ELEMENTS 

OF 

CHEMICAL  PHILOSOPHY. 


\ 


BY 

SIR  HUMPHRY  DAVY,  LL.  D. 

Sec.  R.  S.  Prof.  Chem.  R.  I.  and  B.  A.  M.  R.  I.  F.  R;  S.  E. 
M.R.  I.  A.  Member  of  the  Royal  Academy  of  Stockholm;  of 
the  Imperial  Med.  and  Chir.  Academy  of  St.  Petersburgh ;  of 
the  American  Philosophical  Society ;  and  Honorary  Member 
of  the  Societies  of  Dublin,  Manchester,  the  Physical  Society  of 
Edinburgh,  and  the  Medical  Society  of  London. 


BART  I.    VOL.  L 


LONDON: 


PRINTED  FOR  J.  JOHNSON  AND  CO.  ST.  PAUL's 
CHUKCH-YARD. 

1812, 


London:  printed  by  W.  Bulnaer  and  Co.  Ciev eland-row. 


TO 


LADY  DAVY. 


There  is  no  individual  to  whom  I  can  with 
so  much  propriety  or  so  much  pleasure 
dedicate  this  Work  as  to  you.  The  interest 
you  have  taken  in  the  progress  of  it,  has 
been  a  constant  motive  for  my  exertions; 
and  it  was  begun  and  finished  in  a  period 
of  my  hfe  which,  owing  to  you,  has  been 
the  happiest.  Regard  it  as  a  pledge  that 
I  shall  continue  to  pursue  Science  with 
unabated  ardour.  Receive  it  as  a  proof 
of  my  ardent  affection,  which  must  be 
unalterable,  for  it  is  founded  upon  the 
admiration  of  your  moral  and  intellectual 
qualities. 


H.  DAVY. 


i 


t 


1 


ADVERTISEMENT- 


In  this  Work  I  have  endeavoured  as  far  as  it 
was  in  my  power,  to  employ  the  nomencla- 
ture most  in  use  amongst  the  chemists  of  the 
present  day  in  Britain.  In  consequence  of  the 
progress  of  discovery,  some  of  the  names 
adopted  from  the  French  School  of  Chemistry 
now  imply  erroneous  ideas.  In  such  cases  I 
have  recurred  as  often  as  was  possible  to  the 
familiar  names,  or  the  old  names. 

In  adopting  new  names,  I  have  been  guided 
by  the  necessity  of  the  case  ;  and  have  applied 
them  only  to  new  substances,  or  to  substances 
the  nature  of  which  had  been  misunderstood, 
and  which  were  confounded  with  other  bodies 
differing  from  them  in  their  nature. 

I  may  perhaps  be  censured  for  having  pro- 
posed to  signify  the  combinations  of  chlorine 
or  oxymuriatic  gas  by  simple  terminations,  con- 
nected with  the  name  of  the  basis,  such  as  ane 
and  ana ;  but  these  terminations  will  serve  at 


vi 


ADVERTISEMENT. 


least  as  symbols  of  the  class,  and  in  this  way 
may  assist  the  memory. 

In  the  last  Bakerian  Lecture,  published  in  the 
Philosophical  Transactions,  I  have  proposed  to 
denominate  the  combinations  of  chlorine  sup- 
posed to  contain  one  proportion,  by  the  termi- 
nation ane,  those  supposed  to  contain  two  by  ana, 
and  those  containing  three  by  anee.  As,  how- 
ever, amongst  the  metallic  combinations  of  chlo- 
rine, there  are  never  more  than  two  distinct  com- 
binations belonging  to  the  same  metal,  I  have 
given  the  termination  ane  to  the  first,  and  that  of 
ana  to  the  second,  without  reference  to  propor- 
tions ;  or  where  there  has  been  only  one,  I  have 
used  simply  ane.  If  my  original  proposal 
should  be  adopted,  it  will  however  be  easy  to 
make  the  corrections,  and  the  cases  are  very 
few  that  will  require  it.  Common  salt,  which 
contains  two  proportions  of  chlorine,  and 
which  in  this  work  is  called  sodane,  will  be 
called  sodana  ;  ferrane  will  be  called  ferranea 
ferranea,  ferranee ;  and  arsenicane  must  be 
chan2;ed  to  arsenicana. 

Some  persons  may  chuse  rather  to  use  the 
word  chloride,  following  the  analogy  of  oxide  ; 
but  as  I  have  expressed  in  the  Introduction,  our 
nomenclature  would  have  been  more  simple  and 

DSI 


ADVERTISEMENT.  m 


useful  without  any  attempt  at  tlieoretkal  ex- 
pressions of  the  composition  of  bodies  ;  and 
as  the  fixed  alkalies,  earths,  and  oxides,  are 
similar  bodies,  and  the  termination  a  has  been 
applied  to  the  two  first,  it  might  be  properly 
extended  to  the  last. 

The  word  oxide  is  however  now  current,  I 
have  therefore  used  it,  and  have  employed  Dr. 
Thomson's  method  of  distinguishing  the  dif- 
ferent oxides  of  the  same  metal,  by  prefixing  to 
them  syllables  derived  from  the  Greek  nu- 
merals ;  deutoxide,  tritoxide,  tetroxide^  signify 
that  the  bodies  contain  two,  three,  or  four  pro- 
portions of  oxygene.  When  the  word  oxide 
alone  is  used,  one  proportion  only  of  oxygene 
is  supposed  to  exist  in  it. 

Whatever  pains  be  taken,  it  will  not  be  pos- 
sible to  make  the  existina;  nomenclature  con- 
forrjaable  to  the  idiom  of  our  language  ;  and  till 
some  general  principles  for  its  improvement 
are  agreed  to  by  the  enlightened  in  different 
parts  of  Europe,  it  cannot  be  expected  to  be 
even  a  philosophical  language  ;  and  till  a  more 
simple  system  is  adopted,  innovation  will  be 
censured  sometimes  perhaps  even  when  it  is 
necessary,  and  Neology  generally  brought  for- 
ward as  a  reproach. 


ADVERTISEMENT. 


I  have  in  a  few  instances  only,  given  an  ac- 
count of  the  experiments,  from  the  results  of 
which  the  numbers  representing  the  undecom- 
posed  bodies  were  calculated. 

To  have  given  accurate  histories  of  those 
experiments,  would  have  been  incompatible 
with  the  object  of  an  elementary  book  devoted 
to  the  2;eneral  truths  and  methods  of  the 
science  ;  I  shall  however  shortly  present  them 
to  the  publick,  in  a  work  containing  the  details 
of  labours  that  I  have  carried  on  durina.  the 
last  twelve  years  in  analytical  chemistry. 

I  have  usually  given  whole  numbers,  taking 
away  or  adding  fractional  parts,  that  they  may 
be  more  easily  retained  in  the  memory.  When 
the  number  was  gained  from  experiments  in 
which  a  loss  might  be  supposed,  I  have  added 
fractional  parts,  so  as  to  make  a  whole  number. 
Thus  the  number  representing  barium,,  is 
nearer  129  than  130;  but  it  is  given  as  130, 
because  it  was  deduced  from  an  indirect  ex- 
periment in  which  a  loss  of  weight  was  more 
probable  than  an  increase  from  any  foreign 
source. 

In  a  future  edition  of  this  work,  should 
my  imperfect  labours  be  favourably  received, 
I  may  hope   to  be   able  to  complete  the 


ADVERTISEMENT.  ix 

series  of  numbers,  and  to  fix  some  that  are 
doubtful. 

I  cannot  conclude  without  acknowledging 
my  obligations  to  my  brother  Mr.  John  Davy, 
for  the  able  assistance  he  afforded  me  in  the 
progress  of  the  researches  which  form  the 
foundation  of  this  treatise. 

I  have  likewise  received  much  useful  expe- 
rimental aid  from  Mr.  E.  Davy,  and  Mr.  W. 
Moore. 

The  greater  number  of  the  experiments 
were  made  in  the  laboratory  of  the  Royal 
Institution  ;  and  all  that  were  fitted  for  demons- 
tration have  been  exhibited  in  the  Theatre  of 
that  useful  publick  establishment  in  my  annual 
courses  of  lectures  ;  and  have  been  received  by 
the  members  in  a  manner  which  I  shall  always 
remember  with  gratitude. 

BerTceley  Square^ 
June  1,  1812. 


CONTENTS 


Introduction         .         .         .  page  1 

Historical  View  of  the  Progress  of  Chemistry. 

PART  I. 

ON  THE  LAWS  OF  CHEMICAL  CHANGES:  ON 
UNDECOMPOUNDED  BODIES  AND  THEIR  PRI- 
MARY COMBINATIONS  .  .  6l 

DIVISION  I. 

ON  THE  POWERS  AND  PROPERTIES  OF  MAT- 
TER, AND  THE  GENERAL  LAWS  OF  CHEMICAL 


CHANGES. 

Preliminary  Observations  ,  ,  63 

Of  the  Forms  of  Matter  .  .  65 

Gravitation  .  .  •  67 

Cohesion  .  .  .63 

Of  Heat,  or  calorific  Repulsion  .  6Q 

On  chemical  Attraction,  and  the  Laws  of  Combination 

and  Decomposition  .  ;  98 

Of  Electrical  Attraction   and  Kepulsion,  and  their 

Relations  to  Chemical  Changes        .        .  125 


On  Analysis  and  Synthesis:  on  the  Circumstances 
to  be  attended  to  in  these  Operations,  and  on  the 
Arrangement  of  undecompounded  Bodies  180 


CONTENTS, 


DIVISION  II. 

OF  RADIANT  OR  ETHEREAL  MATTER. 

Of  the  Effects  of  radiant  Matter,  in  producing  the 

Phaenomena  of  Vision  .  page  195 

Of  the  Operation  of  radiant  Matter  in  producing 

Heat  .....  201 
Of  the  Effects  of  radiant  Matter  in  producing  chemical 

Changes  .  ;  .  .  210 

Of  the  Nature  of  the  Motions  or  Affections  of  radiant 

Matter  .  .  .  .  213 

DIVISION  III. 

OFEMPYREALUNDECOMPOUNDED  SUBSTANCES, 
OR  UNDECOMPOUNDED  SUBSTANCES  THAT 
SUPPORT  COMBUSTION,  AND  THEIR  COMBIN- 


ATION WITH  EACH  OTHER. 

General  Observations        .          .  ,  225 

OfoxygeneGas             .           .  .  227 

Chlorine,  or  oxy muriatic  Gas  .        .  235 


DIVISION  IV. 

OF  UNDECOMPOUNDED  INFLAMMABLE  OR 
ACIDIFEROUS  SUBSTANCES  NOT  METALLIC, 
AND  THEIR  BINARY  COMBINATIONS  WITH 
OXYGENE  AND  CHLORINE,  OR  WITH  EACH 


OTHER. 

Preliminary  Observations         .  .  245 

Hydrogene  Gas,  or  inflammable  Air  .  246 

Of  Azote,  or  nitrogene  Gas              .  .  255 

Of  Sulphur               .              .  .271 

Of  Phosphorus              .            .  .  285 

Of  Carbon  or  Charcoal,  and  the  Diamond  299 

Of  Boron,  or  the  boracic  Basis        ,  ,  314 


CONTENTS. 


DIVISION  V. 


OF  METALS;  THEIR  PRIMARY  COMBINATIONS 
WITH  OTHER  UNDECOMPOSED  BODIES,  AND' 
WITH  EACH  OTHER. 


vrPnpral  Ohsprvation<5 

.        page  319 

Of  Potassium 

321 

Sodium 

S31 

TJarium           .             .  . 

-L^uX  J        I.XX                                  (  #9 

338 

Strontinm 

.  343 

Calcium 

345 

Maenesium 

350 

Aluminum  . 

354 

\iliiriniirn 

358 

X^'s  1  V^vJ  if  U  U.J                         «  • 

S60 

Sill  Oil  in 

362 

T  t  Iriii  m 

X  Lift  lU  ill                                        «  4 

364 

fvl    n  ca  npQn  m 

xvj  CLii a Li^oU ill  • 

366 

i^inc  or  Zinouni 

373 

Tin^  or  Stannum  . 

370 

Iron,  or  Ferrum        .  . 

.          .  384 

TiPari   nr  T*lnmV>nm 

3Q4. 

Antimonv.  or  Antimonium 

400 

jjibinuiij^  or  jjisnjuiiiiuiu 

Tellurium 

408 

Cobalt,  or  Cobaltum 

411 

Copper  J  Cuprum 

415 

l^ickel,  or  Nickolum 

420 

Uranium            .  . 

424 

Osmium 

.  426 

Tungsten,  or  Tungstenum 

427 

Titanium 

430 

Columbium            .  . 

431 

Cerium             .        -  . 

.  .  433 

Palladium             •  . 

434 

xiv 


CONTENTS^ 


Iridium           .              .  .           page  436 

Rhodium              .  ,  437 

Mercury,  or  Mercurium  •           -  438 

Silver,  or  Argentum  .           ,        .  443 

Gold,  or  Aurum           .  .           .  446 

Platinum             .  .               .  448 

Arsenic,  or  Arsenicum  .              ,  453 

Molybdenum            ,  .             .  459 

Chromium           .  .              .  462 

DIVISION  VI. 

OF  SOME  SUBSTANCES,  THE  NATURE  OF  WHICH 
IS  NOT  YET  CERTAINLY  KNOWN. 

Preliminary  Observations  .  465 
Of  the  Fluoric  Principle  .               .  ih. 
Of  the  Amalgam  procured  from  ammoniacal  Com- 
pounds      .             .  .             .  473 


DIVISION  VII. 

ON  THE  ANALOGIES  BETWEEN  THE  UNDECOM- 
POUNDED  SUBSTANCES;  SPECULATIONS  RE- 
SPECTING THEIR  NATURE;  ON  THE  MODES  OF 
SEPARATING  THEM,  AND  ON  THE  RELATIONS 
OF  THEIR  COMPOUNDS. 

Of  the  Analogies  between  the  undecom  pounded  Sub- 
stances; Ideas  respecting  their  nature        .  478 

Of  the  Analogies  between  the  primary  Compounds, 
and  on  their  chemical  Relations       .        .  490 

On  the  relative  Attractions  of  the  undecomposed 
Substances  for  each  other       .        .        .  497 

On  the  Methods  of  separating  the  undecomposed 
Bodies  from  each  other         .  .  499 

General  Observations;  and  Conclusion  of  Part  First  502 


ERRATA. 


49,  line  6,  add  lead. 

71,  line  3, /or  silver  tin,  read  silver  and  tin. 
98, /or  IV.  read  VI. 

Ill,  last  Hne,/or  phosphoranee  reaflf  phosphorana. 

11-2,  line  24,/or  15  to  1,  read  1  to  15. 

197,  line  23  and  24,/or  ordinary  rea«f  extraordinary,  and 

for  extraordinary  read  ordinary. 
292,  first  line  of  the  note,/or  13.2  read  13. S. 

319,  line  7, /or  39  read  38. 

320,  line  19,  erase  palladium. 
451,  line  9,/or  18,5  read  24. 


INTRODUCTION. 


M  GST  of  the  substances  belonging:  to  our 
globe  are  constantly  undergoing  alterations  in 
sensible  qualities,  and  one  variety  of  matter 
becomes  as  it  were  transmuted  into  another. 

Such  changes,  whether  natural  or  artificial, 
whether  slowly  or  rapidly  performed,  are  called 
chemical ;  thus  the  gradual  and  almost  imper- 
ceptible decay  of  the  leaves  and  branches  of  a 
fallen  tree  exposed  to  the  atmosphere,  and  the 
rapid  combustion  of  wood  in  our  fires,  are  both 
chemical  operations. 

The  object  of  Chemical  Philosophy  is  to  as- 
certain the  causes  of  ail  phaenomena  of  this 
kind,  and  to  discover  the  laws  by  which  they 
are  governed. 

The  ends  of  this  branch  of  knowledge  are 
the  applications  of  natural  substances  to  new 
uses,  for  increasing  the  coDiforts  and  enjoy- 
ments of  man,  and  the  demonslration  of  the 

VOL.  I.  B 


2 


INTRODUCTION. 


order,  harmony,  and  intelligent  design  of  the 
system  of  the  earth. 

The  foundations  of  chemical  philosophy, 
are  observation,  experiment,  and  analogy.  By 
observation,  facts  are  distinctly  and  minutely 
impressed  on  the  mind.  By  analogy,  similar 
facts  are  connected.  By  experiment,  new  facts 
are  discovered;  and, in  the  progression  of  know- 
ledge, observation,  guided  by  analogy,  leads 
to  experiment,  and  analogy  confirmed  by  expe- 
riment, becomes  scientific  truth. 

To  give  an  instance. — Whoever  will  consider 
with  attention  the  slender  green  vegetable  fila- 
ments ( Conferva  rivularis )  which  in  the  sum- 
mer exist  in  almost  all  streams,  lakes,  or  pools, 
under  the  different  circumstances  of  shade  and 
sunshine,  will  discover  globules  of  air  upon 
the  filaments  exposed  under  water  to  the  sun, 
but  no  air  on  the  filaments  that  are  shaded. 
He  will  find  that  the  effect  is  owing  to  the  pre- 
sence of  light.  This  is  an  observation ;  but  it 
gives  no  information  respecting  the  nature  of 
the  air.  Let  a  wine  glass  filled  with  water  be 
inverted  over  the  Conferva,  the  air  will  collect 
in  the  upper  part  of  the  glass,  and  when  the 
glass  is  filled  with  air,  it  may  be  closed  by  the 
hand,  placed  in  its  usual  position,  and  an 


INTRODUCTION.  3 

inflamed  taper  introduced  into  it;  the  taper  wiil 
burn  with  more  brilliancy  than  in  the  atmos- 
phere. This  is  an  experiment.  If  the  pheno- 
mena are  reasoned  upon,  and  the  question  is 
put,  whether  all  vegetables  of  this  kind,  in 
fresh  or  in  salt  water,  do  not  produce  such  air 
under  like  circumstances,  the  enquirer  is  guided 
hy  analogy :  and  when  this  is  determined  to  be 
the  case  by  new  trials,  a  general  scientific  truth 
is  established — That  all  Confervae  in  the  sun- 
shine produce  a  species  of  air  that  supports 
flame  in  a  superior  degree ;  which  has  been 
shewn  to  be  the  case  by  various  minute  inves- 
tigations. 

These  principles  of  research,  and  combina- 
tions of  methods,  have  been  little  applied,  ex- 
cept in  late  times.  A  transient  view  of  the 
progress  of  chemical  philosophy  will  prove 
that  the  most  brilliant  discoveriesj  and  the 
happiest  theoretical  arrangements  belonging 
to  it  are  of  very  recent  origin  ;  and  a  few  histo- 
rical details  and  general  observations  upon  the 
progress  and  effects  of  the  science  will  form, 
perhaps,  no  improper  introduction  to  the  ele- 
ments of  this  branch  of  knowledge. 

The  only  processes  which  can  be  called 

chemical,  known  to  the  civilized  nations  of 

B  2 


4 


introduction; 


antiquity,  belonged  to  certain  arts,  such  as  me- 
tallurgy, dyeing,  and  the  manufacture  of  glass 
or  porcelain ;  but  these  processes  appear  to 
have  been  independent  of  each  other,  pursued 
in  the  workshop  alone,  and  unconnected  with 
general  knowledge. 

In  the  early  mythological  systems  of  the 
Egyptian  priests,  and  the  Braminsof  Hindostan, 
some  views  respecting  the  chemical  changes  of 
the  elements  seem  to  have  been  developed, 
which  passed,  under  new  modifications}  iato 
the  theories  of  the  Greeks  ;  but  as  the  most 
refined  doctrines  of  this  enlightened  people, 
concerning  natural  causes,  in  their  best  times, 
were  little  more  than  a  collection  of  vague  spe- 
culations, rather  poetical  than  philosophical, 
it  cannot  well  be  supposed  that  in  earlier  ages, 
and  amongst  nations  less  advanced  in  cul- 
tivation, there  were  any  traces  of  genuine 
science. 

The  inhabitants  of  Lower  Egypt,  where  the 
overflowing  of  the  Nile  covered  a  sandy  desert 
with  vegetation  and  life,  might  easily  adopt 
the  notion,  that  water,  in  different  modifica- 
tions, produced  all  the  varieties  of  inanimate 
and  organized  matter  ;  and  this  dogma  charac" 
tenzed  the  earliest  school  of  Greece. 


INTHODUeTION. 


5 


To  generalize  upon  the  great  forms  or  powers 
of  nature,  as  elements,  requires  only  very  super- 
ficial observation;  and  hence  the  theories  seem 
to  have  originated,  which  have  been  attributed 
to  Anaximander,  and  others  of  the  early  Greek 
philosophers,  concerning  air,  earth,  water,  and 
fire. 

As  geometry  and  the  mathematical  sciences 
became  improved,  mechanical  solutions  of  the 
changes  of  bodies  were  natural  consequences, 
such  as  the  atomic  philosophy  of  the  Ionian 
sect,  and  the  five  regular  solids  assumed  by  the 
Pythagoreans  as  the  materials  ©f  the  universe. 

In  the  beginning  of  the  Macedonian  dynasty, 
the  school  of  Aristotle  gave  a  transient  atten- 
tion to  the  objects  of  natural  science,  but  the 
great  founder  attempted  too  many  subjects  to 
be  able  to  offer  correct  views  of  any  one  series. 
— And  his  erroneous  practice,  that  of  advancing 
general  principles,  and  applying  them  to  par- 
ticular instances,  so  fatal  to  truth  in  all  sciences, 
more  particularly  opposed  itself  to  the  pro- 
gress of  one  founded  upon  a  minute  examination 
of  obscure  and  hidden  properties  of  natural 
bodies. 

Theophrastus,  the  successor  of  Aristotle,  did 
not,  it  appears,  adopt  the  sublime,  though  purely 


6 


INTRODUCTION. 


specujative  doctrine  of  his  master,  the  identity 
of  matter,  and  its  diversity  of  form;* — for  he 
says,  ill  the  beginning  of  his  book  concerning 
fossils,  '  stones  are  produced  from  earth,  metals 
from  water. 'i — How  such  a  notion  as  the  last 
could  have  been  formed,  it  is  difficult  to  dis- 
cover ;  yet,  Theophrastus  is  perhaps  the  best 
observer  amongst  the  ancients,  whose  works 
are  in  our  possession,  and  the  theories  of  this 
distinguished  teacher,  who  is  said  to  have  had 
9.  class  of  2000  pupils,  cannot  be  considered  as 
an  unfavourable  specimen  of  the  theoretical 
physics  of  the  age. 

In  all  pursuits  which  required  only  the  na- 
tive powers  of  the  intellect,  or  the  refinements 
of  taste,  the  Greeks  were  pre-eminent ; — their 
literature,  their  works  of  art,  offer  models  which 
have  never  been  excelled.  They  possessed,  as 
if  instinctively,  the  perception  of  every  thing 
beautiful,  grand,  and  decorous.  As  philoso- 
phers, they  failed  not  from  a  want  of  genius, 
or  even  of  application,  but  merely  because  they 
pursued  a  false  path, — because  they  reasoned 

*  'E'TTH^h  i'B  tj  (pt/o-K,  ^»%aJs-,  TO  T8  sTJ'o;  no.)  ri  vXrj.  Aristotelis 
Natural.  Auscult.  Lib.  ii.  495,  fol.  Par.  l654. 

yh<i  AtSof  Tt  %aX  oa-a,  hi^m  cri^iTToTEjja,  Theophrasti  de  Lapi- 
dibus.  Lug.  Br.  l6l3. 


introduction; 


more  upon  an  imaginary  system  of  nature,  than 
upon  the  visible  and  tangible  universe. 

It  will  be  in  vain  to  look  in  the  annals  of 
Rome  for  science,  that  did  not  exist  in  Greece. 
The  conquerors  became  the  pupils  of  the  con- 
quered ;  and  the  Romans  did  little  more  than 
clothe  the  systems  of  their  masters  in  a  new 
dress,  and  adapt  them  to  a  new  people. 

The  grand,  but  unequal  poem  of  Lucretius, 
contains  the  abstract  of  the  opinions  of  Epi- 
curus, compared  with  those  of  other  celebrated 
teachers.   The  Natural  History  of  Pliny,  is  a 
collection  from  all  sources,  but  principally 
from  Theophrastus  and  Aristotle.  The  details 
from  his  own  observation  are  more  interesting 
when  they  relate  to  artificial,  than  when  they 
refer  to  natural  operations  ;  the  speculative  no- 
tions are  of  the  rudest  kind.   The  earlier  phi- 
losophical work  of  the  Romans,  as  if  indicative 
of  the  youth  of  the  people,  is  marked  by  power 
and  genius,  by  boldness  and  incorrectness  ;  the 
later,  as  if  it  belonged  to  their  old  age,  by  gar- 
rulity, copious  and  amusing  anecdote,  superr 
stitious  notions,  and  vulgar  prejudices. 

Some  of  the  historians  of  this  science,*  in 

*  Many  of  the  alchemical  writers  derive  alchemy  from 
Tubal  Cain ;  others  from  Hermes  Trismegistus,  the  Mercury 


8 


INTRODUCTION. 


their  zeal  for  the  honour  of  its  antiquity,  hare 
indeed  endeavoured  to  find  instances  of  an  ac- 
quaintance with  some  doctrines  of  practical 
chemistry,  atleast,  amongst  theancients. — Thus 
Democritus  is  quoted  by  Laertius  as  having 
employed  himself  in  processes  for  imitating 
gems,  and  for  softening  and  working  ivory. 
Caligula  is  said  to  have  made  experiments  with 
the  view  of  extracting  gold  from  orpiment. — 
Dioscorides,  who  is  supposed  to  have  been 
physician  to  the  celebrated  Cleopatra,  has 
described  the  process  of  subliming  mercury 
from  its  ores. — Even  Cleopatra  herself,  on 
the  evidence  of  such  circumstances,  might  be 
considered  as  an  experimenter,  because,  in  the 
madness  of  profusion,  she  dissolved  a  pearl  in 
vinegar,  and  made  a  nauseous  draught  of  a 

of  the  Greeks.  The  first  writing  specifically  on  a  chemical 
subject,  is  a  manuscript  supposed  to  be  of  the  fifth  century, 
by  Zosimus,  on  the  art  of  making  gold  and  silver;  which  was 
in  the  king's  library  at  Paris.  Suidas,  who  wrote  in  the  ninth 
or  tenth  century,  mentions  Diocletian  as  having  burnt  the 
books  of  the  Egyptians  concerning  the  chemistry  of  silver 
and  gold  :  «  TTEpt  •xy^i'io.ti  ufyvpa  xot)  x^van."  Lexicon,  Tom.  i. 
pag.  595. 

For  a  minute  investigation  of  the  claims  of  the  ancients  to 
chemical  knowledge,  the  reader  may  consult  Borrichius  de 
Ortu  et  Progress.  Choem.  Bergman.  Opuscula,  vol.  IV.  de  pri- 
iRordiis  Chasm,  and  Lenglet  Dufrenoy,  Histoire  de  la  Philoso-^ 
phie  hermetique. 


INTRODUCTION.  9 

costly  and^ beautiful  substance;  but  it  is  idle 
to  relate  such  circumstances  as  indications  of 
science.  If  chemical  operations  had  been  known 
to  any  extent,  beyond  their  mere  relations  to  the 
arts,  some  mention  of  them  might  have  been 
expected  in  the  medical  writings  of  those 
times  ;  but  not  even  distillation  is  noticed  in 
the  M^orks  of  Hippocrates  or  Galen;  and  the 
same  Dioscorides  who  has  been  just  alluded  to, 
and  who  probably  possessed  vv^hatever  know- 
ledge was  at  that  time  extant  in  Egypt^  recom- 
mends the  use  of  a  fleece  of  wool  or  a  sponge, 
for  collecting  the  products  from  boiling  or 
burning  substances.* 

The  origin  of  chemistry,  as  a  science  of 
experiment,  cannot  be  dated  farther  back  than 
the  seventh  or  eighth  century  of  the  Christian 
era,  and  it  seems  to  have  been  coeval  with  the 
short  period  in  which  cultivation  and  improve- 
Kient  were  promoted  by  the  Arabians. 

The  early  Mahometans  endeavoured  to  de- 
stroy all  the  records  of  the  former  progress  of 
the  human  mind ;  and,  as  if  to  make  com- 
pensation for  this  barbarian  spirit,  the  same 
people  were  destined,  in  a  more  adranced 
period,  to  rekindle  the  light  of  letters,  and  to 

*  Dioscordis  liber  i.  de  picino  oleo,  pag  52. 


10 


INTRODUCTION. 


become  the  inventors  and  cultivators  of  a  new 
science. 

The  early  nomenclature  of  chemistry  de- 
monstrates how  much  it  owes  to  the  Arabians. 
— The  words  alcohol,  alkahest,  aludel,  alembic, 
alkali,  require  no  comment. 

The  first  Arabian  systematic  works  on 
chemistry  are  said  to  have  been  composed 
by  Geber  in  the  reigns  of  the  caliphs  Almainon 
and  Almanzor.  The  preparation  of  medicines 
seems  to  have  been  the  primary  object  in  this 
study  ;  and  Rhases,  Avicenna,  and  Avenzoar, 
who  have  described  various  chemical  opera- 
tions in  their  works,  were  the  celebrated  phy- 
sicians of  the  age. 

Amongst  a  people  of  conquerors,  disposed 
to  sensuality  and  luxury  even  from  the  spirit  of 
their  religion,  and  romantic  and  magnificent 
in  their  views  of  power,  it  was  not  to  be  ex- 
pected that  any  new  knowledge  should  be 
followed  in  a  rational  and  philosophical  man- 
ner ;  and  the  early  chemical  discoveries  led  to 
the  pursuit  of  alchemy,  the  objects  of  which 
were  to  produce  a  substance  capable  of  con- 
verting all  ©tlier  metals  into  gold ;  and  an  uni- 
versal remedy  calculated  indefinitely  to  prolong 
the  period  of  human  life 


INTRODUCTION. 


11 


Reasonings  upon  the  nature  of  the  metals, 
and  the  composition  of  the  philosopher's  stone, 
form  a  principal  part  of  the  treatises  ascribed 
to  Geber  ;*  and  the  disciples  of  the  School  of 
Bagdat  seem  to  have  been  the  first  professed 
alchemists. 

It  required  strong  motives  to  induce  men  to 
pursue  the  tedious  and  disgusting  processes  of 
the  furnace ;  but  labourers  could  hardly  be 
wanting,  when  prospects  so  brilliant  and  mag- 
nificent were  oflfered  to  them ;  the  means  of 
procuring  unbounded  wealth ;  of  forming  a 
paradise  on  earth  ;  and  of  enjoying  an  immor- 
tality depending  on  their  own  powers. 

The  processes  supposed  to  relate  to  the 
transmutation  of  metals,  and  the  elixir  of  life, 

*  The  library  of  the  British  Museum  contains  several 
works  bearing  the  name  of  Geber:  amongst  them  are,  De 
Alchemia  argentea,  Speculum  Alchemiae,  et  de  Inventione 
perfectionis  :  but  they  appear  to  be  compilations  formed 
by  alchemists  of  the  loth  and  l6th  centuries.  Arsenic,  mer- 
cury, and  sulphur,  are  considered  in  them  as  elements  of 
the  metals ;  distillation  is  distinctly  described.  Alcohol,  cor- 
rosive sublimate,  and  different  saline  combinations  of  iron, 
tin,  copper,  and  lead,  are  mentioned  in  them;  but  they 
abound  in  obscure  descriptions  of  mysterious  processes,  and 
contain  an  account  of  some  impracticable  experiments. — 
The  Liber  Fornacum  is  the  most  intelligible  pari  of  the  works 
ascribed  to  Geber ;  it  contains  a  description  of  several  metalur- 
^ical  operations,  and  of  the  common  apparatus  of  the  assaycr. 


12 


INTRODUCTION. 


*  were  probably  jErst  made  known  to  the  Europe 
cans  during  the  time  of  the  crusades— and 
many  of  the  warriors  who,  animated  with 
visionary  plans  of  conquest,  fought  the  battles 
of  their  religion  in  the  plains  of  Palestine, 
seemed  to  have  returned  to  their  native  coun- 
tries under  the  influence  of  a  new  delusion. 

The  public  spirit  in  the  West,  was  calculated 
to  assist  the  progress  of  all  pursuits  that  carried 
with  them  an  air  of  mysticism.  Warm  with  the 
ardor  of  an  extending  and  exalted  religion,  men 
were  much  more  disposed  to  believe  than  to 
reason  ; — the  love  of  knowledge  and  power  is 
instinctive  in  the  human  mind  ;  in  darkness  it 
desires  light,  and  follows  it  with  enthusiasm  even 
when  appearing  merely  in  delusive  glimmerings. 

The  records  of  the  middle  ages  contain  a 
great  variety  of  anecdotes  relating  to  the  trans- 
mutation of  metals,  and  the  views  or  pretensions 
of  persons  considered  as  adepts  in  alchemy: 
these  early  periods  constitute  what  may  be  re- 
garded as  the  heroic  or  fabulous  ages  of  che- 
mistry. Some  of  the  alchemists  were  low 
impostors,  whose  object  was  to  delude  the  cre- 
dulous and  the  ignorant ;  others  seemed  to 
have  deceived  themselves  with  vain  hopes ;  but 
all  followed  the  pursuit  as  a  secret  and  myste- 


INTRODUCTION.  13 

Tious  study.  T,h«  processes  were  communicated 
only  to  chosen  disciples,  and  being  veiled  in  the 
most  enigmatic  and  obscure  language,  their  im- 
portance was  enhanced  by  the  concealment.  In 
all  times  men  are  governed  more  by  what  they 
desire  or  fear,  than  by  what  they  know  ;  and  in 
this  age  it  was  peculiarly  easy  to  deceive,  but 
difficult  to  enlighten,  the  public  mind ;  truths 
were  discovered,  but  they  were  blended  with 
the  false  and  the  marvellous;  and  another  era 
was  required  to  separate  them  from  absurdities, 
and  to  demonstrate  their  importance  and  uses 

Arnald  of  Villa  Nova,  who  is  said  to  have 
died  in  1250,  was  one  of  the  earliest  European 
Enquirers  who  attended  to  chemical  opera 
tions.  In  the  edition  of  the  works  ascribed  to 
him,  published  at  Leyden  in  I509,*  there  are 
several  treatises  on  alchemical  subjects,  which 
shew  that  he  firmly  believed  in  the  transmu- 
tation of  metals ;  the  same  opinions  are  attri- 
buted to  him  and  to  Geber ;  and  he  seems  to 
have  followed  the  study  with  no  ©thcr  views 
than  those  of  preparing  medicines,  and  attempt^ 
ing  the  composition  of  the  philosopher's  stone. 

Raymund  Lully  of  Majorca  is  said  to  have 
been  a  disciple  of  Arnald,  and  applied  himself 

*  Opera  Arnaldi  de  Villa  Nova,  fol,  1509, 


14 


INTRODUCTION. 


much  more  than  his  instructor  to  philosophy ; 
but  the  works  on  general  science,  ascribed  to 
him,  are  more  abundant  in  abstract  metaphy- 
sical propositions,  than  in  facts;  he  followed, 
in  his  physical  views,  the  plan  of  Aristotle,  and 
our  opinion  of  his  chemical  talents  cannot  be 
very  exalted,  if  the  alchemical  treatises  bearing 
his  name  be  regarded  as  genuine  documents. 

Arnald  and  LuUy  are  both  celebrated  by  the 
vindicators  of  alchemy,  as  having  been  certainly 
possessed  of  the  secret  of  transmutation.  Arnald 
is  said  to  have  converted  iron  into  gold  at  Rome ; 
and  it  is  pretended  that  Lully  performed  a  si- 
milar operation  before  Edward  I.  in  London,  of 
which  gold  nobles  were  said  to  have  been  made.* 

That  the  delusions  of  alchemy  were  ardently 
pursued  at  this  time  may  be  learnt  from  a 
reference  to  the  public  acts  of  these  periods. 
Pope  John  the  S2d,  who  was  raised  to  the  pon- 
tificate in  the  year  13 16,  openly  condemned 
the  alchemists  as  impostors,  and  the  bull  begins 
by  stating,  that  *'  they  promise  what  they  do 
not  perform and  in  England  an  act  of  Par- 
liament was  passed  in  the  fifth  year  of  the  reign 
of  Henry  IV.  prohibiting  the  attempts  at 
transmutation,  and  making  them  fclonious.f 

*  Bergman.  Opuscula,  Tom.  IV.  pag.  126. 

t  Lord  Coke  calls  this  act  the  shortest  he  ever  met  with. 


INTRODUCTION. 


15 


Even  in  these  times,  however,  there  were 
some  few  efforts  to  form  scientific  views.  In 
the  beginning  of  the  thirteenth  century,  Roger 
Bacon  of  Oxford  applied  himself  to  experi- 
ment, and  his  works  offer  proofs  of  talents, 
industry,  and  sagacity.  He  tv^as  a  man  of  a  truly 
philosophical  turn,  desirous  of  investigating 
nature,  and  of  extending  the  resources  of 
art,  and  his  enquiries  offered  some  very 
extraordinary  combinations  ;  but  neither  his 
labours,  nor  those  of  Albert  of  Cologne,  his 
contemporary,  who  appears  to  have  been  a 
genius  of  a  kindred  character,  had  any  con- 
siderable influence  on  the  improvement  of 
their  age.  The  wonders  performed  by  the  ex- 
perimental art  were  attributed  by  the  vulgar 
to  magic ;  and  at  a  time  when  knowledge  be- 
longed only  to  the  cloister,  any  new  philosophy 
was  of  course  regarded  even  by  the  learned 
with  a  jealous  eye. 

It  would  be  a  labour  of  little  profit  to  dwell 
upon  the  works  of  the  professed  alchemists 
of  the  fourteenth  and  fifteenth  centuries,  of 

5  H.  IV.  Statutes  at  large,  Vol.  I.  page  457.  "  None  from 
henceforth  shall  use  to  multiply  gold  or  silver,  or  use  the  craft 
of  multiplication,  and  if  any  the  same  do,  he  shall  incur  the 
pain  of  felony." 


16 


INTRODUeilON. 


Richard  and  Ripley  in  England,  Isac  in  Hol- 
land, Pico  of  Mirandula  and  Koffsky,  in  Poland. 
The  works  attributed  to  these  persons  are  of  a 
similar  stamp,*  and  contain  nothin*;  which  can 
either  instruct  or  amuse  an  intelligent  reader. 
Basil  Valentine  of  Erfurt  deserves  to  be  sepa- 
rated from  the  rest  of  the  enquirers  of  this 
age,  on  account  of  the  novelty  and  variety  of 
his  experiments  on  metallic  preparations,  par- 
ticularly antimony:  in  his  Currus  triumphalis 
Antimonii  he  has  described  a  number  of  the 
combinations  of  this  metal.  He  used  the 
mineral  acids  for  solutions,  and  seems  to  have 
been  one  of  the  first  persons  who  observed 
the  production  of  ether  from  alcohol.  He 
flourished  about  the  year  14  i  3. 

Cornelius  Agrippa,  who  was  born  at  Cologne 
in  14865  openly  professed  magic,  and  endea- 
voured to  connect  together  judicial  astrology, 
the  hermetic  art,  and  metaphysical  philosophy  ; 
and  he  was  followed  by  Paracelsus,  in  Switzer- 
land, and  Digby,  Kelly,  and  Dee,  in  England. 

The  first  Arabian  Alchemists  seem  to  have 
adopted  the  idea,  that  the  elements  were  under 

*  Amongst  them  areRicardi  AngU  Libellus,  wspt 
Opus  Saturni  Johan.   Isac,  Compounde  of  Alchemy  bj 
George  Ripley. 


INTRODUCTION,  17 

the  dominion  of  spiritual  beings,  who  might  he 
submitted  to  human  power  ;  and  the  notions  of 
fairies  and  of  genii,  which  have  been  depicted 
with  so  much  vividness  of  fancy  and  liveliness 
of  description  in  the  Thousand  and  One 
Nights,  seem  to  have  been  connected  with  the 
pursuit  of  the  science  of  transmutation,  and  the 
production  of  the  elixir  of  life.  The  specu- 
lative ideas  of  the  Arabians  were  more  or  less 
adopted  by  their  European  disciples.  The  Rosi- 
crucian  philosophy,  in  which  gnomes,  sylphs, 
salamanders,  and  nymphs  were  the  spiritual 
agents,  supposed  capable  of  being  governed  or 
enslaved  by  man,  seems  to  have  originated  with 
the  Alchemists  of  this  period  ;  and  Agrippa, 
Paracelsus,  and  their  followers,  above  men- 
tioned, all  professed  to  believe  in  supernatural 
powers,  in  an  art  above  experiment,  in  a  system 
of  knowledge  not  derived  from  the  senses.  It 
would  be  a  tedious  and  useless  task,  to  describe 
all  the  absurdities  in  the  opinions  and  practices 
of  this  school.  Paracelsus  alone  deserves  par- 
ticular notice,  from  the  circumstance  of  his 
being  the  first  public  lecturer  on  chemistry 
in  Europe,  and  from  the  more  important  cir- 
cumstance of  his  application  of  mercurial  pre- 
parations to  the  cure  of  diseases.    The  Magis- 

VOL.  I.  C 


is  iNTROiilJdtlbN. 

trates  of  Basle  established  a  professor's  chair  for 
their  countryman,  but  he  soon  quitted  an  oc- 
cupation in  which  regularity  was  necessary, 
and  spent  his  days  in  wandering  from  place  to 
place,  searching  for,  and  revealing  secrets. 
He  pretended  to  confer  immortality^  by  his 
inedicines,  and  yet  died  at  the  age  of  49,  at 
Saltsburg,  in  the  year  I54I.* 

The  enthusiasm  of  this  man  almost  supplied 
his  want  of  scenius.  He  formed  a  number  of 
new  preparations  of  the  metals,  which  were 
Studied  and  applied  by  his  disciples ;  his  exag- 
gerated censure  of  the  methods  of  the  ancients, 
and  of  the  systems  of  his  day,  had  an  effect  in 
diminishing  their  popularity  ;  one  error  was 
expelled  by  another  ;  and  it  is  a  great  step  to- 
wards improvement,  that  men  should  knew 
they  have  been  in  delusion. 

Van  Helmont,  of  Brussels,  born  in  I58'§,t 
was  formed  in  the  school  of  Alchemy,  and  his 
mind  was  tinctured  with  its  prejudices ;  but 
his  views  concerning  nature  and  the  elements 
were  distinguished  by  nmch  more  philosophi- 
'cal  aeutetiess,  and  more  sagacity,  than  those  of 
any  former  writer.    He  is  the  first  person  who 

^  Dictionnaire  Historique,  par  Moreri,  Tomeviii.  pag»6^4. 
1 1-bid  Tom.  v.  pag,  570. 


INTRODUCTION.  19 

seems  to  have  had  any  idea  respecting  elastic- 
fluids,  different  from  the  air  of  the  atmosphere 
and  he  has  distinctly  mentioned  three  of  these 
substances,  to  which  he  applied  the  term  gases  ; 
namely,  aqueous  gas  or  steam,  unctuous  or  in- 
flammable gas,  and  gas  from  wood  or  carbonic 
acid  gas.  Van  Helmont  developed  some  accu- 
rate views  respecting  the  permanent  elasticity 
of  air,  and  the  operation  of  heat  upon  it ;  and 
a  sketch  of  a  curious  instrument  very  similar  to 
the  differential  thermometer,  is  to  be  found  in 
his  works.* 

Van  Helmont  has  used  a  term  not  so  appli- 
cable or  intelligible  as  gas,  namely,  Bias  ;  which, 
he  supposed  to  be  an  influence  derived  from 
the  heavenly  bodies,  of  a  most  subtile  and 
etherial  nature  ;  and  on  the  idea  of  its  opera- 
tions in  our  terrestial  system,  he  has  endea- 
voured to  found  the  vindication  of  astrology.-f- 

At  this  period  there  was  no  taste  in  the  pub- 
lic mind  to  restrain  vague  imaginations.  There 
were  no  severe  critics  to  correct  the  wander- 
ings of  genius.  The  systems  of  logic,  adopted 
in  the  schools  were  founded  rather  upon  the 

*  Johan  Baptist.  Van  Helmont,  Opera  Omnia,  4to.  pag.  6l. 
article  Aer. 
•j"  Ibid.  pag.  114. 

C  S 


20 


INTRODUCTION. 


analogies  of  words,  than  upon  the  relations  of 
things  ;  and  they  were  more  calculated  to  con- 
ceal error,  than  to  discover  truth. — Till  the 
revival  of  literature  in  Europe,  there  was  no  at- 
tempt at  philosophical  discussion  in  any  of  the 
sciences ;  the  diffusion  of  letters  gradually 
brought  the  opinions  of  men  to  the  standard 
of  nature  and  truth  ;  failures  in  the  experi- 
mental arts  produced  caution,  and  the  detection 
of  imposture  created  rational  scepticism. 

The  delusions  of  Alchemy  were  exposed  by 
Guibert,  Gassendi,  and  Kepler.  Libavius  an- 
swered Guibert  in  a  tone  which  demonstrated 
the  weakness  of  his  cause.  This  person,  who 
died  in  1616,  was  the  last  active  experimentalist 
who  believed  that  transmutation  had  actually 
been  performed  ;  and  in  the  beginning  of  the 
1 7  th  century  the  processes  of  rational  chemistry 
were  pursued  by  a  number  of  enlightened 
persons  in  different  parts  of  Europe. 

A  metallurgical  School  had  before  this  time 
been  founded  in  Germany.  George  Agricola 
published,  in  1542,  his  twelve  books,  de  Re 
Metallica,  or,  on  the  methods  of  extracting 
and  purifying  the  useTul  metals  ,-  and  he  was 
followed  by  Lazarus  Erckern.  Assay  Master 
General  of  the  Empire  of  Germany,  whose 


INTRODUCTION.  51 

ivorts,  brought  forward  in  15745  contain  a 
number  of  useful  practices  detailed  in  a  simple 
and  perspicuous  manner. 

Lord  Bacon  happily  described  the  Alche- 
mists as  similar  to  those  husbandmen  who  in 
searching  for  a  treasure  supposed  to  be  hidden 
in  their  land,  by  turning  up  and  pulverising 
the  soil,  rendered  it  fertile;  in  seeking  for 
brilliant  impossibilities,  they  sometimes  dis- 
covered useful  realities  ;  and  in  speaking  of  the 
chemistry  of  his  time,  he  says,  a  new  philoso- 
phy has  arisen  from  the  furnaces,  which  has 
confounded  all  the  reasonings  of  the  ancients. 
This  illustrious  man  himself  pointed  out  many 
important  objects  of  chemical  enquiry  ;  but  he 
was  a  still  greater  benefactor  to  the  science, 
by  his  developement  of  the  general  system  for 
improving  natural  knowledge.  Till  his  time 
there  had  been  no  distinct  views  concernincr  the 
art  of  experiment  and  observation.  Lord  Bacon 
demonstrated  how  little  could  be  effected  by 
the  unassisted  human  powers,  and  the  weakness 
of  the  strongest  intellect  even  without  artificial 
resources.  He  directed  the  attention  of  inqui- 
rers to  instruments  for  assisting  the  senses, 
and  for  examinins;  bodies  under  new  relations. 
He  taught  that  Man  was  but  the  servant  and 


t 


INTRODUCTION. 


interpreter  of  Nature  ;  capable  of  discovering 
truth  in  no  other  way  but  by  observing  and 
imitating  her  operations :  that  facts  were  to  be 
collected  and  not  speculations  formed :  and 
that  the  materials  for  the  foundations  of  true 
ystems  of  knowledge  were  to  be  discovered, 
not  in  the  books  of  the  ancients,  not  in  meta- 
physical theories,  not  in  the  fancies  of  men, 
but  in  the  visible  and  tangible  external  world. 

Though  Van  Helmonthad  formed  some  just ' 
notions  respecting  the  properties  of  air,  yet  his 
views  were  blended  with  obscure  and  vas;ue 
speculations,  and  it  is  to  the  disciples  of  Gal- 
liljeoj  that  the  true  knowledge  of  the  mecha- 
nical qualities  and  agencies  of  elastic  fluids  is 
owing.  After  Torricelli  and  Pascal  had  shewn 
the  pressure  and  weight  of  the  atmosphere,  the 
investigation  of  its  effects  in  chemical  opera- 
tions became  an  obvious  problem. 

John  Rey  is  generally  quoted  as  the  first 
person  who  shewed  by  experiments  that  air  is 
fixed  in  bodies  during  calcination :  but  it  ap- 
pears from  the  work  of  this  acute  and  learned 
man  that  he  reasoned  upon  the  processes  of 
others,  rather  than  upon  his  own  observations. 

He  quotes  Fachsius,  Libavius,  Cesa]pin,and 
Cardan,  as  having  ascertained  the  increase  of 


INTRODUCTION.  St$ 

weight  of  lead  during  its  conversion  into  a 
calx,*  and  he  mentions  an  experiment  of 
Hammerus  Poppius,  who  found  that  antimony 
calcined  by  a  burning-glass,  notwithstanding  th^ 
loss  of  vapours,  yet  was  heavier  after  the  process, 

Rey  ridicules  the  various  notions  of  the  Al« 
chemists  on  the  cause  of  this  phsenomenon  ;  an4 
ascribes  it  to  the  union  of  air  with  the  metal  ; 
he  supposes  that  air  is  miscible  with  other 
bodies  besides  metals,  and  states  distinctly  that 
it  may  be  expelled  from  water. 

The  observations  of  John  Rey  seem  to  have 
excited  no  attention  amongst  his  cotemporaries. 
The  philosophical  spirit  was  only  beginning  to 
animate  chemistry,  and  the  labourers  in  this 
science,  occupied  by  their  own  peculiar  pro- 
cesses, were  little  disposed  to  listen  to  the  rea- 
sonings of  an  enquirer  in  general  science ;  yet, 
though  the  most  active  of  the  forms  of  matter 
were  neglected  in  the  processes  of  tlie  operative 
chemists  of  this  day,  and  consequently  no  just 
views  formed  by  them,  still  they  discovered  a 
number  of  important  facts  respecting  the  com- 
binations and  agencies  of  solid  and  fluid  bodies. 

*  Sur  la  Recherche  de  la  cause  par  kquelle  Estain  et  le 
Plomb  au^pagntent  de  poids  quaiid  on  les  calcine.  A  Baiis 
1630. 


54  INTRODUCTION!. 

Glauber  at  Amsterdam,  about  !640,  mad» 
known  several  neutral  salts,  and  several  conr- 
pounds  of  metallic  and  vegetable  substances, 
Kunckel  in  Saxony  and  Sweden,  pursued  tech- 
nical chemistry  with  very  great  success,  and  was 
the  first  person  who  made  any  philosophical 
experiments  upon  phosphorus,  which  was  ac- 
cidentally discovered  by  Brandt  in  16^9.* 
Barner  in  Poland,  and  Glaser  in  France,  pub- 
lished elementary  books  on  the. science,  and 
Borichius  in  Denmark,  Bohn  at  Leipzic,  and 
Hoffman  at  Halle  pursued  speciSc  scientific  in- 
vestigations with  much  zeal  and  success  ;  and 
Hoffm  an  was  the  first  person  who  attempted  the 
philosophical  analysis  of  mineral  waters. 

About  the  middle  of  this  century  likewise 
mathematical  and  physical  Investigations  were 
pursued  in  every  part  of  the  civilized  world 
with  an  enthusiasm  before  unknown.  The  new 
mode  of  improving  knowledge  by  collecting 
facts,  associated  together  a  number  of  labourers 
in  the  same  pursuit.  It  was  felt  that  the  whole 
of  nature  was  yet  to  be  investigated,  that  there 
were  distinct  subjects  connected  with  utility  and 
glory,  sufficient  to  employ  all  enquirers,  yet 
tending  to  the  common  end  of  promoting  the 
*  Horaberg,  Mem.  Acad.  Paris,  Tom.  x.  pag.  58. 


INTRODUCTION 


progress  of  the  human  mind.  Learned  bodies 
were  formed  in  Italy,  England,  and  France,  for 
the  purpose  of  the  interchange  of  opinions,  the 
combination  of  labour  and  division  of  expense 
in  performing  new  experiments,  and  the  ac- 
cumulation and  diffusion  of  knowledge. 

The  Academy  del  Cimento  was  established 
in  1651  under  the  patronage  of  the  Duke  of 
Tuscany ;  the  Royal  Society  of  London,  in 
1660 ;  the  Royal  Academy  of  Sciences  of  Paris, 
in  1666.  And  a  number  of  celebrated  men,  who 
have  been  the  sireat  luminaries  of  the  different 
departments  of  science,  were  brought  together 
or  formed  in  these  noble  establishments.  The 
ardour  of  scientific  investigation  was  excited 
and  kept  alive  by  sympathy:  taste  was  improved 
by  discussion,  and  by  a  comparison  of  opinions. 
The  conviction  that  useful  discoveries  would 
be  appreciated  and  rewarded,  was  a  constant 
stimulus  to  industry,  and  every  field  of  enquiry 
was  open  for  the  free  and  unbiassed  exercise  of 
the  powers  of  genius. 

Boyle,  Hooke,  and  Slare,  were  the  principal 
early  chemical  investigators  attached  to  the 
Royal  Society  of  London.  Homberg,  Geoffroy, 
and  the  two  Lemerys,  a  few  years  later,  dis" 
tinguished  themselves  in  France* 


S6  INTRODUCTION. 

Otto  de  Guericke  of  Magdeburgh  invented 
the  air  pump  ;  and  this  instrument,  improved 
by  Boyle  and  Hooke,  was  made  an  important 
apparatus  for  investigating  the  properties  of 
air.  Boyle*  and  HQoke,+  from  their  experi- 
ments, concluded  that  air  was  absolutely  ne- 
cessary to  combustion  and  respiration,  and  that 
one  part  of  it  only  was  employed  in  these  pro- 
cesses. And  Hooke  formed  the  sagacious  con- 
clusion, that  this  principle  is  the  same  as  the 
substance  fixed  in  nitre,  and  that  combustioi;  is 
a  chemical  process,  the  solution  of  the  burning 
body  in  elastic  fluid,  or  its  union  with  this 
matter. 

Mayow  of  Oxford,  in  1674,  published  his 
treatises  on  the  nitro-atrial  spirit,  in  which  he 
advanced  opinions  similar  to  those  of  Boyle 
and  Hooke,  and  supported  them  by  a  number 
of  original  and  curious  experiments  ;:|:  but  his 
work,  though  marked  by  strong  ingenuity, 
abounds  in  vague  hypotheses.  He  attempted 
to  apply  the  imperfect  chemistry  of  his  day  to 

*  Boyle's  Works,  Vo.  iv.  page  90. 

f  Hooke's  Micrographia,  page  45,  104,  105. 

X  Tract,  p.  28.  He  has  particularly  assigned  the  cause  of 
the  calcination  of  metals,  "  Quippe  vix  concipi  potest  unde 
augmentum  illud  antimonii  nisi  a  particulis  nitro  Mreis  i§- 
»eisque  inter  calcinajajlum  fixis  procedat." 


IJTTRODUGTION.  27 

physiology ;  his  failure  was  complete,  but  it 
was  the  failure  of  a  man  of  genius. 

Boyle  was  one  of  the  most  active  experi** 
menters,  and  certainly  the  greatest  chemist  of 
his  age.  He  introduced  the  use  of  tests  or 
reagents,  active  substances  for  detecting  the 
presence  of  other  bodies :  he  overturned  the 
ideas  which  at  that  time  were  prevalent,  that 
the  results  of  operations  by  fire  were  the  real 
elements  of  things,  and  he  ascertained  a  num- 
ber of  important  facts  respecting  inflammable 
bodies,  acids,  alkalies,  and  the  phcenomena  of 
combination  ;   but  neither  he  nor  any  of  his 
contemporaries  endeavoured  to  account  for 
the  changes  of  bodies  by  any  fixed  principles'.' 
The  solutions  of  the  phasnomena  were  at- 
tempted either  on  rude  mechanical  notions,  or 
by  occult  qualities,  or  peculiar  subtile  spiritjS 
or  ethers  supposed  to  exist  in  the  different  bo- 
dies.— And  it  is  to  the  same  great  genius  who 
developed  the  laws  that  regulate  the  motions  of 
the  heavenly  bodies,  that  chemistry  owes  the 
first  distinct  philosophical  elucidations  of  the 
powers  which  produce  the  changes  and  appa^ 
rent  transmutations  of  the  substances  belon<r- 
ing  to  the  earth. 

Sugar  dissolves  in  water,  alkalies  unite  with 
acids,  metals  dissolve  in  acids.  Is  mi  'ikk^  says 


I 


2$  INTRODUCTION. 

Newton,  on  account  of  an  attraction  between 
their  particles  ?  Copper  dissolved  in  aquafortis 
is  thrown  down  by  iron.  Is  not  this  because 
the  particles  of  the  iron  have  a  stronger  at- 
traction for  the  particles  of  the  acid,  than 
those  of  copper ;  and  do  not  different  bodies 
attract  each  other  with  dijBTerent  degrees  of 
force  ?  * 

A  few  years  after  Newton  had  brought  for- 
wards these  sagacious  views,  the  elder  Geoffroy 
endeavoured  to  ascertain  the  relative  attractive 
powers  of  bodies  for  each  other,  and  to  arrange 
them  in  an  order  in  which  these  forces,  which 
he  named,  affinities,  were  expresed.+ 

Chemistry  had  scarcely  begun  to  assume  the 
form  of  a  science,  when  the  attention  of  the 
most  powerful  minds  were  directed  to  other 
objects  of  research  the  same  great  man  who 
bestowed  on  it  its  first  accurate  principles,  in 
some  measure  impeded  its  immediate  progress, 
by  his  more  important  discoveries  in  optics, 
mechanics,  and  astronomy 

These  objects  of  the  Newtonian  philosophy 
were  calculated  by  their  grandeur,  their  simpli- 
city, and  their  importance,  to  become  the  study 
of  the  men  of  most  distinguished  talents  ;  the 

*  Newton's  Works,  quarto,  Tom.  iv.  page  242. 
t  Mfemoires  del'  Academic,  17I8,  page  256. 


INTRODUCTION.  S9 

effect  that  they  occasioned  on  the  scientific 
mind  may  be  compared  to  that  which  the  new 
sensations  of  vision  produce  on  the  blind  re- 
ceiving sight; — they. awakened  the  highest  in- 
terest, the  most  enthusiastic  admiration,  and  for 
nearly  half  a  century,  absorbed  the  attention 
of  the  most  eminent  philosophers  of  Britain 
and  France. 

Germany  still  continued  the  great  school  of 
practical  chemistry,  and  at  this  period  it  gained 
an  ascendancy  of  no  mean  character  over  the 
rest  of  Europe  in  the  philosophy  of  the  science. 
Beccher,  who  was  born  at  Spires  in  I645,  after 
having  studied  with  minute  attention,  the  ope- 
rations of  metallurgy,  and  the  phaenomena  of 
the  mineral  kingdom,  formed  the  bold  idea  of 
explaining  the  whole  system  of  the  earth  by 
the  mutual  agency  and  changes  of  a  few  ele- 
ments. And  by  supposing  the  existence  of  a 
vitrifiable,  a  metallic,  and  an  inflammable  earth, 
he  attempted  to  account  for  the  various  produc- 
tions of  rocks,  crystalline  bodies,  and  metallic 
veins,  assuming  a  continued  interchange  of 
principles  between  the  atmosphere,  the  ocean, 
and  the  solid  surface  of  the  globe,  and  consi- 
dering the  operations  of  nature  as  all  capable 
©f  being  imitated  by  art. 


so  NTRODUCTION. 

The  Phfsica  suhterranea,  and  the  Oedipus 
chemicus  of  this  author,  are  very  extraordinary 
productions."  They  display  the  efforts  of  a  vi- 
gorous mind,  the  conceptions  of  a  most  fertile 
imagination,  but  the  conclusions  are  too  rapid- 
ly formed  ;  there  is  a  want  of  logical  precision 
in  his  reasonings  ;  the  objects  he  attempted 
v^ere  grand,  but  his  means  of  execution  compa- 
ratively feeble.  He  endeavoured  to  raise  a  per- 
fect and  lasting  edifice  upon  foundations  too 
Weak,  from  materials  too  scanty  and  not  suf- 
ficiently solid  ;  and  the  work,  though  magni- 
ficent in  design,  was  rude  unfinished  and 
feeble,  and  rapidly  fell  into  decay. 

Beccher  added  very  little  to  the  collection 
of  chemical  experiments,  but  he  improved  the 
instruments  of  research,  simplified  the  mani- 
pulations, and  by  the  novelty  and  boldness  of 
'his  speculations,  excited  enquiry  amongst  his 
disciples. 

His  most  distinguished  follower  was  George 
Ernest  Stahl,  born  in  1660,  who  soon  attained 
a  reputation  superior  to  that  of  his  master,  and 
developed  doctrines  which  for  nearly  a  century 
constituted,  the  theory  of  chemistry  of  the 
whole  of  Europe. 

Albertus  Magnus  had  advanced  the  idea  thact 


INTRODUCTION.  3^ 

the  mfetals  were  earthy  substances  impregnated 
with  a  certain  inflammable  principle.  Becchet 
supported  the  idea  of  this  principle,  not  only 
as  the  cause  of  metallization,  but  likewise  of 
combustibility :  and  Stahl  endeavoured,  by  a 
number  of  ingenious  and  elaborate  experiments, 
to  prove  the  existence  of  phlogiston,  as  it 
was  called,  and  to  explain  its  agencies  in  the 
phaenomena  of  nature  and  art. 

'Glauber,  about  fifty  years  before  Stahl  begafi 
liis  labours,  had  discovered  the  combination  of 
fossil  alkali  and  sulphuric  acid,  which  still 
bears  his  name.  And  Stahl,  in  operating  upon 
this  body, thought  he  had  discovered  the  proof, 
tliat  the  inflammability  not  only  of  metals,  but 
likewise  of  all  other  substances,  was  owing  to 
the  same  principle.  Charcoal  is  entirely  dis- 
sipated or  consumed  in  combustion,  therefore, 
says  this  philosopher,  it  must  be  phlogiston 
nearly 'pure  ;  by  heating  charcoal  with  metallic 
earths,  they  become  metals  ;  therefore  they 
are  compounds  of  metallic  earths  and  phlogis- 
ton :  by  heating  Glauber's  salt,  which  consists  of 
sulphuric  acid  and  fossil  alkali,  with  charcoal, 
a  compound  of  sulphur  and  alkali  is  obtained  ; 
therefore  sulphur  is  an  acid  combined  with 
phlogiston.   Stahl  entirely  neglected  the  che- 


3S  INTRODUCTION. 

mical  influence  of  air  on  these  phenomena  ;  and 
though  Boyle  had  proved  that  phosphorus 
and  sulphur  would  not  burn  without  air,  and 
had  stated  that  sulphur  was  contained  in  sul- 
phuric acid,  and  not  the  acid  in  sulphur,  yet 
the  ideas  of  the  Prussian  school  were  received 
without  controversy.  Similar  opinions  were 
adopted  in  France  by  Homberg  and  Geoffroy, 
who  assumed  them  without  reference  to  the 
views  of  the  Prussian  philosopher,  and  opposed 
them  to  the  more  correct  and  sagacious  views 
of  the  English  school  of  chemistry. 

Though  misled  in  his  general  notions,  few 
men  have  done  more  than  Stahl  for  the  pro- 
gress of  chemical  science.— His  processes  were, 
many  of  them,  of  the  most  beautiful  and  satis- 
factory kind :   he  discovered  a  number  of 
properties  of  the  caustic  alkalies  and  metallic 
calces,  and  the  nature  of  sulphureous  acid ; 
he  reasoned  upon  all  the  operations  of  che- 
mistry in  which  gaseous  bodies  were  not  con- 
cerned, with  admirable  precision.    He  gave 
an  axiomatic  form  to  the  science,  banishing 
from  it   vague  details,  circumlocutions  and 
enigmatic  descriptions,  in  which  even  Beccher 
had  too  much  indulged ;  he  laboured  in  the 
spirit  of  the  Baconian  school,  multiplying  in* 


INTRODUCTION.  33 

Stances,  and  cautiously  making  inductions,  and 
appealing  in  all  cases  to  experiments  which, 
though  not  of  the  most  refined  kind,  wer« 
more  perfect  than  any  which  preceded  them. 

Dr.  Hales,  about  17  24,  resumed  the  investi- 
gations commenced  with  so  much  success  by 
Boyle,  Hooke,  and  Mayow;  and  endeavoured  to 
ascertain  the  chemical  relations  of  air  to  other 
substances,  and  to  ascertain  by  statical  expe- 
riments the  cases  in  nature,  in  which  it  is 
absorbed  or  emitted.  He  obtained  a  number  of 
important  and  curious  results  ;  but,  misled  by 
the  notion  of  one  elementary  principle  con- 
stituting elastic  matter,  and  modified  in  its 
properties  by  the  effluvia  of  solid  or  fluid 
bodies,  he  formed  few  inferences  connected 
with  the  refined  philosophy  of  the  subject: 
he  disengaged,  however,  elastic  fluids  from 
a  number  of  substances,  and  drew  the  con- 
clusion that  air  was  a  chemical  element  in  many 
compound  bodies,  and  that  flame  resulted  from 
the  action  and  re-action  of  serial  and  sulphurous 
particles.* 

In  1756  Dr.  Black  publisiied  his  admirable 
researches  on  calcareous,  magnesian,  and  al- 
kaline substances,  by  which  he  proved  the 

•  Hales'  Statical  Essays,  2d  ed.  8vo.  Vol.  i,  pag.  315. 
VOL.  I.  D 


34  INTRODUCTION. 

existence  of  a  gaseous  body,  perfectly  distinct 
from  the  air  of  the  atmosphere.  He  shewed  that 
quicklime  differed  from  marble  and  chalk  by 
containing  this  substance,  and  that  it  was  a 
weak  acid,  capable  of  being  expelled  from 
alkaline  and  earthy  substances  by  strong 
acids.* 

Ideas  so  new  and  important  as  those  of  the 
British  philosopher,  were  not  received  without 
opposition  ;  several  German  enquirers  endea- 
voured to  controvert  them.  .  Meyer  attempted 
to  shew  that  limestones  became  caustic,  not 
by  the  emission  of  elastic  matter,  but  by  com- 
bining with  a  peculiar  substance  in  the  fire  ; 
but  the  loss  of  weight  was  perfectly  inconsistent 
with  this  view:  and  Bergman  atUpsal,  Macbride 
in  Ireland,  Keir  at  Birmingham,  and  Cavendish 
in  London,  demonstrated  the  correctness  of  the 
opinions  of  Black;  and  a  few  years  were  suffi- 
cient to  establish  his  theory  upon  immutable 
foundations. 

The  knowledge  of  one  elastic  fluid  different 
from  air,  immediately  led  to  the  enquiry 
whether  there  might  not  be  others.  The  pro- 
cesses of  fermentation  which  had  been  observed 

*  Essays  and  Observations  Physical  and  Literary,  vol.  ii. 
page  1 59, 


INTRODUCTION.  35 

by  the  ancient  chemists,  and  those  by  which 
Hales  had  disengaged  and  collected  elastic 
substances,  were  now  regarded  under  a  novel 
point  of  view ;  and  the  consequence  was,  that 
a  number  of  new  bodies,  possessed  of  very  ex- 
traordinary properties,  were  discovered. 

Mr.  Cavendish,  about  1765,  invented  an  ap- 
paratus for  examining  elastic  fluids  confined 
by  water,  which  has  been  since  called  the 
hydro-pneumatic  apparatus.  He  discovered 
inflammable  lair,  and  described  its  properties  ; 
he  ascertained  the  relative  weights  of  fixed  air, 
inflammable  air,  and  common  air,  and  made  a 
number  of  beautiful  and  accurate  experiments 
on  the  properties  of  these  elastic  substances. 

Dr.  Priestley,  in  I771j  entered  the  same  in- 
teresting path  of  enquiry ;  and  principally  by 
repeating  the  processes  of  Hales,  added  a 
number  of  most  important  facts  to  this  depart- 
ment of  chemical  philosophy.  He  discovered 
nitrous  air,  nitrous  oxide,  and  dephlogisticated 
air;  and  by  substituting  mercury  for  water  in  the 
pneumatic  apparatus,  ascertained  the  existence 
of  several  aeriform  substances,  which  are  rapidly 
absorbable  by  water,  muriatic  acid  air,  sul- 
phurous acid  air,  and  ammonia. 

Whilst  a  new  branch  of  the  science  was 


$6 


INTRODUCTION. 


making  this  rapid  progress  in  Britain,  the  che» 
mistry  of  solid  and  fluid  substances  was  pursued 
with  considerable  zeal  and  success  in  France 
and  Germany ;  and  Macquer,  Rouelle,  Mar- 
graff,  and  Pott,  added  considerably  to  the 
knowledge  of  fosslle  bodies,  and  the  proper- 
ties of  the  metals.  Bergman,  in  Sweden,  de- 
veloped refined  ideas  on  the  powers  of  chemi- 
cal attraction,  and  reasoned  in  a  happy  spirit 
of  generalization  on  many  of  the  new  phaeno- 
mena  of  the  science ;  and  in  the  same  country 
Scheele,  independently  of  Priestley,  discovered 
several  of  the  same  aeriform  substances :  he 
ascertained  the  composition  of  the  atmosphere; 
he  brought  to  light  fluoric  acid,  prussic  acid, 
and  the  substance  which  has  been  improperly 
called  oxymuriatic  gas. 

Black,  Cavendish,  Priestley,  and  Scheele, 
were  undoubtedly  the  greatest  chemical  dis- 
coverers of  the  eighteenth  century  ;  and  their 
merits  are  distinct,  peculiar,  and  of  the  most 
exalted  kind.  Black  made  a  smaller  number 
of  original  experiments  than  either  of  the 
other  philosophers  ;  but  being  the  first  labourer 
in  this  new  department  of  the  science,  he 
had  greater  dilEcukies  to  overcome.  His  me* 
ihods  are  distinguished  for  their  simplicity, 


INTRODUCTION. 


37 


his  reasonings  are  admirable  for  their  pre- 
cision;  and  his  modest,  clear,  and  unaffected 
manner,  is  well  calculated  to  ~ impress  upon 
the  mind  a  conviction  of  the  accuracy  of  his 
processes,  and  the  truth  and  candour  of  his 
narrations. 

Cavendish  was  possessed  of  a  minute  know- 
ledge of  most  of  the  departments  of  Natu- 
ral Philosophy ;  he  carried  into  his  chemical 

researches  a  delicacy  and  precision,  which 
have  never  been  exceeded:  possessing  depth 

and  extent  of  mathematical  knowledge,  he 
reasoned  with  the  caution  of  a  geometer  upon 
the  results  of  his  experiments  :  and  it  may  be 
said  of  him,  what,  perhaps,  can  scarcely  be 
said  of  any  other  person,  that  whatever  he 
accomplished,  was  perfect  at  the  moment  of 
its  production.  His  processes  were  all  of  a 
finished  nature  ;  executed  by  the  hand  of  a 
master,  they  required  no  correction  ;  the  accu- 
racy and  beauty  of  his  earliest  labours  even, 
have  remained  unimpaired  amidst  the  progress 
of  discovery,  and  their  merits  have  been  illus- 
trated by  discussion,  and  exalted  by  time. 

Dr.  Priestley  began  his  career  of  discovery 
without  any  general  knowledge  of  chemistry, 
and  with   a  very  imperfect  apparatus.  His 


3^ 


INTRODUCTION. 


characteristics  were  ardent  zeal  and  the  most 
unwearied  industry.  He  exposed  all  the  sub- 
stances he  could  procure  to  chemical  agencies, 
and  brought  forward  his  results  as  they  oc- 
curred, without  attempting  logical  method  or 
scientific  arrangement.  His  hypotheses  were 
usually  founded  upon  a  few  loose  analogies ; 
but  he  changed  them  with  facility  ;  and  being 
framed  without  much  effort,  they  were  relin- 
quished with  little  regret.  He  possessed  in  the 
highest  degree  ingenuousness  and  the  love  of 
truth.  His  manipulations,  though  never  very 
refined,  were  always  simple,  and  often  inge- 
nious. Chemistry  owes  to  him  some  of  her  most 
important  instruments  of  research,  and  many 
of  her  most  useful  combinations;  and  no  single 
person  ever  discovered  so  many  new  and  cu- 
rious substances. 

Scheele  possessed  in  the  highest  degree  the 
faculty  of  invention ;  all  his  labours  were  in- 
stituted with  an  object  in  view,  and  after  happy 
or  bold  analogies.  He  owed  little  to  fortune 
or  to  accidental  circumstances :  born  in  an  ob- 
scure situation,  occupied  in  the  duties  of  an 
irksome  employment,  nothing  could  damp  the 
ardour  of  his  mind  or  chill  the  fire  of  his  ge- 
nius :  with  rery  small  means  he  accomplished 


INTRODUCTION.  S9 

very  great  things.  No  difficulties  deterred 
him  from  submitting  his  ideas  to  the  test  of 
experiment.  Occasionally  misled  in  his  views, 
in  consequence  of  the  imperfection  of  his  ap- 
paratus, or  the  infant  state  of  the  inquiry,  he 
never  hesitated  to  give  up  his  opinions  the 
moment  they  were  contradicted  by  facts.  He 
was  eminently  endowed  with  that  candour 
which  is  characteristic  of  great  minds,  and 
which  induces  them  to  rejoice  as  well  in  the 
detection  of  their  own  errors,  as  in  the  dis- 
covery of  truth-  His  papers  are  admirable 
models  of  the  manner  in  which  experimental 
research  ought  to  be  pursued ;  and  they  con- 
tain details  on  some  of  the  most  important  and 
brilliant  phasnomena  of  chemical  philosophy. 

The  discovery  of  the  gasses,  of  a  new  class 
of  bodies,  more  active  than  any  others  in  most 
of  the  phaenomena  of  nature  and  art,  could 
not  fail  to  modify  the  whole  theory  of  che- 
mistry. The  ancient  doctrines  were  revised; 
new  modifications  of  them  were  formed  by 
some  philosophers ;  whilst  others  discarded 
entirely  all  the  former  hypotheses,  and  endea- 
voured to  establish  new  generalizations. 

The  idea  of  a  peculiar  principle  of  mflam- 
mability  was   so  firmly  established  in  the 


40  INTRODUCTION. 

chemical  schools,  that  even  the  knowledge  of 
the  composition  of  the  atmosphere  for  a  long 
while  was  not  supposed  to  interfere  with  it ;  and 
the  part  of  the  atmosphere  which  is  absorbed  by- 
bodies  in  burning,  was  conceived  to  owe  its 
powers  to  its  attraction  for  phlogiston. 

All  the  modern  chemists  who  made  experi- 
ments upon  combustion,  found  that  bodies  in- 
creased in  weight  by  burning,  and  that  there 
was  no  loss  of  ponderable  matter.  It  was  ne- 
cessary therefore  to  suppose,  contrary  to  the 
ideas  of  Stahl,  that  phlogiston  was  not  emitted 
in  combustion,  but  that  it  remained  in  the  in- 
flammable body  after  absorbing  gaseous  mat- 
ter from  the  air.  But  what  is  phlogiston  was 
a  question  constantly  agitated.  Inflammable  air 
had  been  obtained  during;  the  dissolution  of  cer- 
tain  metals,  and  during  the  distillation  of  a  num- 
ber of  combustible  bodies.  This  light  and  sub- 
tile matter,  therefore, was  fixed  upon  as  the  prin- 
ciple of  inflammability ;  and  Cavendish,  Kirwan, 
Priestley,  and  Fontana,  were  the  illustrious 
advocates  of  this  very  ingenious  hypothesis. 

In  1774,  Bayen*  shewed  that  mercury  con- 
veirted  into  a  calx  or  earth,  by  the  absorption  of 
air,  could  be  revived  without  the  addition  of 
*  Journal  de  Physique,  1774,  page  28S, 


INTRODUCTION.  4I 

any  inflammable  substance ;  and  hence  he  con- 
cluded, that  there  was  no  necessity  for  sup- 
posing the  existence  of  any  peculiar  principle 
of  inflammability,  in  accounting  for  the  calcin- 
ation of  metals.  The  subject,  nearly  about  the 
same  time,  was  taken  up  by  Lavoisier,  who  had 
been  for  some  time  engaged  in  repeating  the  ex- 
periments of  the  British  philosophers.  Bayen 
formed  no  opinion  respecting  the  nature  of  the 
air  produced  from  the  calx  of  mercury.  Lavoi- 
sier, in  1775,  shewed  that  it  was  an  air  which 
supported  flame  and  respiration  better  than  com- 
mon air,  which  he  afterwards  named  oxygene  ; 
the  same  substance  that  Priestley  and  Scheele 
had  procured  from  other  metallic  substances  the 
year  before,  and  had  particularly  described.* 

Lavoisier  discovered  that  the  same  air  is  pro- 
duced during  the  revivification  of  metallic 
calces  by  charcoal,  as  that  which  is  emitted 
during  the  calcination  of  limestone;  hence  he 
concluded,  that  this  clastic  fluid  is  composed 
of  oxygene  and  charcoal;  and  from  his  expe- 
riments on  nitrous  acid  and  oil  of  vitriol,  he 

*  In  the  Journal  de  Physique  for  l/^P,  Preliminary  Dis- 
course, De  la  Meiherie  has  given  an  adrnir<ible  \ieworihe 
progress  of  the  investigations  concerning  the  gases.  See 
p.  24,  &c. 


42  INTRODUCTION. 

concluded  that  this  gas  entered  into  the  compo- 
sition of  these  substances. 

Dr.  Black  had  demonstrated  by  a  series  of 
beautiful  experiments,  that  when  gases  are  con- 
densed, or  when  fluids  are  converted  into  solids, 
heat  is  produced.  In  combustion  gaseous  mat- 
ter usually  assumes  the  solid  or  the  fluid  form. 
Oxygene  gas,  said  Lavoisier,  seems  to  be 
compound  of  the  matter  of  heat,  and  a  basis. 
In  the  act  of  burning,  this  basis  is  united  to  the 
combustible  body,  and  the  heat  is  evolved. 
There  is  no  necessity,  said  this  acute  philoso- 
pher, to  suppose  any  phlogiston,  any  pecu- 
liar principle  of  inflammability  ;  for  all  the 
phaenomena  may  be  accounted  for  without  this 
imaginary  existence. 

Lavoisier  must  be  regarded  as  one  of  the 
most  sagacious  of  the  chemical  philosophers 
of  the  last  century ;  indeed,  except  Cavendish, 
there  is  no  other  inquirer  who  can  be  compared 
to  him  for  precision  of  logic,  extent  of  view, 
and  sagacity  of  induction.  His  discoveries 
were  few,  but  he  reasoned  with  extraordinary 
correctness  upon  the  labours  of  others.  He 
introduced  weight  and  measure,  and  strict 
accuracy  of  manipulation  into  all  chemical 
processes.    His  mind  was  unbiassed  by  pre- 


INTRODUCTION*  43 

judice  ;  his  combinations  were  of  the  most  phi- 
losophical nature :  and  in  his  investigations 
upon  ponderable  substances,  he  has  entered 
the  true  path  of  experiment  with  cautious  steps, 
following  just  analogies,  and  measuring  hypo- 
theses by  their  simple  relations  to  facts. 

The  doctrine  of  Lavoisier,  soon  after  it  was 
framed,  received  some  important  confirmations 
from  the  two  grand  discoveries  of  Mr.  Caven- 
dish,  respecting  the  composition  of  water,  and 
nitric  acid  ;  and  the  elaborate  and  beautiful  in- 
vestigations of  Berthollet  respecting  the  nature 
of  ammonia;  in  which  phacnomena,  before  ano- 
malous, were  shewn  to  depend  upon  combina- 
tions of  aeriform  matter. 

The  notion  of  phlogiston,  was  however  de- 
fended for  nearly  20  years,  by  some  philoso- 
phers in  Germany,  Sweden,  Britain,  and  Ire- 
land. Mr.  Cavendish,  in  17  84,  drew  a  parallel 
between  the  hypothesis,  that  all  inflammable  bo- 
dies contain  inflammable  air,  and  the  doctrine  in 
which  they  are  considered  as  simple  substances, 
in  a  paper  equally  remarkable  for  the  precision 
of  the  views  displayed  in  it,  and  for  the  accu- 
racy and  minuteness  of  the  experiments  it  con- 
tains. To  this  great  man,  the  assumption  of 
M.  Lavoisier,  of  the  matter  of  heat,  appeared 


44 


INTRODUCTION, 


more  hypothetical  than  that  of  a  principle  of 
inflammability.  He  states,  that  the  phaenomena 
may  be  explained  on  either  doctrine ;  but  he 
prefers  the  earlier  view,  as  accounting,  in  a 
happier  manner,  for  some  of  the  operations  of 
nature. 

De  Morveau,  Berlhollet,  and  Fourcroy,  in 
France,  and  William  Higgins  and  Dr.Hope,in 
Britain,  were  the  first  advocates  for  the  anti- 
phlogistic chemistry.  Sooner  or  later,  that  doc- 
trine which  is  an  expression  of  facts,must  prevail 
over  that  which  is  an  expression  of  opinion.  The 
most  important  part  of  the  theory  of  Lavoisier 
was  merely  an  arrangement  of  the  facts  relating 
to  the  combinations  of  oxygene:  the  principle 
of  reasoning  which  the  French  school  professed 
to  adopt  was,  that  every  body  which  was  not 
yet  decompounded,  should  be  considered  as 
simple  ;  and  though  mistakes  were  made  with 
respect  to  the  results  of  experiments  on  the 
nature  of  bodies,  yet  this  logical  and  truly  phi- 
losophical principle  was  not  violated ;  and 
the  systematic  manner  in  which  it  was  en- 
forced, was  of  the  greatest  use  in  promoting 
the  progress  of  the  science. 

Till  17  86,  there  had  been  no  attempt  to 
reform  the  nomenclature  of  chemistry ;  the 


INTRODUCTION. 


45 


names  applied  by  discoverers  to  the  substances 
which  they  made  known,  were  still  employed. 
Some  of  these  names,  which  originated  amongst 
the  alchymists,  were  of  the  most  barbarous 
kind ;  few  of  them  were  sufficiently  definite 
or  precise,  and  most  of  them  were  founded 
upon  loose  analogies,  or  upon  false  theoretical 
views. 

It  was  felt  by  many  philosophers,  particu- 
larly by  the  illustrious  Bergman,  that  an  im- 
provement in  chemical  nomenclature  was  ne- 
cessary, and  in  1787,  Messrs.  Lavoisier,  Mor- 
veau,  Berthollet,  and  Fourcroy,  presented  to 
the  world  a  plan  for  an  almost  entire  change 
in  the  denomination  of  chemical  substances, 
founded  upon  the  idea  of  calling  simple  bodies 
by  some  names  characteristic  of  their  most 
striking  qualities,  and  of  naming  compound 
bodies  from  the  elements  which  composed 
them. 

The  new  nomenclature  was  speedily  adopted 
in  France  ;  under  some  modifications  it  was 
received  in  Germany  ;  and  after  much  discus- 
sion and  opposition,  it  became  the  language  of 
a  new  and  rising  generation  of  chemists  in 
England.  It  materially  assisted  the  diffusion  of 
the  antiphlogistic  doctrine,  and  even  facilitated 


46 


INTRODUCTION. 


the  general  acquisition  of  the  science ;  and 
many  of  its  details  were  contrived  with  much 
address,  and  were  worthy  oF  its  celebrated  au- 
thors: but  a  very  slight  reference  to  the  phi- 
losophical principles  of  language  will  evince 
that  its  foundations  were  imperfect,  and  that 
the  plan  adopted  was  not  calculated  for  a  pro- 
gressive branch  of  knowledge. 

Simplicity  and  precision  ought  to  be  the 
characteristics  of  a  scientific  nomenclature : 
words  should  signify  things,  or  the  analogies 
of  things,  and  not  opinions.  If  all  the  elements 
were  certainly  known,  the  principle  adopted  by 
Lavoisier  would  have  possessed  an  admirable 
application  ;  but  a  substance  in  one  age  sup- 
posed to  be  simple,  in  another  is  proved  to 
be  compound  ;  and  vice  versa.  A  theoretical 
nomenclature  is  liable  to  continued  alterations; 
oxygenated  muriatic  acid  is  as  improper  a 
name  as  dephlogisticated  marine  acid.  Every 
school  believes  itself  in  the  right ;  and  if  every 
school  assumes  to  itself  the  liberty  of  altering 
the  names  of  chemical  substances,  in  conse- 
quence of  new  ideas  of  their  composition,  or 
decomposition,  there  can  be  no  permanency  in 
the  language  of  the  science,  it  must  always 
be  confused  and  uncertain.    Bodies  which  are 


INTRODUCTION.  47 

similar  to  each  other  should  always  be  classed 
together ;  and  there  is  a  presumption  that  their 
composition  is  analogous.  Metals,  earths,  al- 
kalies, are  appropriate  names  for  the  bodies 
they  represent,  and  independant  of  all  specu- 
lative views ;  whereas  oxides,  suiphurets,  and 
muriates,  are  terms  founded  upon  opinions  of 
the  composition  of  bodies,  some  of  which  have 
been  already  found  erroneous.  The  least  dan- 
gerous mode  of  giving  a  systematic  form  to  a 
language,  seems  to  be,  to  signify  the  analogies 
of  substances  by  some  common  sign  affixed  to 
the  beginning  or  the  termination  of  the  word. 
Thus,  as  the  metals  have  been  distinguished  by 
a  termination  in  um,  as  aurum,  so  their  calci- 
form  or  oxidated  state,  might  have  been  denot- 
ed by  a  termination  in  a,  as  aura ;  and  no  pro- 
gress, however  great,  in  the  science,  could  ren- 
der it  necessary  that  such  a  mode  of  appellation 
should  be  changed.  Moreover,  the  principle 
of  a  composite  nomenclature  must  always  be 
very  limited.  It  is  scarcely  possible  to  repre- 
sent bodies  consisting  of  five  or  six  elements 
in  this  way,  and  yet  it  is  in  such  difficult  cases 
that  a  name  implying  a  chemical  truth  would 
be  most  useful. 

The  new  doctrines  of  chemistry,  before  1795, 


4t 


INTRODUCTION. 


were  embraced  by  almost  all  the  active  expe- 
rimental enquirers  in  Europe ;  and  the  adoption 
of  a  precise  mode  of  reasoning,  and  more  re- 
fined forms  of  experiment,  led  not  only  to  the 
discovery  of  new  substances,  but  likewise  to  a 
more  accurate  acquaintance  with  the  properties 

and  composition  of  bodies  that  had  long  been 
known. 

New  investigations  were  instituted  with  re- 
spect to  all  the  productions  of  nature,  and  the 
immense  variety  of  substances  in  the  mineral, 
vegetable,  and  animal  kingdom,  submitted  to 
chemical  experiments. 

The  analysis  of  mineral  bodies  first  at- 
tempted by  Pott  in  experiments  principally  on 
their  igneous  fusion,  and  afterwards  refined  by 
the  application  of  acid  and  alkaline  menstrua, 
by  Margraaf,  Bergman,  Bayen,  and  Achard, 
received  still  greater  improvements  from  the 
labours  of  Klaproth,  Vauquelin,  and  Hatchett. 
Hoffman,  in  the  beginning  of  the  1 8th  century, 
pointed  out  magnesia  as  a  peculiar  substance.* 
Margraaf,  about  fifty  years  later,f  distinguished 
accurately  betweea  the  silicious,  calcareous,  and 

*  Hoffman,  Opera,  Tom.  iv.  pag.  47.9. 
t  Opuscules,  Tom.  ii.  pag.  137. 


INTRODUCTION.  49 

aluminous  earths,  Scheele,  in  1774,  discovered 
barytes.  Klaproth,*  in  1  788,  made  known  zir- 
cone.  Dr.  Hope,f  strontites  in  791»  Qadolin, 
ittriajin  1794;  and  Vauquelin,  glucine  in  I798. 

Seven  metals  only  had  been  accurately  known 
to  the  ancieats,  gold,  silver,  mercury,  copper, 
tin,  and  iron.  Zinc,  bismuth,  arsenic,  and  anti- 
mony, though  mentioned  by  the  Greek  and 
Roman  authors,  yet  were  employed  only  in 
certain  combinations,  and  the  production  of 
them  in  the  form  of  reguli  or  pure  metals,  was 
owing  to  the  Alchemists. 

Cobalt  had  been  used  to  tinge  glass  ia 
Saxony  in  the  sixteenth  century ;  but  the  me- 
tal was  unknown  till  the  time  of  Brandt,  and 
this  celebrated  Swedish  chemist  discovered  it 
in  17 33'  Nickel  j|  was  procured  by  Cronstedt 
in  1751.  The  properties  of  manganese,  which 
was  announced  as  a  peculiar  metal  by  Kaim  ^ 
in  1 7  70,  were  minutely  investigated  by  Scheele 
and  Bergman  a  few  years  after.  Molybdic  acid 
was  discovered  by  Scheele  in  177  8,  and  a  metal 
procured  from  it  by  Hielm  in  1782,  the  same 

*  Annales  de  Chiraie,  Tom.  i.  pag.  183. 
+  Edinburgh  Trans.  Vol.  iv.  p.  44. 
X  Crell's  Annals,  1796. 
H  Bergman  Opuscula,  Tpin.  ii.  page  22c 
I  De  Metallis  dubiis,  p.  48. 
VOL.  I.  ^ 


so 


INTRODUCTION. 


year  that  tellurium  was  made  known  by  Muller. 
Scheele  discovered  tungstic  acid  in  17 Si;  and 
soon  after  a  metal  was  extracted  from  it  by 
Messrs.  D'  Elhuyars.  Klaproth  discovered 
uranium  in  1 7  89,*  The  first  description  of  the 
properties  of  the  oxide  of  titanium  was  given 
by  Gregor  in  1791-+  Vauquelin  made  known 
chromium  in  1797  ;$  Hatchett  columbium  in 
1801;§  and  skortly  after,  the  same  substance 
was  noticed  by  Ekeberg,  and  named  by  him 
tantalium.  Cerium  was  discovered  in  I804,  by 
Hissinger  and  Berzelius.  Platina  had  been 
brought  into  Europe  and  examined  by  Lewis  in 
1749*  and  in  I803,  Descotils,  Fourcroy,  and 
Vauquelin  announced  a  new  metallic  substance 
in  it ;  but  the  complete  investigation  of  the  pro- 
perties of  this  extraordinary  body  was  reserved 
for  Messrs.  Tennant  and  WoUaston,  who  in 
1 803  and  1804  discovered  in  it  no  less  than  four 
new  metallic  substances,  besides  the  body  which 
exists  in  it  in  the  largest  proportion,  namely, 
iridium,  osmium,  palladium,  and  rhodium. 

The  attempts  made  to  analyse  vegetable 
lubstances  previous  to  17^0,  merely  produced 

*  Jntirnal  de  Physique,  17S9.  pag.  39. 
t  Aniiales  de  ('himie,  xii.  pag.  147.         I  Ibid,  xxv.  21. 
Phil.  Trans.  i8u2. 


I 


INTRODUCTION.  51 

their  resolution  into  the  supposed  elements  of 
the  chemists  of  those  days,  namely,  salts,  Earths, 
phlegm,  and  sulphur.  Boerhaave  and  Newmann 
attempted  an  examination  by  fluid  menstrua, 
which  was  pursued  with  some  success  by  Rou- 
elle,  Macquer  and  Lewis.  Scheele,  between  17  70 
and  17.80,  pointed  out  several  new  vegetable 
acids.  Fourcroy,  Vauquelin,  Deyeux,  Seguin, 
Proust,  Jacquin,  and  Hermbstadt,  between  17  80 
and  1790,  in  various  interesting  series  of  expe- 
riments, distinguished  between  different  secon- 
dary elements  of  vegetable  matter,  particu- 
larly extract,  tannin,  gums,  and  resinous  sub- 
stances ;  and  investigations  of  this  kind  have 
been  pursued  with  great  success  by  Hatchett, 
Pearson,  Shraeder,  Chenevix,Gehlen,Thomson, 
Thenard,  Chevreul,  Kind,  Brande,  Bostock^ 
and  Duncan.    The  chemistry  of  animal  sub- 
stances has  received  great  elucidations  from 
several  of  the  same  enquirers  ;  and  Berzelius 
has  examined  most  of  their  results,  and  has 
added  several  new  ones,  in  a  comprehensive 
work  expressly  devoted  to  the  subject,  pub- 
lished in  1S08. 

That  solid  masses  fell  from  above,  connected 
with  the  appearance  of  meteors,  had  been 
advanced  as  early  as  500  years  before  the 

Eg 


52  INTRODUCTION. 

Christian  aera,  by  Anaxagoras ;  and  the  same  idea 
had  been  brought  forward  in  a  vague  manner 
by  other  enquirers  amongst  the  Greeks  and 
Romans,  and  was  revived  in  modern  times  ; 
but  till  1802  it  was  regarded  by  the  greater 
number  of  philosophers  as  a  mere  vulgar  error, 
when  Mr.  Howard,  by  an  accurate  examina- 
tion of  the  testimonies  connected  with  events 
of  this  kind,  and  by  a  minute  analysis  of  the 
substances  said  to  have  fallen  in  different  parts 
of  the  globe,  proved  the  authenticity  of  the 
circumstance,  and  shewed  that  these  meteoric 
productions  differed  from  any  substances  be- 
longing to  our  earth  ;  and  since  that  period  a 
number  of  these  phscnomena  have  occurred, 
and  have  been  minutely  recorded. 

The  philosophy  of  heat,  the  foundations  of 
which  were  laid  between  1757  and  11  $5,  by 
Black, Wilcke,  Crawford,  Irvine,  and  Lavoisier, 
since  that  period  has  received  some  new  and 
very  important  additions,  from  the  inquiries  of 
Pictet,  Rumford,  Herschel,  Leslie,  Dalton, 
and  Gay  Lussac.  The  circurosfances  under 
which  bodies  absorb  and  communicate  heat, 
have  been  minutely  investigated ;  and  the 
important  discoveries  of  the  different  physical 
and  chemical  powers  of  the  difterent  solar 


INTRODUCTION.  5S 

rays;  and  of  a  property  analogous  to  polarity 
in  light,  bear  immediate  relation  to  the  most 
refined  doctrines  of  corpuscular  science,  and 
promise  to  connect^  by  close  analogies,  the 
chemical  and  mechanical  laws  of  matter. 

A  general  view  of  the  philosophy  of  che- 
mistry was  published  under  the  name  of  Chemi- 
cal Statics,  in  1 803,  by  the  celebrated  Berthollet. 
It  is  a  work  remarkable  for  the  new  views  that 
it  contains  on  the  doctrines  of  attraction  ;  views 
which  are  still  objects  of  discussion,  and  which 
bear  an  immediate  relation  to  some  of  the  con- 
clusions depending  upon  very  recent  disco- 
veries. 

At  the  time  when  the  antiphlogistic  theory 
was  established,  electricity  had  little  or  no  re- 
lation to  chemistry.  The  grand  results  of 
Franklin,  respecting  the  cause  of  lightning, 
had  led  many  philosophers  to  conjecture,  that 
certain  chemical  changes  in  the  atmosphere, 
might  be  connected  with  electrical  phseno- 
mena; — and  electrical  discharges  had  been 
employed  by  Cavendish,  Priestley,  and  Van- 
marum,  for  decomposing  and  igniting  bodies ; 
but  it  was  not  till  the  era  of  the  wonderful 
discovery  of  Volta,  in  i860,  of  a  new  electrical 
apparatus,  that  any  great  progress  was  made  in 


54 


INTRODUCTION. 


chemical  investigation  by  means  of  electrical 
coHibinations. 

Nothing  tends  so  much  to  the  advancement 
of  knowledge  as  the  application  of  a  new  in- 
strument. The  native  intellectual  powers  of 
men  in  different  times,  are  not  so  much  the 
causes  of  the  different  success  of  their  labours, 
as  the  peculiar  nature  of  the  means  and  artificial 
resources  in  their  possession.  Independent  of 
vessels  of  glass,  there  could  have  been  no  accu- 
rate  manipulations  in  common  chemistry :  the 
air  pump,  was  necessary  for  the  investigation  of 
the  properties  of  gaseous  matter ;  and  without 
the  Voltaic  apparatus,  there  was  no  possibility 
of  examining  the  relations  of  electrical  pola- 
rities to  chemical  attractions. 

By  researches,  the  commencement  of  which  is 
owing  to  Messrs.  Nicholson  and  Carlisle,  in  1800, 
which  were  continued  by  Cruickshank,  Henry, 
Wollaston,  Children,  Pepys,  Pfaff,  Desormes, 
Biot,  Thenard,  Hissinger,  and  Berzelius,  it 
appeared  that  various  compound  bodies  were 
capable  of  decomposition  by  electricity;  and  ex- 
periments, which  it  was  my  good  fortune  to  in- 
stitute, proved  that  several  substances  which  had 
never  been  separated  into  any  other  forms  of 
matter  in  the  common  processes  of  experiment, 


INTRODUCTION.  53 

were  susceptible  of  analysis  by  electrical 
power'4 ;  in  consequence  of  these  circumstances, 
the  fixed  alkalies  and  several  of  the  earths  have 
been  shewn  to  be  metals  combined  with  oxy- 
gene ;  various  new  agents  have  been  furnished  to 
chemistry,  and  many  novel  results  obtained  by 
their  application,  which  at  the  same  time  that 
they  have  strengthened  some  of  the  doctrines  of 
the  school  of  Lavoisier,  have  overturned  others, 
and  have  proved  that  the  generalizations  of  the 
Antiphlogistic  philosophers  were  far  from  hav- 
ing anticipated  the  whole  progress  of  discovery. 

Certain  bodies  which  attract  each  other  che- 
mically, and  combine  when  their  particles  have 
freedom  of  motion,  when  brought  into  con- 
tact, still  preserving  their  aggregation,  exhibit 
what  may  be  called  electrical  polarities ;  and  by 
certain  combinations  these  polarities  may  be 
highly  exalted ;  and  in  this  case  they  become 
subservient  to  chemical  decompositions ;  and 
by  means  of  electrical  arrangements  the  con- 
stituent parts  of  bodies  are  separated  in  an  uni- 
form order,  and  in  definite  proportions. 

Bodies  combine  with  a  force,  which  in  many 
cases  is  correspondent  to  their  power  of  exhibit- 
ing electrical  polarity  by  contact ;  and  heat,  or 
heat  and  light,  are  produced  in  proportion  to  the 


56 


iNTftODUGTlON. 


energy  of  their  combination.  Vivid  inflam- 
mation occurs  in  a  number  of  cases  in  which 
gaseous  matier  is  not  fixed;  and  this  phseno- 
menon  happens  in  various  instances  without 
the  interierence  of.  free  or  combined  oxygene. 

Experiments  made  by  Richter  and  Morveau 
had  shewn  that,  when  there  is  an  interchange 
of  elements  between  two  neutral  salts,  there  is 
never  an  excess  of  acid  or  basis ;  and  tlie  same 
law  seems  to  apply  generally  lo  double  de- 
compositions. When  one  body  combines  with 
another  in  more  than  one  proportion,  the  se- 
cond proportion  appears  to  be  some  multiple  or 
divisor  of  the  first ;  and  this  circumstance,  ob- 
served and  ingeniously  illustrated  by  Mr.  Dal- 
ton,  led  him  to  adopt  the  atomic  hypothesis  of 
chemical  changes,  which  had  been  ably  defended 
by  Mr.  Higgins  in  1789,  namely,  that  the  che- 
mical elements  consist  of  certain  indestructible 
particles  which  unite  one  and  one,  or  one  and 
two,  or  in  some  definite  numbers. 

Whether  matter  consists  of  indivisible  cor- 
puscles, or  physical  points  endowed  with 
attraction  and  repulsion,  still  the  same  conclu- 
sions may  be  formed  concerning  the  powers 
by  which  they  act,  and  the  quantities  in  which 
they  combine  ;  and  the  powers  seem  capable  of 


INTRODUCTION.  57 

being  measured  by  their  electrical  relations,  and 
the  quantities  on  which  they  act  of  being  ex- 
pressed by  numbers. 

In  combination  certain  bodies  form  regular 
solids;  and  all  the  varieties  of  crystalline  ag- 
gregrates  have  been  resolved  by  the  genius  of 
Haiiy  into  a  few  primary  forms.  The  laws  of 
crystallization,  of  definite  proportions,  and  of 
the  electrical  polarities  of  bodies,  seem  to  be 
intimately  related;  and  the  complete  illustra- 
tion of  their  connection,  probably  will  constitute 
the  mature  age  of  chemistry. 

To  dwell  more  minutely  upon  the  particular 
merits  of  the  chemical  philosophers  of  the  pre- 
sent age,  will  be  a  grateful  labour  for  some  future 
historian  of  chemistry  ;  but  for  a  contemporary 
writer,  it  would  be  indelicate  to  assume  the 
right  of  arbitrator,  even  where  praise  only  can 
be  bestowed.  The  just  fame  of  those  who  have 
enlightened  the  science  by  new  and  accurate 
experiments,  cannot  fail  to  be  universally  ac- 
knowledged; and  concerning  the  publication 
of  novel  facts  there  can  be  but  one  judgment  ; 
for  facts  are  independent  of  fashion,  taste,  and 
caprice,  and  are  subject  to  no  code  of  cri- 
ticism ;  they  are  more  useful  perhaps  even 
when  they  contradict,  than  when  they  support 


58 


INTRODUCTION. 


received  doctrines,  for  our  theories  are  only  im- 
perfect approximations  to  the  real  knowledge 
of  things ;  and  in  physical  research,  doubt  is 
usually  of  excellent  elFect,  for  it  is  a  principal 
motive  for  new  labours,  and  tends  continually 
to  the  developement  of  truth. 

The  slight  sketch  that  has  been  given  of  the 
progress  of  chemistry,  has  necessarily  been 
limited  to  the  philosophical  details  of  discovery. 
To  point  out  in  historical  order  the  manner 
in  which  the  truths  of  the  science  have  been 
applied  to  the  arts  of  life,  or  the  benefits 
derived  by  society  from  them,  would  occupy 
many  volumes.  From  the  first  discovery  of 
the  production  of  metals  from  rude  ores,  to  the 
knowledge  of  the  bleaching  liquor,  chemistry 
has  been  continually  subservient  to  cultivation 
and  improvement.  In  the  manufacture  of  porce- 
lain and  glass,  in  the  arts  of  dying  and  tanning, 
it  has  added  to  the  elegancies,  refinement,  and 
comforts  of  life ;  in  its  application  to  medicine 
it  has  removed  the  most  formidable  of  diseases ; 
and  in  leading  to  the  discovery  of  gunpowder, 
it  has  changed  the  institutions  of  society,  and 
rendered  war  more  independent  of  brutal 
strength,  less  personal,  and  less  barbarous. 

It  is  indeed  a  double  source  of  interest  in 


INTRODUCTION. 


59 


this  science,  that  whilst  it  is  connected  with 
the  grand  operations  of  nature,  it  is  likewise 
subservient  to  the  common  processes  as  well  as 
the  most  refined  arts  of  life.  New  laws  cannot 
be  discovered  in  it,  without  increasing  our  ad- 
miration of  the  beauty  and  order  of  the  sys- 
tem of  the  universe;  and  no  new  substances 
can  be  made  known  which  are  not  sooner  or 
later  subservient  to  some  purpose  of  utility. 

When  the  great  progress  made  in  chemistry 
within  the  last  few  years  is  considered,  and  the 
number  of  able  labourers  who  are  at  present 
actively  employed  in  cultivating  the  science, 
it  is  impossible  not  to  augur  well  concerning 
its  rapid  advancement  and  future  applications. 
The  most  important  truths  belonging  to  it  are 
capable  of  extremely  simple  numerical  ex- 
pressions, which  may  be  acquired  with  facility 
by  students  ;  and  the  apparatus  for  pursuing 
original  researches  is  daily  improved,  the  use 
of  it  i^endered  more  easy,  and  the  acquisition 
less  expensive. 

Complexity  almost  always  belongs  to  the 
early  epochs  of  every  science;  and  the  grandest 
results  are  usually  obtained  by  the  most  simple 
means,  A  great  part  of  the  phaenomena  of 
chemistry  may  be  already  submitted  to  calcu- 


60 


INTRODUCTION. 


lation ;  and  there  is  great  reason  to  believe, 
that  at  no  very  distant  period  the  whole  science 
will  be  capable  of  elucidation  by  mathematical 
principles.    The  relations  of  the  common  me- 
tals to  the  bases  of  the  alkalies  and  earths,  and 
the  gradations  of  resemblance  between  the 
bases  of  the  earths  and  acids,  point  out  as  pro- 
bable a  similarity  in  the  constitution  of  all  in- 
flammable bodies :  and  there  are  not  wantin<r 
experiments,  which  render  their  possible  de- 
composition far  from  a  chimerical  idea.    It  is 
contrary  to  the  usual  order  of  things,  that 
events  so  harmonious  as  those  of  the  system  of 
the  earth,  should  depend  on  such  diversiied 
agents,  as  are  supposed  to  exist  in  our  artificial 
arrangements;  and  there  is  reason  to  antici- 
pate a  great  reduction  in  the  number  of  the 
undecompounded  bodies,  and  to  expect  that 
the  analogies  of  nature  will  be  found  con- 
formable to  the  refined  operations  of  art.  The 
more  the  phaenomena  of  the  universe  are  stu- 
died, the  more  distinct  their  connection  appears, 
the  more  simple  their  causes,  the  more  magni- 
ficent their  design,  and  the  more  wonderful  the 
wisdom  and  power  of  their  Author. 


ELEMENTS 

OF 

CHEMICAL  PHILOSOPHY. 


PART  I. 

ON  THE  LAWS  OF  CHEMICAL  CHANGES 

ON 

UNDECOMPOUNDED  BODIES 

AND 

THEIR  PRIMARY  COMBINATIONS. 


ELEMENTS,  8fc. 


DIVISION  I. 

ON  THE  POWERS  AND  PROPERTIES  OF  MAT- 
TER, AND  THE  GENERAL  LAWS  OF  CHEMICAL 
CHANGES. 

I.  Preliminary  Observations. 

1.  1.  H  E  forms  and  appearances  of  the  beings 
and  substances  of  the  external  world  are  almost 
infinitely  various,  and  they  are  in  a  state  of 
continued  alteration :  the  whole  surface  of  the 
earth  even  undergoes  modifications :  acted  on 
by 'moisture  and  air,  it  affords  the  food  of 
plants ;  an  immense  number  of  vegetable  pro- 
ductions arise  from  apparently  the  same  mate- 
rials ;  these  become  the  substance  of  animals ; 
one  species  of  animal  matter  is  converted  into 
another  ;  the  most  perfect  and  beautiful  of  the 
forms  of  organised  life  ultimately  decay,  and 
are  resolved  into  inorganic  aggregates;  and 
the  same  elementary  substances,  differently 


[  64  ] 


arranged,  are  contained  in  the  inert  soil,  or 
bloom  and  emit  fragrance  in  the  flower,  or  be- 
come in  animals  the  active  organs  of  mind  and 
intelligence.  In  artificial  operations  changes  of 
the  same  order  occur;  substances  having  the  cha- 
racters of  earths  are  converted  into  metals ;  clays 
and  sands  are  united  so  as  to  become  porcelain ; 
earths  and  alkalies  are  combined  into  glass ; 
acrid  and  corrosive  matters  are  formed  from 
tasteless  substances  ; — colours  are  fixed  upon 
stuffs,  or  changed,  or  made  to  disappear;  and 
the  productions  of  the  mineral,  vegetable,  and 
animal  kingdoms  are  converted  into  new  forms, 
and  made  subservient  to  the  purposes  of  civil- 
ized life. 

2.  To  trace  in  detail  these  diversified  and 
complicated  phsenomena,  to  arrange  them  and 
deduce  general  laws  from  their  analogies,  would 
be  a  labour  to  which  even  the  longest  life  of  the 
most  industrious  and  sagacious  individual  might 
be  devoted  in  vain.  The  student  who  has  the 
advantage  of  referring  to  the  knowledge  accu- 
mulated by  many  individuals  in  different  times, 
may  adopt  much  more  simple  methods  of  acquir- 
ing the  science.  Those  of  recurring  to  its  general 
principles,  so  as  to  ascertain  the  powers  and 
properties  of  matter,  which  are  the  causes  of 
the  phaenomena  of  Chemistry;  and  of  apply- 
ing these  principles  to  the  actions  taking  place 


[  65  ] 

be<^ween  tbe  various  substances  existing  in 
nature,  or  produced  by  art ;  proceeding  gradu- 
ally referring  to  ob<;ervations,  experiments,  and 
distinct  analogies,  from  the  more  simple  to  the 
more  complicated  changes,  so  as  to  understand 
the  laws  by  which  they  are  governed. 

11.  Of  the  Forms  of  Matter, 

1.  In  the  general  views  that  may  be  taken  of 
the  properties  of  natural  substances,  certain 
relations  appear,  which  afford  the  means  of 
arranging  them  in  four  distinct  classes,  each  of 
which  is  distinguished  by  certain  sensible  and 
obvious  qualities, 

2.  The  first  class  consists  of  solids ^  which 
compose  the  great  known  part  of  the  globe. 
Solid  bodies,  when  in  small  masses,  retain  what- 
ever mechanical  form  is  given  to  them  :  their 
parts  are  separated  with  difficulty,  and  cannot 
readily  be  made  to  unite  after  separation  ;  some 
solid  bodies  yield  to  pressure,  and  do  not  reco- 
ver their  former  figure,  when  the  compressing 
force  is  removed,  and  they  are  called  non-elas- 
tic solids ;  others  that  regain  this  form,  are  called 
elastic  bodies.  Solids  differ  in  degrees  of  hard- 
ness, in  colour,  in  degrees  of  opacity  or  trans- 
parency, in  density  or  in  the  weight  afforded  by 
equal  volumes  ;  and  when  their  forms  are  regu- 
lar or  crystallized,  in  the  nature  of  these  forms. 

VOL.  I.  F 


[66] 


3.  The  second  class  consists  o£ fluids,  of  whicK 
there  are  much  fewer  varieties.  Fluids  when  in 
small  mrsses  assume  the  spherical  form  ;  theix 
parts  possess  freedom  of  motion  ;  they  differ  in 
degrees  of  density  and  tenacity,  in  colour  and 
degrees  of  opacity  or  transparency.  They  are 
usually  regarded  as  incompressible,  at  least  a 
very  great  mechanical  force  is  required  to  make 
them  occupy  a  space  perceptibly  smaller. 

4-  Elastic  fluids  or  gasses  the  third  class 
exist  free  in  the  atmosphere  ;  but  they  may  be 
confined  by  solids,  or  by  solids  and  fluids,  and 
their  properties  examined.  Their  parts  are 
highly  move;able  ;  they  are  compressible  and 
expansible,  and  their  volumes  are  inversely  as 
the  weights  compressing  them.  All  known 
elastic  fluids  are  transparent,  and  present  only 
two  or  three  varieties  of  colour ;  they  differ 
materially  in  density. 

5.  Besides  these  forms  of  matter  which  are 
easily  submitted  to  experiment,  and  the  parts 
of  which  may  be  considered  as  in  a  state  of  ap- 
parent rest,  there  are  other  forms  of  matter 
which  are  known  to  us  only  in  their  states  of 
motion  when  acting  upon  our  organs  of  sense, 
or  upon  other  matter,  and  which  are  not  suscep- 
tible of  being  confined.  They  have  been  some- 
times called  etherial  substances^  which  appears  a, 
more  unexceptionable  name  than  imponderable 


[67l 

substances.  It  cannot  be  doubted  that  there  is 
matter  in  motion  in  space,  between  the  sun  and 
th^  stars  and  our  globe,  though  it  is  a  subject 
of  discussion  whether  successions  of  particles  be 
emitted  from  these  heavenly  bodies,  or  motions 
communicated  by  them,  to  particles  in  their  vi- 
cinity, and  transmitted  by  successive,  impulses 
to  other  particles.  Etherial  matter  differs  either 
in  its  nature  or  in  its  affections  by  motion ;  for 
it  produces  different  effects;  for  instance,  as 
radiant  heat,  and  as  different  kinds  of  light. 

6.  The  various  forms  of  matter,  and  the 
changes  of  these  forms,  depend  upon  active 
powers,  such  as  gravitation,  cohesion,  calorific 
repulsion  or  heat,  chemical  attraction,  and  elec- 
trical attraction,  the  laws  of  which  it  is  neces- 
sary to  study  with  attention. 

III.  Kjrravitation. 

1.  When  a  stone  is  thrown  into  the  atmo- 
sphere it  rapidly  descends  towards  the  surface 
of  the  earth.  This  is  owing  io  gravitation.  All 
the  great  bodies  in  the  universe  are  urged  to» 
wards  each  other  by  a  similar  force.  A  cannon 
ball  sent  from  a  piece  of  artillery  describes  a 
curve,  and  at  last  falls  to  the  ground  ;  were  the 
impulse  given  to  it  by  the  gunpowder,  increased 
to  a  certain  extent,  and  exerted  in  free  space,  it 
would  continuously  revolve  round  the  earth,  in 


[  68  1 

consequence  of  the  equilibrium  between  the  two 
forces.  The  moon  and  the  planets  as  Newton 
has  demonstrated,  are  retained  in  their  orbits 
by  simiiar  laws,  and  their  harmonious  and  con- 
stant revolutions  produced. 

2.  Bodies  mutually  gravitate  towards  each 
other;  but  the  smaller  body  proportionally 
more  than  the  larger  one  :  hence  the  power  of 
gravity  is  said  to  be  directly  as  the  mass;  it  is 
in  fact  the  measure  of  the  mass  or  quantity  of 
matter. 

3-  Gravitation  acts  inversely,  as  the  square  of 
the  distance. 

IV.  Cohesion. 

1.  When  two  particles  of  quicksilver  are 
brought  into  apparent  contact  they  may  be 
made  to  unite  and  form  one  globule  :  when  a 
glass  tube,  having  a  very  JSne  bore,  is  intro- 
duced into  a  vessel  containing  water,  the  water 
rises  in  the  tube  to  a  higher  level  than  it  occu- 
pied in  the  vessel :  both  these  effects  are  said  to 
be  owing  to  cohesion  or  cohesive  attraction.  It  is 
the  same  force  which  preserves  the  forms  of 
solids,  and  gives  globularity  to  fluids,  and  is 
thus  a  prime  cause  of  the  permanency  of  the 
arrangements  which  compose  the  surface  of  the 
globe.  It  is  usually  said  to  act  only  at  the  sur- 
faces of  bodies,  or  by  their  immediate  contact ; 
but  this  does  not  seem  to  be  the  case.  It 


[  69  ] 

certainly  acts  with  much  greater  energy  at  small 
distances  ;  but  the  spherical  form  of  minute 
portions  of  fluid  matter  can  only  be  produced 
by  the  attractions  of  all  the  parts  of  which  they 
are  composed,  for  each  other ;  and  most  of  these 
attractions  must  be  exerted  at  sensible  distances, 
so  that  for  any  thing  we  know  to  the  contrary, 
gravitation  and  cohesion  may  be  mere  modifi- 
cations of  the  same  general  power  of  attraction, 
in  the  one  case  acting  at  distances  that  can  be 
easily  measured,  and  in  the  other  case  operat- 
ing at  distances  which  it  is  difficult  to  estimate. 

2.  Some  philosophers  have  attempted  to  ac- 
count for  attraction  in  general  by  supposing  that 
there  is  a  certain  unknown  matter  always  mov- 
ing through  the  universe  in  right  lines,  by  which 
bodies  are  impelled  towards  each  other ;  but 
though  the  phasnomena  may  be  explained  by 
such  a  supposition,  it  is  without  proof;  and 
there  is  no  ground  for  supposing  that  matter 
cannot  act  at  a  distance,  and  it  is  absolutely 
necessary  for  the  explanation  of  the  planetary 
motions,  to  suppose  space  in  the  universe  yoid 
of  matter. 

V.  Of  Heat,  or  calorific  Repulsion. 

1.  When  a  body  which  occasions  the  sen- 
sation of  heat  on  our  oro;ans,  is  brou2:ht  into 
contact  with  another  body  which  has  no  suck 


[  70  ] 

effect,  the  result  of  their  mutual  action  is  that 
the  hot  body  contracts,  and  loses  to  a  certain 
extent  its  power  of  communicating  heat,  and 
the  other  body  expands,  and  in  a  degree  ac- 
quires this  power. 

This  law  may  be  exemplified  with  respect  to 
every  form  of  ponderable  matter.  If  a  polished 
cylinder  of  tin,  which  accurately  fits  a  ring,  be 
heated  so  as  to  make  water  boil,  it  will  no  lonser 
pass  through  the  ring,  and  will  be  found  en- 
larged in  all  its  dimensions.  If  spirits  of  wine 
be  heated  in  a  glass  vessel  having  a  narrow 
tubulated  neck,  as  it  becomes  capable  of  com- 
municating the  sensation  of  heat,  it  will  be 
found  to  expand  and  to  rise  in  the  narrow 
neck  ;  and  if  the  body  of  the  same  vessel  be 
filled  with  air,  and  it  be  inverted  in  water,  its 
neck  containing  water,  the  air  will  rapidly  ex- 
pand, on  the  application  of  a  heated  body,  and 
will  cause  the  water  to  descend  in  the  neck  of 
the  vessel.* 

2.  Different  solids  and  fluids  expand  very 
differently  when  heated  by  the  same  means. 

Glass  is  less  expansible  than  any  of  the 
metals ;  100,000  parts  raised  from  the  degree 
of  freezing  to  that  of  boiling  water,  expand  so 
as  to  become  100,083  parts ;  100,000  of  plati- 
nurai  under  similar  circumstances  expand  so  as 
*  Plate  I.  fig.  1. 


t  71  ] 

to  become  100,087  ;  and  equal  parts  oF  gold, 
antimony,  cast-iron,  steel,  iron,  bismutli,  cop- 
per, cast-brass,  silver,  tin,  lead-zinc,  and  ham- 
inered  zinc  expand  in   the  following  order : 
100094,    100108,    1001  tl,   100112,  100126, 
100139,    100170,    100189,  100238,  100287, 
100296,  100308.    The  expansive  power  of 
liquids  in  general  is  greater  than  that  of  solids  ; 
alcohol  appears  to  be  more  expansible  than 
oils,  and  oils  in  general  more  expansible  than 
water.    100,000  parts  of  mercury  of  the  same 
degree  of  heat  as  ice  become  at  the  degree  of 
heat  at  which  water  boils  101,835.   All  the 
elastic  fluids,  or  the  different  species  of  air  that 
have  been  examined,  as  has  been  demonstrated 
by  Messrs.  Dalton  and  Gay  Lussac,  expand 
alike  when  heated  to  the  same  degree;  100 
parts  of  each  at  the  freezing  point  of  water  be- 
coming about  137j5  at  the  boiling  point. 

It  is  evident  that  the  density  of  bodies  must 
be  diminished  by  expansion  ;  and  in  the  case 
of  fluids  and  gasses,  the  parts  of  which  are 
mobile,  many  important  phenomena  depend 
upon  this  circumstance.  If  heat  be  applied  to 
fluids  or  to  gasses,  the  heated  parts  change 
their  places  and  rise  ;  and  the  colder  parts 
descend  and  occupy  their  places.  Currents  are 
constantly  produced  in  the  ocean  and  in  great 
bodies  of  water,  in  consequence  of  this  ellect. 


[72] 

The  heated  water  rises  to  the  surface  in  the 
tropical  climates,  and  flows  towards  coldt  r  ones, 
thus  the  warmth  of  the  Gulf  stream  is  felt  a 
thousand  miles  from  its  source  ;  and  de^p  cur- 
rents pass  from  the  colder  to  the  warmer  parts 
of  the  sea:  and  the  general  tendency  of  these 
changes  is  to  equalize  the  tetuperature  of  the 
globe. 

In  the  atmosphere,  heated  air  is  constantly- 
rising,  and  colder  air  rushes  in  to  supply  its 
place  ;  and  this  event  is  the  principal  cause  of 
winds  :  the  air  that  flows  from  the  poles  towards 
tlie  equator,  in  consequence  of  the  rotation  of 
the  earth,  has  less  motion  than  the  atmos- 
phere into  which  it  passes,  and  occasions  an 
easterly  current ;  the  air  passing  from  the 
equator  towards  the  poles  having  more  motion, 
occasions  a  westerly  current ;  and  by  these 
changes,  the  different  parts  of  the  atmosphere 
are  mixed  together :  cold  is  subdued  by  heat, 
moist  air  from  the  sea  is  mixed  with  dry  air 
from  the  land,  and  the  great  mass  of  elastic 
fluid  surrounding  the  globe,  preserved  in  a  state 
fitted  for  the  purposes  of  vegetable  and  animal 
life. 

S.  There  are  very  few  exceptions  to  the  law  of 
the  expansion  of  bodies,  at  the  time  they  become 
capable  of  communicating  the  sensation  of  heat ; 
and  these  excepiions  seem  entirely  to  depend 


[  73  ] 

upon  some  chemical  change  in  the  constitution 
of  bodies,  or  on  their  crystalline  arrangements. 
Thus  clay  contracts  considerably  in  dimensions 
by  a  very  intense  heat,  and  on  the  measure  of 
its  contractions  the  pyrometer  of  Wedgwood 
is  founded :  but  in  this  case  the  clay  first  gives 
ofF  water,  which  was  united  to  its  parts,  and 
afterwards  these  parts  cohere  together  with 
more  force,  and  from  being  in  a  state  of  loose 
aggregation  become  strongly  united.  Water 
expands  a  little  before  it  congeals,  and  expands 
considerably  during  its  conversion  into  ice  ;  but 
in  this  case  it  assumes  the  crystalline  form  ; 
and  its  parts  whilst  they  are  arranging  them- 
selves to  form  regular  solids,  probably  leave 
greater  interstices  than  they  occupied  when  at 
uniform  distances  in  the  fluid.  Thus  the  same 
weight  of  matter  will  occupy  much  more  space 
when  arranged  in  a  certain  number  of  octahe- 
drons, than  when  arranged  in  a  similar  number 
of  cubes,  or  hexagonal  prisms.  Certain  saline 
solutions  likewise  that  shoot  into  prismatic 
crystals,  expand  at  the  moment  they  become 
solid ;  and  the  case  is  the  same  with  cast-iron, 
bismuth,  and  antimony. 

The  expansion  of  water  during  its  conversion 
into  ice,  is  shewn  by  the  circumstance  of  ice 
swimming  upon  water ;  and  if  water  in  a  deep 
vessel  be  examined  at  the  time  ice  is  forming,  it 


[  u  3 

ivill  he  found  a  little  warmer  at  the  bottom  than 
at  the  top  ;  and  these  circumstances  are  of 
great  importance  in  the  ioeconomy  of  nature. 
Water  congeals  only  at  the  surface,  where  it  is 
liable  to  be  acted  upon  hy  the  sun,  and  by 
warm  currents  of  air  which  tend  to  restore  ittd 
the  fluid  state;  and  when  water  approaches 
near  the  point  of  freezing  it  begins  to  descend^ 
so  that  no  ice  can  form  till  the  whole  of  the 
water  has  been  cooled  to  the  point  where  it 
possesses  the  greatest  density  ;  and  in  the  deep 
parts  of  the  sea  and  lakes,  even  in  some  of  the 
northern  latitudes,  the  duration  of  the  long 
winter  is  insufficient  to  cool  the  water  to  the 
degree  at  which  ice  forms. 

4.  When  equal  quantities  of  the  same  matter 
differently  heated  are  mixed  together,  as  much 
as  the  one  contracts,  so  much  the  other  seems 
to  expand.  It  is  easy  to  prove  this  by  shaking 
together  100  parts  of  mercury  so  hot  as  not  to 
be  touched  without  pain,  and  100  parts  in  its 
common  state,  having  previously  measured  the 
space  they  occupy ;  if  the  mixture  is  made  in 
the  tube  that  contained  the  hot  mercury,  there 
will  be  no  sensible  change  of  volume. 

It  is  on  the  idea,  that  when  heat  or  the 
power  of  repulsion  is  communicated  from  body 
to  body,  as  much  is  gained  by  one  body  as 
is  lost  by  the  other,  that  thermometers  have 


been  framed,  and  the  doctrines  of  temperature^ 
and  Capacity  for  heat  founded, 

5.  The  most  common  thermometer  is  a  glass 
bulb,  containing  mercury,  terminated  by  a  glass 
tube,  having  a  very  narrow  bore.    The  mer- 
cury is  boiled  to  expel  any  air  or  moisture  that 
might  be  attached  to  it ;  and  at  the  moment 
it  is  in  ebullition,  the  extremity  of  the  tube 
being  drawn  to  a  fine  point,  is  hermetically 
sealed  by  a  spirit  lamp.   For  the  purpose  o£ 
acquiring  a  scale,  the  bulb  is  first  plunged  into 
melting  ice,  and  the  place  where  the  mercury 
stands  is   marked ;   the  bulb   is  afterwards 
plunged  into  boiling  water  and  the  same  ope- 
ration repeated.    On  Fahrenheit's  scale  this 
space  is  divided  into  180  equal  parts,  and  simi- 
lar parts  are  taken  above  and  below  for  extend- 
ing the  scale,  and  the  freezing  point  of  water 
is  placed  at  S2**,  and  the  boiling  point  at  212°. 
1.8  degrees  of  Fahrenheit  are  equal  to  one  de- 
gree of  the  centigrade  thermometer,  and  2.25  to 
one  degree  of  Reaumur. 

Other  fluids  besides  mercury,  such  as  alcohol, 
are  sometimes  used  in  thermometers,  particu- 
larly for  measuring  low  degrees  when  mercury 
freezes. 

Air  is  employed  in  the  differential  thermo- 
meter, which  consists  of  two  bulbs  filled  with 
air,  and  connected  by  a  capillary  tube  contain- 


[  76  ] 

ing  oil  of  vitriol ;  the  heated  body  is  brought 
in  contact  with  one  bulb,  the  air  of  which 
expands  and  drives  the  fluid  towards  the  other 
bulb.* 

6.  Temperature  is  the  power  bodies  possess  of 
communicating  or  receiving  heat,  or  the  energy 
of  repulsion  ;  and  the  temperature  of  a  body  is 
said  to  be  high  or  low  with  respect  to  another, 
in  proportion  as  it  occasions  an  expansion  or 
contraction  of  its  parts  ;  and  the  therraometer 
is  the  common  measure  of  temperature. 

7.  When  equal  volumes  of  different  bodies  of 
different  temperatures  are  suffered  to  remain  in 
contact  till  they  are  possessed  of  the  same  tem- 
perature, it  is  found  that  this  temperature  is 
not  a  mean  one,  as  it  would  be  in  the  case  of 
equal  volumes  of  the  same  body.  Thus,  if  a 
pint  of  quicksilver  at  100°,  be  mixed  with  a 
pint  of  water  at  50°,  the  resulting  temperature 
is  not  75°,  but  about  70° :  the  mercury  has  lost 
30**,  whereas  the  water  has  gained  only  20°. 
In  the  common  language  of  chemical  philoso* 
phers  this  difference  is  said  to  depend  upon 
the  different  capacities  of  bodies  for  heat,  and 
the  capacity  of  a  body  is  said  to  be  greater  or 

•  Plate  1.  fig.  2,  represents  Mr.  Leslie's  differential  thermo- 
meter. Fig.  3  is  copied  from  Van  Helmont.  This  instrument 
appears  to  have  been  the  first  in  which  the  expansive  power  of 
heated  air,  was  exhibited  by  its  action  upon  cold  air. 


[  11 1 


less,  in  proportion  as  its  temperature  is  less  or 
more  raised  by  the  addition,  or  diminished  by 
the  subtraction  of  equal  quantities  of  the 
power  of  repulsion,  or  heat.  Thus  mercury 
is  said  to  have  a  much  less  capacity  for  heat 
than  water  ;  and  taking  the  facts  above  stated  as 
data,  and  comparing  the  weights  of  the  two 
bodies,  which  are  as  I3.3  to  1,  their  capacities 
will  be  to  each  other  as  about  I9  to  1. 

Tables  of  the  relative  capacities  of  bodies  are 
given  in  the  works  of  different  authors.  In  re- 
ferring to  the  various  bodies  which  are  the 
subjects  of  chemistry,  this  property  will  be  de- 
scribed amongst  other  properties. '  In  general 
it  appears  that  the  substances  most  expansible 
by  heat  are  those  which  have  the  greatest  capa- 
cities ;  thus  gasses  in  general  have  greater 
capacities  than  fluids,  and  fluids  than  solids; 
but  the  exact  ratio  has  not  been  yet  deter- 
mined. 

8.  Different  bodies,  it  appears,  have  their 
temperatures  differently  raised  by  the  addition, 
or  diminished  by  the  subtraction  of  equal 
quantities  of  heat,  or  the  power  of  repulsion, 
and  they  are  likewise  affected  by  heat,  or  ex- 
panded with  very  different  degrees  of  celerity. 
If  slender  cyhnders  of  silver,  of  glass,  and  of 
charcoal,  of  equal  length  and  size,  be  held  in 
the  central  part  of  the  flame  of  a  candle,  tLe 


[  78  } 

silver  rapidly  becomes  heated  throughout,  and 
cannot  be  held  in  the  hand;  the  heat  is  more 
slowly  communicated  through  the  glass,  but 
the  charcoal  becomes  red-hot  at  the  one  extre- 
mity long  before  any  heat  is  felt  at  the  other 
extremity.  These  differences  are  said  to  de- 
pend upon  the  different  pov*^ers  of  these  bodies 
for  conducting  heat;  thus  the  silver  is  said  to 
be  a  better  conductor  than  the  glass,  and  the 
glass  than  the  charcoal.  In  general  those  bodies 
that  are  the  densest,  and  that  have  the  least 
capacity  for  heat,  are  the  best  conductors ;  thus 
the  metals  conduct  better  than  any  other  solids  ; 
gasses  are  worse  conductors  than  fluids,  and 
fluids  than  solids:  but  there  are  exceptions 
with  respect  to  this  correspondence  between 
conducting  power  and  density,  and  a  remarka- 
ble one,  in  the  densest  known  body  in  nature, 
platlna,  which  is  perhaps  the  worst  conductor 
amongst  the  metals. 

Animal  and  vegetable  substances  in  general, 
are  very  bad  conductors ;  thus  the  hair  and 
wool  of  animals,  and  the  feathers  of  birds,  are 
admirably  fitted  to  protect  them  from  the  cold, 
and  they  inclose  and  retain  air,  which  being  a 
still  worse  conductor,  enhances  the  effect.  It 
was  supposed  by  Count  Rumford,  that  fluids 
and  gasses  are  perfect  nonconductors  of  heat,  and 
that  their  particles  can  be  heated  in  no  other 


[  79  ] 

way,  except  by  coming  in  succession  to  the 
source  of  heat ;  but  some  very  conchisive  ex- 
periments seem  to  render  this  opinion  untena- 
ble. In  general,  however,  fluids  and  gasses 
alter  their  places,  from  a  change  of  specific 
gravity  much  more  rapidly  than  they  communi- 
cate or  receive  heat.  This  is  iUostrated  by  a 
very  simple  experiment;  let  an  air  thermometer 
be  inverted  in  a  vessel  of  wAter,  so  that  the  ex- 
tremity of  the  bulb  is  barely  beneath  the  surface, 
let  a  little  ether  be  poured  upon  the  water  so 
as  to  form  a  stratum  about  -f-  of  an  inch  above 
the  thermometer,  and  let  the  ether  be  in- 
flamed ;*  however  delicate  the  thermometer,  the 
^ir  in  it  will  not  soon  expand  ;  the  ether  boils 
violently,  but  a  very  long  process  of  this  kind 
is  required  to  communicate  any  sensible  heat 
to  the  water.  Unless  the  particles  of  gasses  and 
fluids  had  been  capable  of  communicating  heat 
to  a  certain  extent,  the  upper  strata  of  liquids 
would  be  almost  the  only  permanently  heated 
parts ;  and  heat  would  be  constantly  accumu- 
lating on  the  surface  of  extensive  seas.  Our 
lower  atmosphere  likewise  would  be  intensely 
cold  during  the  absence  of  the  sun ;  but  by  the 
relations  between  the  conducting  power  and  the 
mobility  of  fluids  and  gasses ;  the  changes  offem- 
perature  of  air  and  water  are  made  progressive 
«  See  Plate  I.  fig.  4. 


[  80  ] 

and  equable,  and  adapted  to  a  habitable  globe. 
As  heat  is  propagated  very  slowly  through 
gaseous  bodies,  so  they  communicate  it  very 
slowly  to  other  bodies,  a  circumstance  that 
might  be  expected  from  the  small  quantity  of 
matter  they  contain,  when  compared  to  other 
substances.  The  heat  of  metals  at  the  tempera- 
ture of  120°  is  scarcely  supportable;  water 
scalds  at  150°;  but  air  may  be  heated  to  240° 
without  being  painful  to  our  organs  of  sen- 
sation, and  a  temperature  near  this  was  expe- 
rienced for  some  minutes,  by  Sir  Joseph  Banks, 
Sir  Charles  Blagden,  and  Dr.  Fordyce,  in  a 
room  artificially  heated. 

The  power  of  abstracting  heat  in  air  is  like- 
wise comparatively  very  small ;  in  the  high 
northern  latitudes  a  cold  has  been  experienced 
without  injury,  in  which  mercury  froze  ;  and  if 
in  this  state  of  the  atmosphere,  metallic  sub- 
stances, of  the  same  temperature,  were  touched, 
a  sensation  like  that  of  burning  was  experienced, 
and  the  part  blistered. 

9.  Heat,  or  the  power  of  repulsion,  may  be 
considered  as  the  antagonist  power  to  the  attrac- 
tion of  cohesion,  the  one  tending  to  separate, 
the  other  to  unite  the  parts  of  bodies  ;  and  the 
forms  of  bodies  depend  upon  their  respective 
agencies.  In  solids  the  attractive  force  pre- 
dominates over  the  repulsive  ;  in  fluids,  and  in 


[  «1 1 

elastic  fluids  they  may  be  regarded  as  in  dif- 
ferent states  of  equilibrium  ;  and  in  ethereal 
substances  the  repulsive  must  be  considered  as 
predominating  over,  and  destroying  the  attrac- 
tive force. 

All  the  different  substances  in  nature,  under 
certain  circumstances,  are  probably  capable  of 
assuming  all  these  forms ;  thus  solids,  by  a  cer- 
tain increase  of  temperature,  become  fluids,  and 
fluids  gasses;  and  rice  versa,  by  a  diminution 
of  temperature  gasses  become  fluids,  and  fluids 
solids; 

Instances  of  the  fusion  of  solids  by  heat  are  too 
familiar  to  require  any  particular  notice  ;  when 
water  becomes  steam  by  boiling,  it  is  merely 
the  conversion  of  a  fluid  into  an  elastic  fluid ; 
and  a  simple  instance  of  this  circumstance  may 
be  given  in  the  ebullition  of  ether.  Let  a  little 
ether  be  introduced  into  a  small  glass  retort 
filled  with  water,  and  inverted  in  water ;  the 
ether  will  swim  above  the  water,  in  the  upper 
part  of  the  retort;  let  a  heated  bar  of  metal*  be 
held  near  the  part  of  the  retort  containing  the 
ether,  as  the  heat  is  communicated,  globules 
will  be  seen  to  rise,  and  in  a  very  short  time 
elastic  fluid  will  be  formed,  in  such  quantities, 
as  to  expel  the  water  from  the  vessel;  on  suf- 

Plate  I.  fig.  5. 

VOL.  I.  G 


[  82  1 

ferirsg  the  glass  to  cool,  the  elastic  matter  will 
be  condensed,  and  will  become  again  Huid. 

If  a  globule  of  mercury  be  held  in  a  spoon 
oF  platina,  over  the  flame  of  a  lamp,  it  wiil  be 
vividly  agitated,  and  will  rapidly  diniinish. 
This  is  owing  to  its  becoming  elastic,  and  flying 
off  in  gas;  and  by  a  very  low  temperature, 
which  may  be  artificially  produced  by  mixing 
together  very  cold  snow  and  a  salt  called  muri- 
ate of  lime,  mercury  may  be  congealed  into  the 
solid  form. 

JDifFerent  bodies  change  their  states  at  very 
diETerent  temperatures.  Thus  mercury,  which 
is  a  solid  at  about  40  below  Fahrenheit,  boils 
at  about  66O  ;  sulphur,  which  becomes  fluid  at 
218%  boils  at  570°;  ether  boils  at  9'S°.  The 
temperatures  at  which  the  common  metals  be- 
come gaseous,  are  generally  very  high,  and 
most  of  them  incapable  of  being  produced  by 
common  means.  Iron,  manganese,  platina, 
and  some  other  metals,  which  can  scarcely  be 
fused  in  the  best  furnaces,  are  readily  melted 
by  electricity;  and  by  the  Voltaic  apparatus  a 
degree  of  heat  is  attained,  in  which  platina  not 
only  fuses  with  readiness,  but  seems  even  to 
evaporate: 

With  respect  to  the  conversion  of  solids, 
fiiiids,  or  gasses,  into  ethereal  substances,  the; 


[  83  ] 

proofs  are  hot  of  the  same  distinct  nature  as 
those  belonging  to  their  conversion  into  each 
other.  When  the  temperature  of  a  body  is 
raised  to  a  certain  extent,  it  becomes  lumin- 
ous ;  and  heated  bodies  not  only  affect  other 
bodies  by  direct  contact,  but  likewise  exert  an 
influence  on  them  at  a  distance,  which  is  as- 
cribed to  what  is  usually  called  radiant  heat. 
One  solution  of  this  phenomenon  is,  that  par- 
ticles are  thrown  off  from  heated  bodies  with 
great  velocity,  which  by  acting  on  our  organs 
produce  the  sensations  of  heat  or  light,  and 
that  their  motion,  communicated  to  the  particles 
of  other  bodies,  has  the  power  of  expanding 
them  ;  thus  if  heat,  or  the  force  of  repulsion, 
be  so  increased  in  an  elastic  fluid,  as  to  over- 
come the  force  of  cohesion  and  gravitation,  these 
particles  would  move  in  right  lines  through 
free  space ;  and  we  know  of  no  other  effects 
they  could  produce,  than  those  of  heat  and 
light.  It  is  perhaps  in  favour  of  this  opinion, 
that  all  the  different  elastic  fluids  expand 
equally,  when  their  temperatures  are  equally 
raised;  and  from  observations  made  on  the 
eclipses  of  Jupiter's  satellites,  and  from  other 
phenomena  presented  by  the  heavenly  bodies, 
it  appears  that  the  motions  of  light  are  equable. 
It  may,  however,  be  said,  that  the  radiant 


mafters  emitted  by  bodies  in  ignition,  are  spe- 
cific substances,  and  that  common  matter  is  not 
susceptible  of  assuming;  this  form;  or  ii  may- 
be contended,  that  the  phenomena  of  racli.iiion 
do,  in  fact,  depend  upon  motions  communicated 
to  subtile  matter  every  where  existing  in  space. 

9.  The  temperatures  at  which  boflies  change 
their  states  from  fluids  to  solids,  though  in 
general  definite,  are  influenced  by  a  few  cir- 
cumstances, such  as  mrtion  and  psessure. 
Water,  kept  perfectly  at  rest,  may  sometimes  be 
cooled  to  22°  without  cone;e!aii!>n  :  hut  if  at  a 
temperatute  below  52°,  it  be  agitated,  ice  in- 
stantly forms,  A  saturated  solution  of  Gl  .uber's 
salt,  introduced  whilst  warm  into  a  boltle.  frc  m 
which  the  pressure  of  tlse  atmosphere  is  ex- 
cluded, remains  liquid  after  cooling,  but  if  the 
atmc  sphere  be  suffered  to  act  upon  it,  it  in- 
stantly crystallizes.  The  boiling  point  of 
fluids  is  still  less  fixed,  than-the  point  of  fusion 
of  solids,  and  is  immediately  dependent  upon 
pressure.  Thus  ether  will  boil  readily  at  the 
freezing  point  of  water,  in  the  exhausted  re- 
ceiver of  an  air  pump ;  and  it  appears  from  the 
researches  of  Professor  Robison,  that  in  a 
vacuum,  all  liquids  boil  about  bwer,  than, 
in  the  open  air.  Under  pressure,  liquids  may- 
be heated  to.a  high  degree ;  water  in  a  Papin's 


C  85  3 

digester,  may  have  its  temperature  raised  to 
S'OO',  but  at  the  moment  the  pressure  is  removed, 
elastic  matter  is  disengap^ed  with  great  violence. 

10.  A  peculiar  distinction  has  been  made 
by  some  autliors  between  permanent  eiaslic 
Ouids,  and  elastic  fluids  which  are  conderisi- 
ble  by  pressure  or  cold  ;  but  these  substances 
differ  only  in  the  degree  of  the  point  of  va:;or-» 
ization  ;  and  steam  at  5Qu  decrees  of  Faiiren- 
heit,  there  is  every  reason  to  beh'eve,  would 
be  equaliy  incondensibie  with  air  at  a  range 
of  temperature  such  as  we  can  commimd  btlow 
our  common  temperatures;  and  some  gassts 
that  are  permanent  under  all  common  circum- 
stances, as  ammonia,  are  condensible  by  intense 
cold  aided  by  pressure. 

Ali  bodies  that  boil  at  moderate  temperatures, 
seem  to  evaporate,  so  as  to  produce  a  certain 
quantity  of  elastic  matter  in  the  common  state 
of  the  atmosphere  ;  and  this  quantity  is  greater 
in  proportion  as  the  temperature  is  high.  Ac- 
cording to  Mr.  Dalton,  the  force  of  vapour  in- 
creases in  geometrical  progression  to  the  tem- 
perature, but  thiE  ratio  differs  in  different  fluids. 
It  is  certain  that  as  the  temperature  approaches 
near  the  point  of  ebullition,  in  liquids,  the 
strength  of  the  vapour,  i.  e.  the  quantity  that 
would  rise  in  free  space,  rapidly  increases. 

In  h©t,  dry  weather,  it  is  obvious  that  tliere 


[  86  3 

must  be  much  more  vapour  in  the  atmosphere, 
than  in  cold  wet  weather;  and  the  largest 
quantity  exists  in  summer  and  in  the  tropical 
climates,  when  moisture  is  most  needed  for  the 
purposes  of  life  ;  and  it  appears  to  be  the 
aqueous  vapour  in  the  atmosphere,  which, 
when  condensed  by  the  mixture  of  cold  with 
hot  air,  or  by  other  agencies  occasioning  a 
change  of  its  temperature,  is  the  cause  of  dew, 
mists,  rain,  and  ultimately  of  springs,  and 
rivers. 

11.  When  solids  are  converted  into  fluids,  or 
fluids  into  gasses,  there  is  always  a  loss  of  heat, 
of  temperature,  and  vice  versa,  when  gasses 
are  converted  into  fluids,  or  fluids  into  solids, 
there  is  an  increase  of  heat  of  temperature, 
and  in  this  case  it  is  said  that  latent  heat  is  ab- 
sorbed or  given  out.  Thus  if  equal  weights  of 
snow  at  and  of  water  at  172°  be  mixed  to- 
gether, the  whole  of  the  snow  is  melted,  but 
the  temperature  of  the  mixture  is  found  to  be 
32°}  so  that  140"  degrees  of  heat  are  lost.  Again, 
if  water  be  heated  in  a  Papin's  digester  to  300 
degrees,  and  the  valve  be  raised,  a  quantity  of 
steam  instantly  rises,  which  has  the  temperature 
of  212°,  and  the  temperature  of  the  water  in 
the  digester  is  found  to  be  the  same,  so  that  a 
great  quantity  of  heat  of  temperature  is  lost  in 
eonvertino;  the  water  into  steam. 


[S7J 

%  when  the'air  is  at  20",  a  quantity  of  water 
Wexposed  to  it  in  a  tall  glass,  the  water  gra- 
dually cooh  down  to  22°,  without  freezina;,  but 
if  it  be  shaken,  So  as  to  be  converted  into  ice, 
the  temperatuie  of  the  ice  is  found  to  be  at  32° 
so  that  the  degree  of  heat  is  raised  during  the  act 
offreezlns. 

If  one  part  of  steam  or  aqueous  gas,  at  212°, 
be  mixed  with  6  parts  by  \veig;ht  of  water  at 
62°,  the  whole  of  the  steam  will  be  condensed, 
and  the  temperature  of  the  fluid  will  be  about 
512°,  so  that  there  is  an  immense  increase  of 
the  heat  of  temperature,  and  900°  degrees  may 
be  considered  as  taken  from  the  steam,  and  as 
added  to  the  water. 

All  the  phenomena  of  these  changes  may  be 
referred  to  a  simple  general  law,  of  which  Dr, 
Black  was  the  discoverer,  and  which  has  been 
most  ably   illustrated  by  the   researches  of 
Wilke,  Watt,  Irvine,  and  Crawford,  namely, 
"  that  whenever  a  body  changes  its  form,  its 
relations  to  temperature  are  likewise  changed, 
either  increased  or  diminished;"  and  many  im- 
portant operations,  both  artificial  and  naturalj 
depend  upon  this  law.    The  knowledge  of  it, 
for  instance,  led  Mr.  Watt  to  make  his  great 
improvement  ot*  the  steam  engine,  by  which  the 
steam  is  condensed  out  of  the  cylinder  in  which 


[  8g 

its  forceis  efficient,  and  fresh  gaseous  matter  intro- 
duced vvithoutany  chance  of  a  loss  of  its  elasticity. 

One  of  the  most  perfect  modes  of  heating 
large  rooms,  and  of  procuring  a  uniform  tempe- 
rature for  the  purposes  of  manufacture,  is  by 
the  condensation  of  steam.  By  the  cold  pro- 
duced in  consequence  of  the  evaporation  of 
water  in  hot  climates,  congelation  is  effected  ; 
and  in  the  nights  in  Bengal,  when  the  tempe- 
rature is  not  below  fifty,  by  the  exposure  of 
water  in  earthenware  pans  upon  moistened 
bamboos,  thin  calces  of  ice  are  formed,  which 
are  heaped  together  and  preserved  under  ground 
by  being  kept  in  contact  with  bad  conductors 
of  heat.  The  cold  produced  by  evaporation, 
is  likewise  the  cause  of  the  formation  of  ice  in 
Mr.  Leslie's  elegant  experiment,  in  which  sul- 
phuric acid  is  placed  in  a  vessel  upon  the  plate 
of  an  air-pump,  and  water  in  another  vessel 
raised  above  it ;  the  surfaces  both  of  the  acid 
and  the  water  being  considerable.  When  an 
exhaustion  is  made,  the  sulphuric  acid  rapidly 
absorbs  the  vapour  rising  from  the  water; 
fresh  vapour  is  immediately  formed,  and  in  a 
few  minutes,  if  the  circumstances  are  favour- 
able, spicule  of  ice  are  seen  to  form  on  the 
surface  of  the  water. 

When  aqueous  vapour  is  condensed  into 


[  89  ] 

fluid  in  tTie  atmosphere,  heat  is  produced ;  and 
the  for  mat  ion  of  rain,  hail,  and  snow,  tends  to 
miti^^ate  the  severity  of  the  winter.  In  the  sum- 
mer, evaporation  is  constantly  tending  to  cool  the 
surface.  The  melting  of  the  polar  ice  moder- 
ates the  heat  that  would  arise  in  the  northern 
regions  from  the  constant  presence  of  the  sun 
during  the  polar  summer.  And  the  evolution  of 
heat  during  the  congelation  of  water,  prevents 
too  great  a  degree  of  cold,  and  renders  the 
transitions  of  temperature  more  slow  and 
gradual. 

-  12.  When  the  forms  of  bodies  are  changed 
by  mechanical  means,  or  when  mechanical 
forces  are  made  to  act  upon  them,  there  is 
usually  a  change  of  temperature.  A  piece  of 
caotchouc  extended  and  suffered  to  contract 
rapidly  by  mechanical  means,  becomes  hot ;  a 
nail  is  easily  made  red  hot  by  a  few  wdl  di- 
rected blows  of  the  hammer  ;  and  by  the  friction 
of  solids,  considerable  increase  of  temperature 
is  produced  ;  thus  the  axle  trees  of  carriages 
sometimes  inflame. 

By  strong  pressure,  fluids  even  are  made  lu- 
minouSj  as  has  been  lately  shewn  by  M.  Des- 
saignes. 

When  an  elastic  fluid  is  compressed  by  me- 
chanical means,  its  temperature  is  raised,  and 
when  the  compressing  forces  are  great  and 


t  9^  J 

I'apidiy  applied  the  effect  is  such  as  to  cause  the 
ignition  of  bodies.  A  machine  for  setting  fire 
to  tinder  of  the  agaric,  by  the  compression  of 
air,  has  been  for  some  time  in  use. 

When  air  is  made  to  expand  by  removing 
compressing  forces,  a  diminution  of  tempera- 
ture is  occasioned.  Thus  the  mercury  in  the 
thermometer  sinks  at  the  time  of  the  rarefac- 
tion of  air,  by  exhausting  the  receiver  of  an  air 
pump. 

In  the  common  language  of  chemistry,  it 
may  be  said  that  the  capacity  of  elastic  fluids 
for  heat  is  diminished  by  compression,  and  en- 
creased  by  rarefaction  ;  and  it  is  probable  that 
when  the  volumes  of  elastic  fluids  are  changed 
by  change  of  temperature,  there  is  likewise  a 
change  of  capacity,  and  on  these  ideas,  it  is  easy 
to  account  for  the  correspondence  between  the 
diminution  of  the  temperature  of  the  atmos- 
phere and  its  height ;  for  if  it  be  conceived 
that  the  capacity  of  air  rarefied  by  heat,  in- 
creases as  it  ascends,  the  heat  of  temperature 
which  was  the  cause  of  its  ascent,  must,  at  a 
certain  elevation,  become  heat  of  capacity  :  and 
the  higher  and  more  rarefied  the  air,  the  more 
it  is  removed  from  the  source  of  heat,  and 
the  greater  its  power  of  diminishing  tempera- 
ture. 

A  very  curious  phenomenon  is  produced 


t  91  1 

during  the  action  of  the  fountain  of  Hiero  at 
Schemnitz  in  Hungary  ;  the  air  in  the  machine 
is  compressed  by  a  cohnnn  oF  water,  260  feet 
high,  and  when  a  stop-cock  is  opened  so  as  to 
suffer  air  to  escape,  its  sudden  rarefaction 
produces  a  degree  of  cold  which  not  only 
precipitates  aqueous  vapour,  but  causes  it  to 
congeal  in  a  shower  of  snow,  and  the  pipe  from 
which  the  air  issues,  becomes  covered  with 
icicles.  Dr.  Darwin  has  ingeniously  explained 
the  production  of  snow  on  the  tops  of  the  high- 
est mountains  by  the  precipitation  of  vapour 
from  the  rarefied  air  which  ascends  from  plains 
and  valiies  The  Andes,  placed  almost  under  the 
line,  rises  in  the  midst  of  burning  sands  ;  about 
the  middle  height  is  a  pleasant  and  mild  cli- 
mate; the  summits  are  covered  with  unchang- 
ing snows  .*  and  these  ranges  of  temperature 
are  always  distinct ;  the  hot  winds  from  be- 
low, if  they  ascend,  become  cooled  in  con- 
sequence of  expansion,  and  the  cold  air,  if 
by  any  force  of  the  blast,  it  is  driven  down- 
wards, is  condensed,  and  rendered  warmer  as  it 
descends. 

It  seems  probable  that  the  capacity  of  solids 
and  fluids  is  increased  by  expansion,  and  di» 
minished  by  condensation,  and  if  this  is  the 
case,  the  additions  of  equal  quantities  of  heat 
will  give  smaller  increments  of  temperature  at 


I  92  ] 

h'lgh  than  at  low  degrees,  which  must  to  a  cer* 
tain  extent  render  the  thermometer  inaccurate 
in  the  higher  degrees,  though  prohably  only  to 
a  very  small  extent,  of  little  importance  as  to 
all  practical  purposes  ;  and  this  cause  of  inac- 
curacy appears  to  be  counteracted  by  another^ 
that  fluids  seem  to  be  more  expansible  by  heat 
in  proportion  as  their  temperature  is  higher. 

13.  In  all  chemical  changes  there  is  an  alter- 
ation of  temperature;  and  inmost  instances 
when  gasses  become  fluids,  or  fluids  solids, 
there  is  an  increase  of  temperature  ;  and  vice 
versa,  there  is  usually  a  diminution  of  tem- 
perature when  solids  become  fluids,  or  fluids, 
solids.  For  instance,  when  the  highly  inflam- 
mable substance  called  phosphorus,  the  pro- 
perties of  which  will  be  hereafter  described,  is 
burnt  in  the  air,  it  is  found  to  condense  a  parti- 
cular part  of  the  air,  and  a  high  temperature  is 
produced  during  the  process.  When  a  solid 
amalgam  of  bismuth,  and  a  solid  amalgam  of 
lead,  substances  which  will  be  noticed  in  that 
part  of  this  work  relating  to  the  metallic  com- 
pounds, are  mixed  together,  they  become  fluid, 
and  the  thermometer  sinks  during  the  time  of 
their  action. 

There  are,  however,  a  number  of  cases  in 
which,  though  gaseous  bodies  or  fluids  are 
formed  from  solids,  an  increase  of  temperature 


[93], 

occurs  :  thus,  in  the  explosion  of  gunpowder  a 
large  quantity  of  aeriform  matter  is  disengaged, 
yet  a  violent  heat  is  produced. 

And  there  is  an  instance  in  which  at  the 
time  of  the  separation  of  two  species  of  gaseous 
matter  from  each  other,  which  is  connected 
with  expansion,  there  is  an  increase  of  temper- 
ature;  thus,  when  a  little  of  the  gas  whicli  I 
have  named  Euchlorine,  and  which  consists  of 
the  substance  called  by  the  French  chemists 
oxyrauriatic  gas,  and  oxygene  gas,  is  gently 
heated  in  a  small  glass  tube  over  mercury,  an 
explosion  takes  place,  fire  appears,  and  yet  the 
two  gasses  occupy  a  greater  volume  than  before 
the  explosion. 

14.  As  attempts  have  been  made  to  account 
for  attraction,  by  the  supposition  of  the  exist- 
ence of  a  peculiar  matter,  so  calorific  repulsion 
has  been  accounted  for  by  supposing  a  subiile 
fluid,  capable  of  combining  v/ith  bodies,  and  of 
separating  their  parts  from  each  other,  which 
has  been  named  the  mailer  of  heat,  or  caloric. 

Many  of  the  phenomena  admit  of  a  happy 
explanation  on  this  idea,  such  as  the  cold  pro* 
duced  during  the  conversion  of  solids  into 
fluids  or  gassesj  and  the  increase  of  temperature 
connected  with  the  condensation  of  gasses  and 
fluids  ,•  but  there  are  other  facts  which  are  not 
so  easily  reconciled  to  the  opinion .-  such  are  the 


[  94  ] 

production  of  heat  by  friction  and  percussion  ;- 
and  some  of  the  chemical  changes  which  have 
been  just  referred  to.    When  the  temperature 
of  bodies  are  raised  by  friction,  there  seems  to 
be  no  diminution  of  their  capacities,  using  the 
word  in  its  common  sense  ;  and  in  many  che- 
mical changes  connected  with  an  increase  of 
temperature,  there  appears  to  be  likewise  an 
increase  of  capacity.  A  piece  of  iron  made  red 
hot  by  hammering  cannot  be  strongly  heated  a 
second  time  by  the  same  means,  unless  it. has 
been  previously  introduced  into  a  fire.  This 
fact  has  been  explained  by  supposing  that  the 
fluid  of  heat  has  been  pressed  out  of  it,  by  the 
percussion,  which  is  recovered  in  the  fire  ;  but 
this  is  a  very  rude  mechanical  idea :  the  ar- 
rangements of  its  parts  are  altered  by  hammer- 
ing in  this  way,  and  it  is  rendered  brittle.  By 
a  moderate  degree  of  friction,  as  it  would  appear 
from  Rumford's  experiments,  the  same  piece  of 
metal  may  be  kept  hot  for  any  length  of  time  ; 
so  that  if  heat  be  pressed  out,  the  quantity  must 
be  inexhaustible.    When  any  body  is  cooled 
it  occupies  a  smaller  volume  than  before:  it  is. 
evident,  therefore,  that  its  parts  must  have  ap- 
proached towards  each  other :  when  the  body 
is  expanded  by  heat,  it  is  equally  evident  that 
its  parts  must  have  separated  from  each  oihen 
The  immediate  cause  of  the  phsenomena  of  heat 


I  95  1 

then  is  motion,  and  the  laws  of  its  communica- 
tion are  precisely  the  same  as  the  laws  of  the 
communication  of  motion. 

Since  all  matter  may  be  made  to  fill  a  smaller 
volume  by  cooling,  it  is  evident  that  the  parti- 
cles of  matter  must  have  space  between  them  ; 
and  since  every  body  can  communicate  the 
power  of  expansion  to  a  body  of  a  lower  tem- 
perature, that  is,  can  give  an  expansive  motion 
to  its  particles,  it  is  a  probable  inference  that  its 
own  particles  are  possessed  of  motion  ;  bat  as 
there  is  no  change  in  the  position  of  its  parts 
as  long  as  its  temperature  is  uniform,  the  mo- 
tion, if  it  exist,  must  be  a  vibratory  or  undulatory 
motion,  or  a  motion  of  the  particles  round  their 
axes,  or  a  motion  of  particles  round  each  other. 

It  seems  possible  to  account  for  all  the  phas- 
nomena  of  heat,  if  it  be  supposed  that  in  solids 
the  particles  are  in  a  constant  state  of  vibra- 
tory motion,  the  particles  of  the  hottest  bodies 
moving  with  the  greatest  velocity  and  through 
the  greatest  space  ;  that  in  fluids  and  elastic 
fluids,  besides  the  vibratory  motion,  which  must 
be  conceived  greatest  in  the  last,  the  particles 
have  a  motion  round  their  own  axes,  with  diffe- 
rent velocities,  the  particles  of  elastic  fluids  mov- 
ing with  the  greatest  quickness;  and  that  in 
etherial  substances  the  particles  move  round 
their  own  axes,  and  separate  from  each  other^ 


[  96  ] 

penetrating  in  right  lines  through  space.  Tem- 
perature maybe  conceived  to  depend  upon  the 
Velocities  of  the  vibrations  ;  increase  of  capacity 
on  the  motion  being  performed  in  greater  space ; 
and  the  diminution  of  temperature  daring  the 
conversion  of  solids  into  fluids  or  o;asses,  may 
be  explained  on  the  idea  of  the  loss  of  vibra- 
tory motion,  in  consequence  of  the  revolution 
of  particles  round  their  axes,  at  the  moment 
when  the  body  becomes  fluid  or  triform,  or 
from  the  loss  of  rapidity  of  vibration  in  conse- 
quence of  the  motion  of  the  particles  through 
greater  space 

If  a  specific  fluid  of  heat  be  admitted,  it  must 
be  supposed  liable  to  most  of  the  affections 
which  the  particles  of  common  matter  are  as- 
sumed to  possess,  to  account  for  the  phaeno- 
inena;  such  as  losing  its  motion  when  combining 
with  bodies,  producing  motion  when  trans- 
mitted from  one  body  to  another,  andgaining 
projectile  motion,  when  passing  into  free  space: 
so  that  many  hypotheses  must  be  adopted  to 
account  for  its  mode  of  agency,  which  renders 
this  view  of  the  subject  less  simple  than  the 
other.  Very  delicate  experiments  have  been 
made  which  shew  that  bodies  when  heated  do 
not  increase  in  weight.  This,  as  far  as  it  goes, 
is  an  evidence  against  a  specific  subtile  elastic 
fluid  producing  the  calorific  expansion  ;  but  it 


4 


[9?] 

cannot  be  considered  as  decisive,  on  account  of 
the  imperfection  of  our  instruments  ;  a  cubical 
inch  of  inflammable  air  requires  a  good  balance 
to  ascertain  that  it  has  any  sensible  weight,  and 
a  substance  bearing  the  same  relation  to  this, 
that  this  bears  to  platinum,  could  not  perhaps  be 
weighed  by  any  methods  in  our  possession. 

Some  arguments  have  been  raised  in  favour 
of  the  existence  of  a  specific  fluid  of  heat,  from 
the  circumstances  of  the  communication  of  heat 
to  bodies  in  exhausted  receivers,  and  from  the 
manner  in  which  they  are  affected  by  this  heat; 
but  there  are  no  means  known  in  experimental 
science  of  producing  a  perfect  vacuum  ;  even 
the  best  Torricellian  vacuum  must  contain  elas- 
tic matter.    The  great  capacity  of  such  highly 
rarefied  matter  is  an  obstacle  to  the  indication  of 
temperature  ;  but  supposing  a  communication 
of  heat,  the  laws  must  be  analogous  to  those  of 
heat  communicated  to  common  air.    If  a  long 
cylinder  of  metal,  placed  perpendicularly,  be 
heated  in  the  middle,  the  warmest  part  will  be 
above,  from  the  ascent  of  heated  particles  of  the 
elastic  medium  ;   but  if  a  sphere  be  heated  in 
the  middle,  the  hottest  portion  will  be  below, 
as  the  heated  elastic  matter  must  remain  lono-er 
in  contact  with  the  inferior  than  with  the  supe- 
rior portion. 

The  laws  of  the  communication  of  heat,  and 
VOL.  I.  H, 


[  98  ] 

the  philosophy  of  its  effects,  are  independent  of 
this  speculative  question,  which  will  again  be 
considered,  under  new  relations,  in  the  part  of 
this  work  relating  to  the  properties  ethereal 
or  radiant  matter. 

IV.  On  chemical  Attraction^  and  the  Laws  of 
Combination  and  Decomposition. 

i.  When  olive  oil  and  water  are  adtated  to- 
gether  they  refuse  to  act  upon  each  other,  and 
separate  according  to  the  order  of  their  densi- 
ties, the  oil  swimming  above  the  water.  Oil 
and  water  will  not  mix  intimately  ;  they  will 
noi  combine;  and  they  are  said  to  have  no  che- 
mical attraction  or  ajfLnitf  for  each  other.  But 
if  oil  and  soap  lees,  or  solution  of  potassa  in 
water,  be  mixed,  the  oil  and  the  solution  blend 
together,  and  a  species  of  soap  will  be  formed, 
which  maybe  procured  as  a  soft  solid  substance 
by  evaporating  a  part  of  the  water.  This  is  an 
instance  of  combination ;  and  solution  of  potassa 
and  oil  are  said  to  attract  each  other  chemically, 
or  to  have  an  affinity  for  each  other. 

2  Oil  is  almost  insipid,  but  the  solution  of 
potassa  is  a  caustic  substance,  which  corrodes 
the  skin,  and  has  a  strong  taste. — The  body 
resulting  from  their  union  differs  both  from  the 
oil  and  the  alkali  in  taste,  smell,  colour,  and 
in  all  its  sensible  qualities  ;  and  it  is  a  general 


C  99  ] 

GhsxRcter  oi" chemical  combination,  that  it  chano-es 
the  sensible  qualities  of  bodies. 

Corrosive  and  pungent  substances  often  be- 
come mild  and  tasteless  by  their  union,  as  is  the 
case  with  sulphuric  acid  and  quicklime,  which 
form  gypsum,  or  sulphate  of  lime. 

Bodies  possessed  of  little  taste  or  smell  often 
gain  these  qualities  in  a  high  degree  by  combi- 
nation.   Thus  sulphur,  when  inflamed  ia  oxy- 
gene  or  in  common  air,  dissolves  and  forms  an 
elastic  fluid  of  a  most  penetrating  and  disagree- 
able odour  and  peculiar  flavour.  The  forms 
of  bodies,  or  their  densities,  likewise  usually 
alter ;  solids  become  fluids,  and  solids  and  fluids 
gasses,  and  gasses  are  often  converted  into  fluids 
or  solids.  Thus  sugar,  or  salt,  or  isinglass,  dis 
solves  in  water.    The  consumption  of  charcoal 
in  our  fires  depends  upon  its  uniting  with  a 
part  of  the  air,  with  which  it  forms  an  invisible 
elastic  fluid :  mercury  is  rendered  solid  by  being 
heated  with  half  its  weight  of  tin,  and  a  substance 
of  this  kind  is  used  for  silvering  mirrors.  The  gas 
produced  by  the  combustion  of  charcoal  is  con- 
densed by  another  gas  procured  from  quicklime 
and  sal  ammoniac,  when  they  are  mixed  over 
mercury  ;  and  the  two  invisible  elastic  fluids 
form  a  white  saline  solid, 

3.  Many  substances  may  be  made  to  unite  by 
chemical  affinity  or  attraction  :  thus  common 
,  H2 


f  ] 

salt,  sugar,  and  pearl-ashes,  will  all  dissolve 
together  in  water.  And  the  fosilalkali,  sand 
and  the  glass  of  lead,  when  melted  toge- 
ther, unite  to  form  flint  glass  And  in  like 
manner,  porcelain  is  formed  by  heating  together 
mixtures  of  different  earths.  In  a  number  of 
the  productions  of  nature  likewise  many  sub- 
Stances  are  combined  into  one  mass  or  com- 
pound. Thus  many  stones  and  gems  are  capable 
of  being  resolved  into  several  elements  ;  and  in 
the  vegetable  and  animal  kingdom  there  are 
scarcely  any  compounds  which  do  not  contain 
more  than  two  principles,  and  complexity  of 
constitution  seems  uniformly  connected  with 
organization. 

4.  That  chemical  attraction  may  be  exerted 
between  bodies,  it  is  necessary  that  they  should 
be  brought  into  apparent  contact.  Thus  no 
body  will  act  chemically  upon  another  at  any 
sensible  distance. 

5.  A  freedom  of  motion  in  the  parts  of  bodies, 
or  a  want  of  cohesion,  greatly  assists  combina- 
tion ;  and  this  circumstance  is  so  marked,  that 
it  was  formerly  considered  as  a  chemical  axiom, 
which  is  still  retained  in  some  elementary  books, 
that  bodies  cannot  act  chemically  on  each  other 
unless  one  of  tiiem  be  fluid  or  seriform.  Such 
an  extensive  general  zation  is,  however,  incqr- 
regt ;  thus  crystalline  munate  of  lime  and  snow. 


0 


C  101  ] 

both  cooled  to  0°  Fahrenheit  act  upon  each  other 
ijnd  liquify;  and  crystals  ofoxalic  acid  and  dry 
lime  treated  in  the  same  manner  readily  com-* 
bine.  The  hardest  arid  the  densest  bodies, 
however,  vmdergo  chemical  chanties  Avith  the 
greatest  difficulty.  Thus  the  sapphire  in  its 
crystallized  state,  is  not  affected  by  boiling  sul- 
phuric acid  ;  but  when  in  a  fine  pov/der,  as  alu* 
mine,  it  is  easily  dissolved  Minute  division, 
or  solution,  or  fusion  is  necessary  in  almost  all 
chemical  processes.  In  the  chemical  arts  these 
circumstances  are  always  attended  to  ;  and  in 
the  phcenomena  of  external  nature,  the  com- 
mencement of  chemical  operations  may  in  almost 
all  cases  be  traced  to  the  agencies  of  fluids  or 
aeiif'orm  substances.  Thus  in  the  bosom  of  our 
rocks  and  mountains,  where  aic  and  water  are 
incapable  of  penetrating,  all  is  permanent  and 
still,  without  change  or  motion;  wherever  wa- 
ter and  air  are  capable  of  acting,  decomposition 
slowly  goes  on  ;  and  these  agents  gradually 
change  the  nature  of  the  surface,  render  liie  soil 
fertile,  and  decompose  and  degrade  the  exterior 
of  strata. 

5.  If  equal  weights  of  magnesia  and  of  quick- 
lime, in  fine  powder,  and  diluted  aquaforiis  or 
nitric  acid,  be  mixed  together  and  suff  red  to 
remain  for  some  hours,  it  will  be  found  by  a  mi- 
nute examination,  that  a  considerable  part  oi  the 


[102] 

lime  has  been  dissolved,  but  all  the  masnesia 
will  remain  untouched.  Hence,  it  is  said,  that 
lime  has  a  stronger  altraclion  for  nitric  acid, 
than  magnesia  has. 

This  is  proved  likewise,  by  another  experi- 
ment of  a  different  kind  :  it  is  easy  to  make  a 
solution  of  magnesia,  in  nitric  acid,  by  heating 
them  together;  and  to  make  a  solution  of  lime 
in  water,  by  agitating  some  powdered  quick- 
lime in  distilled  water.  Let  tlie  solution  of 
lime  be  poured  into  the  solution  of  magnesia, 
a  white  powder  or  precipitate  will  separate,  and 
gradually  fall  to  the  bottom  of  the  vessel  in 
which  the  mixture  is  made.  This  powder, 
when  examined,  is  found  to  be  magnesia,  and, 
it  is  said,  that  magnesia  is  precipitated  from 
siitric  acid,  in  consequence  of  the  stronger 
attraction  of  lime  for  that  acid. 

Ail  bodies,  that  differ  in  their  nature,  com- 
bine with  different  degrees  of  force  ;  and  some 
very  important  chemical  phacnoraenain  the  arts 
depend  upon  this  circumstance.  Thus  the  astrin- 
gent 01  tanning  substance,  in  the  bark  of  trees, 
which  is  soluble  in  water,  is  attracted  from 
water,  by  the  prepared  skins  of  animals,  in  con- 
sequence of  their  stronger  affinity  Tor  it,  and 
the  skin,  from  being  destructible  by  boiling 
water,  and  decomposable,  becomes  indestruc- 
tible and  permanent.    In  like  manner,  indigo, 


t  ^03  ] 

and  other  dyeing  materials,  are  separated  from 
their  soluiions,  by  vegetable  or  animal  fibres, 
and  new  combinations  of  ihem  effected;  and  a 
number  of  instances  of  the  same  kind  mio-ht 
be  brought  forward. 

6.  Different  bodies  unite  with  different  de- 
grees of  force  ;  and  hence,  one  body  is  capable 
of  separating  others,  from  certain  of  their  com- 
binations ;  and  inconsequence  of  the  same  cir- 
cumstance, mutual  decomposilions  of  different 
compounds  take  place.  This  has  been  called 
double  ajjinily^  or  complex  chemical  attraction. 
Thus,  if  an  aqueous  neutral  solution  of  lime 
and  nitric  acid,  and  a  like  solution  of  magnesia 
and  sulphuric  acid,  be  mixed  together,  the 
lime  wiil  quit  the  nitric  acid,  to  unite  to  the 
sulphuric  acid,  and  the  magnesia  will  leave  the 
sulphuric  acid,  to  combine  with  the  nitric  acid. 
The  combination  of  nitric  acid  and  magnesia, 
will  remain  in  solution;  but  the  compound  of 
lime  and  sulphuric  acid,  being  only  slightly 
soluble  in  water,  will  for  the  most  part  be  pre- 
cipitated, in  the  form  of  a  white  powder. 

In  many  cases  decompositions,  that  cannot 
be  produced  by  single  attractions,  may  be 
produced  by  double  affinities.  Thus  the 
elements  of  sulphate  of  baryta,  or  the  c(»m- 
bination  of  sulphuric  acid,  and  the  earth 
called    baryta,   are    so    firmly  united,  that 


[  104  ] 

no  alkali,  nor  earth,  will  separate  the  acid  from 
the  baryta.  Potassa,  which  has  a  very  strong 
attraction  for  the  acid,  will  not  decompose  it 
alone  ;  but  if  potassa,  combined  with  carbonic 
acid,  be  digested  for  some  time,  with  powdered 
sulphate  of  baryta,  there  is  a  double  decompo- 
sition;  and  combinations  of  sulphuric  acid  and 
potassa,  and  carbonic  acid  and  baryta,  are 
formed. 

7.  If  one  part  of  pure  oxygene  gas,  and  two 
parts  of  pure  hydrogene  gas,  in  volume,  be 
mixed  together,  in  a  glass  tube,  over  mercury, 
furnished  with  wires  for  passing  the  electrical 
spark  through  it,  and  they  be  inflamed  by  the 
electrical  spark;*  the  gaseous  matter  will  dis- 
appear, and  water  will  result.  If  two  parts  of 
oxygene,  be  employed,  and  two  of  hydrogene, 
one  part  of  oxygene  will  remain  ;  in  whatever 
proportions  they  are  mixed  together,  it  is 
found,  that  one  of  oxygene  always  condenses 
two  of  hydrogene.  It  is  evident  then,  that 
oxygene  and  hydrogene,  combine  only  in  defin- 
ite proportions,  and  that  the  water  resulting  is 
always  the  same  in  its  constitution. 

If  ^  piece  of  well  burnt  charcoal  be  introduced 
into  a  vessel,  two  thirds  filled  with  oxvo;ene 
gas,  over  mercury;  and  the  mercury  be  brought 
to  the  same  level  on  the  inside  and  on  the 
*  See  Plate  I.  fig.  6. 


[  105  ] 


outside  of  the  jar,  and  the  charcoal  be  inflamed 
by  a  burning  glass  ;*  there  will  be  at  first,  ^n 
expansion,  but  after  the  experiment  is  over,  it 
will  be  found,  that  the  volume  of  the  gas  has 
not  perceptibly  altered;  and  if  the  charcoal  has 
beeij  in  sufficient  quantity,  the  whole  of  the 
oxvp'ene  will  be  found  converted  into  carbonic 
acid  ;  now  the  densities  of  oxygene  gas  and 
carbonic  acid  gas,  in  whatever  way  they  are 
formed,  are  always  the  same  ;  and  to  each  other, 
as  34  to  47  nearly.  It  is  evident  then,  that 
carbonic  acid  must  always  contain  the  same 
weight  of  oxygene  and  charcoal.  If  there  is 
twice  as  much  oxygene  in  the  vessel,  as  is  ne- 
cessary for  the  consumption  of  the  charcoal, 
half  of  it  remains  untouched  ;  and  if  the  char- 
coal is  partly  unconsumed,  still  the  gas  is  the 
same  in  quality;  it  always  contains  by  weight, 
5.7  of  charcoal  and  15  of  oxygene. 

There  is  an  inflammable  gas,  called  carbonic 
oxide,  which  burns  with  a  blue  flame,  and  which 
is  obtained  by  igniting  together  zinc  filings  and 
chalk.  When  two  in  volume  of  this  gas,  and 
one  in  volume  of  oxygene,  are  acted  upon  by 
an  electric  spark,  over  mercury,  they  inflame, 
and  there  result  exactly  two  volumes  of  car- 
bonic acid  gas ;  there  is  no  other  product,  and 
the  weight  of  the  carbonic  acid  gas,  exactly 
*  Plate  II.  fig.  /. 


[  106  ] 

equals  the  weight  of  the  carbonic  oxide  and  the 
oxygene  gas;  so  it  is  evident,  that  the  carbo- 
nic oxide  contains  exactly  half  as  much  oxygene 
as  carbonic  acid,  that  is  5-7  of  charcoal,  require 
7.5  of  oxygene,  to  become  carbonic  oxide. 
Again  this  is  proved  by  decomposition :  if  elec- 
trical sparks  be  passed  through  carbonic  acid 
gas,  over  mercury,  it  expands,  and  part  of  it  is 
decomposed,  two  volumes  becoming  two  vo- 
lumes of  carbonic  oxide,  and  one  volume  of 
oxygene. 

When  the  saltj  called  nitrate  of  ammonia,  is 
decomposed  by  heat,  an  elastic  fluid  is  disen- 
gaged, called  nitrous  oxide  ;  when  one  volume 
of  this  gas,  is  mixed  with  one  volume  of  hydro- 
gene,  and  an  electric  spark  is  passed  through 
the  mixture,  inflammation  takes  place,  water  is 
formed,  and  one  volume  of  elastic  matter  remains, 
which  is  azote.  Now  as  one  volume  of  hvdro- 
gene  takes  half  a  volume  of  oxygene,  lor  its 
conversion  into  water,  it  is  evident,  that  this 
gas,  nitrous  oxide,  must  be  composed  of  two 
in  volume  of  azote,  and  one  in  volume  of  oxy- 
gene, condensed  into  a  space  equal  to  two» 

There  is  a  gas  produced  by  the  solution 
of  copper  in  diluted  nitric  acid.  If  a  little  of 
this  gas  be  passed  into  a  curved  glass  tube*  over 
mercury,  and  metallic  arsenic  be  sublimed  in 
*  Plate  II.  fig  8. 


[  107  ] 

the  gas,  it  is  gradually  decomposed.    A  solid 
combination  of  arsenic  and  oxygene  is  formed, 
which  is  found  (if  the  weight  of  the  azote  re- 
maining be  compared  with  that  of  the  nitrous 
gas)  to  contain  half  a  volume  of  oxygene,  and 
half  a  volume  of  gas  remains,  which  is  azote. 
So  it  is  evident,  that  as  azote  combined  with  one 
proportion  of  oxygene  gas,  forms  nitrous  oxide, 
so  combined  with  two  proportions,  it  forms 
nitrous  gas ;  and  one  volume  of  nitrous  gas 
mixed  over  water  with  half  a  volume  of  oxy- 
gene, is  condensed,  and  forms  a  solution  of 
nitrous  acid  gas  in  water.    So  that  this  body 
must  consists  of  azote  with,  four  proportions  of 
oxygene,  nitrous  oxide  being  considered  as  azote 
with  one  proportion  of  oxygene ;  and  the  quan- 
tities in  these  bodies  are  always  the  same 

It  would  be  easy  to  bring  forward  a  great  col- 
lection of  evidences  to  shew,  that  in  all  compound 
gaseous  bodies,  the  quantities  of  the  elements 
are  uniform  for  each  species*  and  that  when  two 

*  That  the  proportions  in  compound  gases  are  definite, 
has  long  been  generally  acknowledged,  but  Mr.  Higgins  is,  I 
believe,  the  first  person  who  conceived  that  when  gasses  com- 
bined in  more  than  one  proportion,  all  the  proportions  of  the 
same  element  were  equal;  and  he  founded  this  idea,  which 
was  made  public  in  1789,  on  the  corpuscular  hypothesis,  that 
bodies  combine  particle  with  particle,  or  one  with  two,  or 
three,  or  a  greater  number  of  particles.  Mr.  Dalton,  about 
1802,  adopting  a  similar  hypothesis,  apparently  without  the 
knowledge  of  what  Mr.  Higgins  had  written,  extended  his 
views  to  compounds  in  general.    Mr.  Richter  seem*  to  hav« 


[  108  ] 


gaseous  elements  combine  iri  more  than  one  pro- 
portion, that  the  second  or  third  proportion  is 
always  a  multiple,  or  a  divisor  of  the  first ;  and 
the  case  seems  to  be  analogous  with  respect  to 
all  true  chemical  compounds,  whether  solids  or 
fluids,  in  which  no  mechanical  mixtures  can  be 
suspected,  and  where  no  partial  decompositions 
can  have  taken  place. 

Thus  if  sulphuric  acid  be  poured  into  any 
solution  of  baryta,  the  solid  precipitate  of  sul- 
phate of  baryta  which  falls  down,  is  uniform 
in  its  nature,  and  always  contains  about  34  of 
acid,  and  66  of  baryta  ;  and  the  case  is  the  same 
with  other  similar  compounds,  and  with  neutral 
salts  in  general. 

And  if  tv»'o  neutral  salts  mutually  decompose 

been  the  first  person  to  shew  that  in  the  decomposition  of 
neutral  salts  by  double  affinity,  the  neutral  state  is  preserved  ; 
and  likewise  that,  when  a  metallic  salt  is  decomposed  by  a 
metal,  all  the  oxygene  and  acid  is  transferred,  and  the  metal 
only  changed,  and  that  the  new  solution  is  as  neutral,  as  the 
former  one.  It  had  been  ascertained,  by  different  experiments, 
that  in  certain  cases  when  solids  dissolved  in  gasses,  the  volume 
is  unchanged,  and  some  instances  of  the  combination  of  gasses 
were  kiicuvn,  in  which  the  volumes  bore  simple  ratios  to  each 
other,  as  in  iiitioits  Dxide,  and  water;  but  M.  Gay  Lussac  is- 
the  first  philosopher  who  attempted  to  generalize  on  the  phe- 
nomena, and  shew  that  in  all  cases  where  gasses  unite,  it  is 
always  in  simple  ratios  of  volume,  1  to  l,or  1  to  2,  or  1  to  3, 
and  that  the  condensation,  if  any,  is  in  a  simple  ratio.  His 
very  ir-geniou«  ideus  cn  thib  .subject,  were  made  known  towards 
the  close  of  liSOS.  BerzeUns,  in  a  work  publishv  d  in  1810,  has 
determined  ver)  coi  rci  tij ,  s(/me  of  ihe  definite  proportions  of 
several  important  compounds.  See  Hi^gins's  comparative  View. 


[  109  ] 


each  other,  in  the  interchange  of  principles, 
there  is  never  an  excess  of  acid  or  of  basis,* 
and  the  resiiUing  compounds  are  likewise  per- 
fectly neutral.  Thus  if  100  parts  of  nitrate  of 
baryta,  which  contain  41  nitric  acid,  and  59 
baryta,  be  mixed  with  67  of  sulphat  of  potassa, 
which  consist  of  30  of  sulphuric  acid,  and  37 
potassa,  there  will  be  found  89  of  sulphate  of 
baryta,  and  78  of  nitrate  of  potassa  ;  so  that  41 
of  nitric  acid  will  combine  with  the  37  of  potassa, 
and  30  of  sulphuric  acid  with  the  59  of  baryta. 

It  is  evident  from  these  circumstances,  that 
when  one  body  has  the  power  of  detaching 
another  from  its  combinations,  it  will  always 
detach  the  same  proportion.  Thus  from  what- 
ever basis  baryta  attracts  sulphuric  acid,  it  will 
always  detach  the  same  quantity;  and  the  same 
quantity  of  potassa,  from  whatever  acid  it  pre- 
cipitates magnesia,  will  always  throw  down  the 
same  proportion. 

8.  In  cases  when  an  alkaline  substance  com- 
bines with  more  than  one  proportion  of  acid, 
the  same  circumstances  seem  to  occur  as  in 

Dalton's  new  Chemical  Fhilosophy.  Richter  Ueber  die  neuren 
gegenstande  der  Chemie.  Memoires  d'  Arcueil,  T.  ii.  Bcr- 
zelim  Annales  de  Chemie,  T.  Ixvii.  Thomson's  system  of  Chemis- 
try^ vol.  Hi. 

*  M,  M.  Gay  Lussac  and  Thenard,  have  lately  stated, "  that 
in  some  mutual  decorapositions  of  fluates,  and  muriates; 
slightly  acid  solutions  become  alkaline;  Recherches,  T.  ii. 
page  28;  but  such  changes  must  be  complicated;  and  perhaps 
a  minute  investigation  may  shew  that  they  are  not  anomalous. 


I  no  ] 

the  combinations  of  gaseous  bodies.  The  pro- 
portion is  either  a  multiple  or  a  divisor  of  the 
first ;  this  is  shewn  by  a  very  simple  experiment, 
first  made  by  Dr.  Wollaston  :  let  a  given  weight 
of  the  salt  called  carbonate  of  potassa,  be  thrown 
into  a  tube  over  mercury,  and  diluted  sulphuric 
acid  suflBcient  to  cover  it  be  introduced  into  the 
tube,  a  certain  volume  of  carbonic  acid  gas  will 
be  disengaged;  let  an  equal  weight  of  the  salt 
be  heated  to  redness,  when  it  becomes  a  subcar- 
bonate,  and  let  this  subcarbonate  be  treated  in 
the  same  way,  it  will  be  found  to  give  off  exactly 
half  as  much  carbonic  acid  sas. 

9.  In  the  combination  of  solid  and  fluid  sub- 
stances which  have  not  yet  been  decompounded, 
with  gasses,  and  in  the  union  of  compound 
inflammable  bodies  with  each  other,  and  in  all 
mutual  decompositions  between  bodies  of  this 
class,  similar  circumstances  appear  to  occur : 
thus  there  are  two  combinations  of  mercury  with 
oxygene,  the  black  and  the  red ;  and  one  appears 
to  contain  twice  as  much  oxygene  as  the  other. 
There  are  two  known  combinations  of  iron  with 
oxygene,  the  black  and  the  red  oxide  of  iron ; 
and  the  oxygene  in  the  first  being  considered  as 
2,  that  in  the  second  must  be  considered  as  3, 
that  is  100  parts  of  iron  take  29  parts  of  oxy- 
gene to  become  the  black  oxide,  and  43.5*  to 
become  the  red. 

*  These  results  I  have  obtained  very  nearly,  namely,  29 


[  111  ] 


The  decompositions  of  compounds  containing 
oxymuriatic  gas,  or  chlorine  gas  by  water,  afford 
the  best  and  most  intelligible  instances  of  double 
decomposition.  If  equal  volumes  of  light  inflam- 
mable air  or  hydrogene,  and  chlorine  be  mixed 
together,  and  exposed  to  day-light,  they  slowly 
act  upon  each  other,  no  condensation  takes  place, 
and  they  form  an  equal  volume  of  muriatic  acid 
gas  ;  so  that  muriatic  acid  gas  consists  of  hydro^ 
gene  and  chlorine  in  equal  volumes ;  and  water,  as 
has  been  before  stated,  consists  of  two  parts  in 
volume  of  hydrogene,  and  one  part  in  volume 
of  oxygene.  Now  phosphorus  and  sulphur, 
and  most  of  the  metals,  combine  with  chlorine, 
and  form  peculiar  compounds,  many  of  which 
are  decomposed  by  water,  and  the  results  are 
phosphorus,  sulphur,  or  the  metals  combined 
with  oxygene,  and  muriatic  acid ;  and  the  oxi- 
dated compounds  formed,  are  the  same  as  those 
produced  in  other  ways;  and  it  is  evident, 
that  the  quantity  of  hydrogene  given  to  the 
chlorine  to  form  the  acid,  must  be  exactly  in 
the  ratio  of  the  oxygene  added  to  the  inflamma- 
ble substance  or  the  metal;  thus  phosphorus 
burnt  in  chlorine  in  excess,  forms  a  white 
volatile  substance,  which  1  have  named  phos- 
phor anee.    When  water  is  added  to  this,  phos- 

and  43 ;  and  they  differ  very  little  from  those  of  Mr.  Hassen- 
fraiz,  Dr.  Thomson,  and  Mr.  Beraelius. 


{  112  ] 

phoric  and  muriatic  acids  are  formed,  and  there 
are  no  other  products. 

10.  As  in  all  well  known  compounds,  the 
proportions  of  the  elements  are  in  certain  de- 
finite ratios  to  each  other  ;  it  is  evident,  that 
these  ratios  may  be  expressed  by  numbers  ;  and 
if  one  number  be  employed  to  denote  the 
smallest  quantity  in  which  a  body  combines, 
all  other  quantities  of  the  same  body  will  be 
multiples  of  this  number ;  and  the  smallest 
proportions  in  which  the  undecomposed 
bodies  enter  into  union  being  known,  the 
constitution  of  the  compounds  they  form 
may  be  learnt,  and  the  element  which  unites 
chemically  in  the  smallest  quantity  being  ex- 
pressed by  unity,  all  the  other  elements  may  be 
represented  by  the  relations  of  their  quantities 
to  unity. 

Hydrogene  gas,  or  inflammable  air  is  the 
substance  of  which  the  smallest  weights  seem 
to  enter  into  combination ;  and  it  appears  to 
exist  in  no  definite  compound  in  less  pro- 
portion than  water.  The  specific  gravity  of 
hydrogene  is  to  that  of  oxygene  as  J  5  to  I;  and 
as  2  volumes  of  hydrogene  to  1  of  oxygene 
enter  into  the  composition  of  water,  the 
raiio  of  the  hydrogene  in  water  will  be  to  tlie 
oxygene  as  2  to  15  ;  and  it  may  be  regarded  as 
composed  of  two  proportions  of  hydrogene 


[  113  ] 

and  one  of  oxygene :  and  the  number  repre- 
senting hydrogene  will  be  1,  and  that  repre- 
senting oxygene  15. 

The  weights  of  equal  volumes  of  azote  and 
oxygene  are  to  each  other  nearly  as  13  to  15  ; 
therefore  supposing  the  number  representing 
the  proportion,  in  which  azote  combines,  gained 
from  the  composition  of  nitrous  oxide,  which 
contains  two  volumes  of  azote  to  one  of  oxy- 
gene, it  will  be  represented  by  26  ;  and  nitrous 
oxide  will  consist  of  two  proportions  of  azote 
equal  to  26,  and  one  proportion  of  oxygene, 
equal  to  15.  Nitrous  gas  will  consist  of  1  of  azote 
and  2  of  oxygene,  26  and  30.  Nitrous  acid  gas 
of  I  of  azote  and  4  of  oxygene,  26  and  60. 

Ammonia,  which  is  decomposed  by  electri- 
city into  3  volumes  of  hydrogene  and  1  volume 
of  azote,  will  consist  of  6  proportions  of  hydro- 
gene and  1  proportion  of  azote,  or  6  and  26. 

The  weight  of  chlorine  or  oxymuriatic  gas^ 
is  to  that  of  hydrogene  nearly  as  33.5  to  1;  and 
muriatic  acid  gas  consists  of  equal  volumes  of 
these  gases,  and  therefore  is  composed  of  33,5 
of  chlorine,  and  1  of  hydrogene ; — but  §  of 
chlorine  may  be  made  to  combine  with  one  of 
oxygene  in  volume  ;  and  double  proportions  of 
this  gas  combine  to  form  compounds,  which 
when  decomposed  by  water,  alford  compounds 
containing  single  proportions  of  oxygene,  so  that 
the  ratio  of  chlorine  to  oxygene,  is  that  of  67 

VOL.  I.  I 


[  114  ] 


to  15,  and  the  number  representing  chlorine  is 
correctly  stated  67. 

In  like  manner  it  is  easy  to  deduce  the  num- 
ber representing  the  other  undecompounded 
bodies ;  and  they  will  be  found  to  correspond 
as  nearly  as  can  be  expected,  in  whatever  way 
they  are  obtained.  Thus,  whether  the  number 
representing  the  proportion  in  which  potas- 
sium the  basis  of  potassa  combines,  be  gained 
from  its  combination  with  oxygene  or  with 
chlorine,  the  result  will  scarcely  differ ;  for  8 
grains  of  potassium  converted  into  the  com- 
pound of  chlorine  and  potassium  I  have  found 
gain  about  7.1  grains,  and  when  converted  into 
potassa,  they  gain  a  grain  and  and  as  7.1:8: : 
67  :  75-4  ;  and  as  .  1.6  :  8  : :  15  :  75,  giving  the 
number  representing  potassium  as  about  75- 

It  is  easy  to  form  a  series  of  proportional 
numbers  by  taking  of  these  numbers,  on  the 
supposition  that  water  is  composed  of  one  pro- 
portion of  hydrogene  ahd  one  of  oxygene  ;  but 
in  this  case  the  number  representing  the  pro- 
portion in  which  oxygene  combines  must  con- 
tain a  fraction ;  and  the  calculations  are  much 
expedited,  and  the  formula  rendered  more 
simple,  by  considering  the  smallest  proportion 
an  integer. 

Mr.  Higgins  has  supposed  that  water  is  com- 
posed of  one  particle  of  oxygene  and  one  of 
hydrogene,  and  Mr.  Dalton,  of  an  atom  of  each; 
but  in  the  doctrine  of  proportions  derived  from 


[  M5  3 


facts,  it  is  not  necessary  to  consider  the  combine* 
ing  bodies,  either  as  composed  of  indivisible 
particles,  or  even  as  always  united,  one  and 
one,  or  one  and  two,  or  one  and  three  propor- 
tions. Cases  will  hereafter  be  pointed  out,  in 
which  the  ratios  are  very  different ;  and  at  pre- 
sent, as  we  have  no  means  whatever  of  judging 
either  of  the  relative  numbers,  figures,  or 
weights,  of  those  particles  of  bodies  which  are 
not  in  contact,  our  numerical  expressions  ought 
to  relate  only  to  the  results  of  experiments. 

If  it  should  hereafter  be  discovered,  that  any 
of  those  substances  now  considered  as  undecom- 
pounded,  consist  of  other  elements,  these  ele- 
ments must  be  represented  by  some  division  of 
their  numbers  ;  and  should  even  hydrogene  be 
found  a  compounded  body,  it  would  merely  be 
necessary  to  multiply  all  the  numbers  repre- 
senting the  other  elements,  by  some  common 
number  which  would  admit  of  a  division  into 
proportions,  representing  the  elements  of  hy- 
drogene ;  so  that  no  discovery  concerning  the 
composition  of  bodies,  can  interfere  with  the 
general  law  of  the  definite  nature  of  their  com- 
binations. 

1 1.  If  the  black  oxide  ofmanganese  be  exposed 
to  a  strong  heat,  it  gives  oiBT  oxygene  gas,  and 
becomes  brown  ;  but  no  heat  as  yet  applied  is  ca- 
pable of  depriving  it  of  the  whole  of  its  oxygene. 

12 


I  116  ] 

Hence  itis  evident  that  when  one  proportion  oF 
one  substance  is  combined  with  more  than  one 
proportion  of  another,  the  first  proportions  may- 
be separated  with  much  more  facility  than  the 
last.  There  are  numbers  of  other  instances  ;  thus 
the  carbonate  of  soda,  which  contains  two  pro- 
portions of  carbonic  acid  to  one  of  soda,  gives  off 
half  its  carbonic  acid  with  great  facility,  by  heat, 
but  obstinately  retains  the  other  half.  Nitric 
acid  is  easily  brought  to  the  state  of  nitrous  gas 
by  the  abstraction  of  oxygene  :  nitrous  gas  with 
more  difficulty  is  converted  into  nitrous  oxide, 
but  nitrous  oxide  is  still  less  decomposable  than 
nitrous  gas. 

When  one  proportion  of  a  body  is  combined 
with  two  or  more  proportions  of  another,  it 
seems  to  enter  with  more  difficulty  into  new 
combinations,  than  when  it  is  combined  with 
one  proportion.  Thus  iron  combined  with  two 
proportions  of  sulphur  in  golden  pyrites  is  not 
acted  upon  by  diluted  sulphuric  acid :  but  when 
combined  only  with  one  proportion  of  sulphur, 
as  in  the  common  artificial  sulphuret,  it  is  readily 
acted  upon. 

It  seems  from  these  facts  that  two  or  more 
proportions  of  one  body  attract  a  single  pro- 
portion of  another  body  with  more  energy  than 
one  proportion,  and  that  two  proportions  or 
mgre  adhere  to  a  single  proportion  with  less 


[  "7  ] 

energy  than  one  proportion  ;  or  at  least  that  a 
second  or  a  third  proportion  adheres  with  less 
energy  than  the  first. 

It  may  possibly  be  said,  that  the  effect  of  two 
or  three  proportions,  in  defending  one  propor- 
tion from  the  action  of  a  new  substance,  may 
depend  upon  mechanical  causes,  from  their 
more  completely  enveloping  its  parts  ;  but  the 
other  solution  of  the  effect  seems  to  be  the  most 
probable. 

12.  M.  BerthoUet,  to  whom  the  first  distinct 
views  of  the  relations  of  the  force  of  attraction 
to  quantity  are  owing,  has  endeavoured  to  prove 
that  these  relations  are  universal,  and  that  elec- 
tive affinities  cannot  strictly  be  said  to  exist. 
He  considers  the  powers  of  bodies  to  com  ine  as 
depending  in  all  cases  upon  their  relative  attrac- 
tions, and  upon  their  acting  masses,  whatever 
these  may  be  :  and  he  conceives  that  in  all  cases 
of  decomposition,  in  wliich  two  bodies  act  upon 
a  third,  that  third  is  divided  between  them  in 
proportion  to  their  relative  affinities,  and  their 
quantities  of  matter.  Were  this  proposition 
strictly  correct,  it  is  evident  that  there  could  be 
scarcely  any  definite  proportions :  a  salt  crys- 
tallizing in  a  strong  alkaline  solution,  would  be 
strongly  alkaline ;  in  a  weak  one  less  alkaline ; 
and  in  an  acid  solution,  it  would  be  acid  \  which 
does  not  seem  to  be  the  case.    In  combina->. 


I 


[  11'  ] 

tions,  in  which  gaseous  bodies  are  concerned, 
the  particles  of  which  have  perfect  freedom  of 
motion,  the  proportions  are  unchangeable ;  and 
in  all  solid  compounds,  which  have  been  accur- 
ately examined,  and  in  which  there  is  no  chance 
of  mechanical  mixture,  the  same  law  s6ems  to 
hold  good.  It  is  certainly  possible  to  dissolve 
different  bodies  in  fluid  menstrua,  in  very 
various  proportions,  but  the  result  may  be  a 
mixture  of  different  solutions,  rather  than  a 
combination.  M.  Berthollet  brings  forward 
glasses  and  alloys  of  metals,  as  compounds,  con- 
taining indefinite  proportions ;  but  it  is  not 
easy  to  prove,  that  in  these,  all  the  eletnents  are 
chemically  combined  ;  and  the  points  of  fusion 
of  alkali,  glass,  and  certain  metallic  oxides,  are 
so  near  each  other,  that  transparent  mixtures 

of  them  may  be  formed.  It  cannot  but  be 

supposed,  that  the  attractive  power  of  matter  is 
general,  but  in  the  formation  of  aggregates,  cer- 
tain arrangements  seem  to  be  always  uniform. 

IS-  M.  Berthollet  conceives,  that  he  has  prov- 
ed that  a  large  quantity  of  a  body  having  a  weak 
affinity,  may  separate  a  part  of  a  second  body, 
from  a  small  quantity  of  a  third,  for  which  it  has  a 
strong  affinity ;  but  even  granting  this,  it  does  not 
destroy  the  idea  of  definite  proportions.  Thus 
in  the  fact,  noticed  by  Bergman,  the  decompo- 
sition of  sulphate  of  potassa  by  nitric  acid,  one 


[119] 

proportion  of  potassa  may  be  separated  from  the 
acid  ;  and  the  other  proportion  may  combine 
with  two  proportions  of  acid  ;  phaenomena  ana- 
logous to  those  of  common  double  affinity. 

M.  Berthollet  states,  that  a  large  quantity  ,of 
potassa  will  separate  a  small  quantity  of  sul- 
phuric acid  from  sulphate  of  baryta ;  but  he 
made  his  experiments  in  contact  with  the  atmos- 
phere, in  which  carbonic  acid  constantly  floats  ; 
and  carbonate  of  potassa  and  sulphate  of  baryta, 
mutually  decompose  each  other  (6).  Even 
allowing  the  correctness  of  his  views,  still  he 
has  not  given  a  complete  statement  of  facts. 
If  potassa  separates  sulphuric  acid  from  baryta, 
either  there  must  exist  an  insoluble  sulphate  of 
baryta,  containing  more  baryta  than  the  com- 
mon sulphate,  and  which  of  course  may  contain 
two  proportions  of  baryta ;  or  baryta,  sulphuric 
acid,  and  potassa,  must  all  be  dissolved,  in  the 
same  fluid,  which  seems  highly  improbable. 
M.  Berthollet  regards  baryta  as  separable  froiQ 
sulphuric  acid,  by  potassa  ;  but  has  not  endea- 
voured to  shew  in  what  form  it  appears  after 
the  process. 

14.  M.  Berthollet  states,  that  soda  is  capable 
ef  separating  a  certain  quantity  of  potassa  from 
sulphuric  acid ;  but,  in  his  experiment,  water  was 
present,  as  the  soda  must  have  been  a  hydrate  ; 
and  he  likewise  used  alcohol ;  and  thephseno- 


I 


[  120  ] 


menon  may  be  a  phaenomenon  of  double  attrac- 
tion, Potassa  has  a  mucli  stronger  attraction 
for  water  than  soda ;  and  the  soda  may  quit  its 
water,  and  the  potassa  its  sulphuric  acid  ;  and 
the  effect  may  be  assisted  by  the  stronger  at- 
traction of  hydrate  of  potassa  for  alcohol. 

In  general,  when  large  quantities  of  fluid  or 
fusible  bodies,  are  used  in  experiments,  the 
attraction  of  the  substances  which  are  capable 
of  acting  upon  each  other,  is  more  readily 
brought  into  play.  In  many  solutions  all  the 
elements  are  in  chemical  combination ;  and 
their  separations  depend  not  merely  upon  the 
relative  attractions  of  their  parts,  but  likewise 
on  the  manner  in  which  they  are  acted  on  by 
water ;  and  earths,  and  oxides,  are  usually 
thrown  down  from  their  solutions  in  union  with 
water. 

15.  When  an  alkali  precipitates  an  earth 
from  its  solution  in  an  acid,  the  earth,  accord- 
ing to  M,  Berthollet's  ideas,  ought  to  fall  down 
in  combination  with  a  portion  of  acid.  But  if 
a  solution  of  potassa  be  poured  into  a  sulphuric 
solution  of  magnesia,  the  precipitate  produced, 
after  being  well  washed,  affords  no  indication 
of  the  presence  of  acid  ;  and  M.  Pfaff  has  shewn 
by  some  very  decisive  experiments,  that  mag- 
nesia has  no  action  upon  neutral  combina- 
tions of  the  alkalies  and  sulphuric  acid ;  and 


[  131  ] 

likewise,  that  the  tartaroiis  acid  is  entirely  se- 
parated from  lime,  and  the  oxalic  acid  from 
oxide  of  lead,  by  quantities  of  sulphuric  acid, 
merely  sufficient  to  saturate  the  two  bases ;  and 
these  are  distinct  and  simple  instances  of  elective 
attraction.    Again,  when  one  metal  precipitates 
another  from  an  acid  solution,  the  body  that  falls 
down  is  usually  free  both  from  acid  and  oxy- 
gene  :  thus  zinc  precipitates  lead  and  tin,  and 
iron,  copper ;  and  the  whole  of  the  oxygene 
and  the  acid,  is  transferred  from  one  metal  to 
the  other. 

16.  M.  Berthollet,  in  crystallizing  sulphate 
of  potassa,  from  acid  solutions,  states  that  he 
obtained  salts,  of  which  the  first  portion  con- 
tained 55.83  of  acid  in  100  parts,  and  another 
portion  only  49-5  ;  but  it  is  far  from  improba- 
ble, that  these  salts  were  both  mixtures  of  the 
acidulous  sulphate,  and  the  neutral  sulphate  of 
potash ;  and  the  idea  is  strengthened  by  the 
circumstance,  that  he  obtained  neutral  sulphate 
from  the  same  solution,  towards  the  end  of  the 
process  ;  but  even  allowing  the  substances  to 
have  been  principally  simple  binary  combina- 
tions, and  not  mixtures,  still  the  potassa  and 
the  acid,  may  be  regarded  in  them  as  in  definite 
proportions.    The  number  representing  potassa 
being  considered  as  90,  and  that  representing" 
sulphuric  acid  as  75?  the  first  may  be  conceived 


[  122  ] 

to  contain  four  of  alkali  and  seven  of  acid,  and' 
the  second,  three  of  alkali  and  four  of  acid. 

In  cases  in  which  solutions  of  salts  are  formed 
in  acid  or  alkaline  menstrua,  which  are  sup- 
posed incapable  of  decomposing  them,  the  re- 
sults must  be  considered  as  depending  upon  a 
new  combination ;  and  in  the  evaporation  of 
the  water  or  of  the  menstruum,  and  the  crystal' 
lization  of  the  remaining  constituents,  the  pro»- 
portions,  that  have  acted,  will  determine  the 
nature  of  the  solids  which  are  formed.  There 
appears  no  difficulty  in  reconciling  the  doctrine 
of  definite  proportions,  with  the  influence  of 
quantity ;  none  of  the  experiments  of  M.  Ber- 
thollet  can  be  considered  as  strictly  contra- 
dictory to  the  doctrine,  and  some  of  the  most 
important  results  of  this  sagacious  chemist  afford 
it  confirmation. 

17.  M.  Berthollet  supposes  that  the  attrac- 
tions of  bodies  for  each  other,  are  inversely,  as 
the  quantities  that  saturate.  Thus,  magnesia 
and  ammonia,  take  up  more  sulphuric  acid  than 
equal  quantities  of  potassa  ;  and  therefore  he 
concludes,  that  magnesia  and  ammonia,  have  a 
stronger  attraction  for  acids  than  potassa:  yet 
potassa  instantly  separates  magnesia  and  am- 
monia from  acids  ;  and  though  the  facility  with 
which  ammonia  is  expelled  from  a  compound^ 
may  be  hypolhetically  accounted  for,  by  assum- 


[  123  ] 


feig  that  the  ease,  with  which  it  takes  the  gaseouS 
state,  assists  its  escape  ;  yet  magnesia  is  in  an 
opposite  case  i  and  to  account  for  chemical 
changes,  by  supposing  the  effects  of  forms  of 
matter,  which  are  about  to  appear,  or  powers  not 
in  actual  existence,  such  as  elasticity  or  cohe- 
sion, is  merely  the  solution  of  one  difficulty, 
by  the  creation  of  another  ;  and  ammonia,  when, 
solid  or  fluid,  should  require  a  new  force  to 
render  it  elastic :  and  the  cohesion,  in  a  com- 
pound, can  only  be  regarded  as  the  exertion  of 
the  chemical  attractions  of  its  elements.  The 
action  between  the  constituents  of  a  compound 
must  be  mutual ;  sulphuric  acid,  there  is  every 
reason  to  believe,  has  as  much  attraction  for 
baryta,  as    baryta  for  sulphuric   acid :  and 
baryta  is  the  alkaline  substance,  of  which  the 
largest  quantity  is  required  to  saturate  sul- 
phuric acid  ;  therefore,  on  M.  Berthollet's  view, 
it  has  the  weakest  affinity  for  that  acid ;  but 
less  sulphuric  acid  saturates  this  substance,  than 
any  other  earthy  or  alkaline  body ;  therefore, 
according  to  M.  Berthollet,  sulphuric  acid  has 
a  stronger  affinity  for  baryta,  than  for  any  other 
substance  ;  which  is  contradictory. 

18.  It  cannot  be  laid  down  as  a  general  law, 
that  the  attractions  of  bodies  are  connected  with 
the  weights  of  the  proportions  in  which  they 
combine;  yet  in  some  cases  the  proportions. 


[  m  ] 

which  unite  in  the  greatest  quantity,  or  the 
bodies  represented  by  the  highest  numbers,  are 
separated  by  proportions  combining  in  smaller 
quantity,  or  by  bodies  represented  by  lower 
numbers.  Thus  gold,  pbtina,  mercury,  and 
silver,  are  separated  in  their  metallic  states  by 
the  common  metals,  which  are  represented  by 
much  lower  numbers,  and  the  metallic  oxides  by 
the  alkalies  ;  but  there  are  many  exceptions; 
and  the  intensity  of  attraction  seems  to  be  de- 
pendent upon  other  causes,  which  are  intimately 
related  to  the  electrical  phaenomena,  to  be  dis- 
cussed in  the  next  section. 

19.  The  uniformity  of  the  law  of  condensa- 
tion, when  gasses  combine  and  form  denser 
gaseous  compounds,  in  which  the  volume  is 
unaltered,  or  in  which  one  of  the  elements  is 
condensed  to     or  in  which  both  are  condensed 
to  ^,  and  the  regularity  of  the  forms  of  solid 
bodies  seem  to  depend  entirely  upon  the  con- 
stancy of  the  nature  of  the  combination,  and 
probably  upon  the  corpuscular  aggregates  being 
all  of  the  same  kind.  If  the  particles  of  matter 
be  supposed  to  be  globular,  or  to  act  in  spheres 
of  attraction  and  repulsion,  it  would  be  easy 
to  account  for  their  forms,  by  supposing  a  few 
independent  primary  arrangements.  Thus, 
four   particles   may  compose  a  tetrahedron, ' 
five,  a  tetraedral  pyramid,  six  an  octaedron, 


C  125  ] 

or  a  triedral  prism,  and  eight,  a  cube  or  a 
rhomboid. 

20.  It  would  be  premature  in  this  part  of  the 
work,  to  enter  upon  any  more  minute  views  of 
the  laws  of  attraction,  and  the  more  refined 
details  will  properly  follow  the  history  of  the 
agencies  of  different  bodies  on  each  other. 

With  respect  to  a  power  so  constantly  in 
action,  it  is  necessary,  however,  even  at  an  early 
period  of  the  study,  to  possess  some  definite 
ideas.  If  it  be  regarded  as  capricious  in  its 
effects,  and  tending  constantly  to  produce 
different  arrangements,  chemistry  would  be 
without  a  guide,  without  certain  combinations, 
and  no  results  of  analysis  could  be  perfectly 
alike;  but  fortunately  for  the  progress  of  sci- 
ence, this  is  not  the  case  ;  the  changes  of  the 
terrestrial  cycle  of  events,  like  the  arrangements 
of  the  heavens,  and  the  system  of  the  planetary 
motions,  are  characterized  by  uniformity  and 
simplicity  ;  weight  and  measure  can  be  applied 
to  them,  their  order  perceived,  arid  their  laws 
discovered. 

VII.  Of  Electrical  Attraction  mid  Repulsion, 
and  their  Relations  to  Chemical  Changes. 

1.  If  a  piece  of  dry  silk  be  briskly  rubbed 
against  a  warm  plate  of  polished  flint  glass,  it 
will  be  found  to  have  acquired  the  property  of 


[  126  ] 

adhering  to  it,  which  it  will  retain  for  some 
seconds  ;  if  at  the  time  this  adhesive  power 
exists,  the  silk  and  glass  be  separated  from  each 
other,  they  will  both  be  found  to  have  gained 
the  property  of  attracting  very  light  substances, 
such  as  the  ashes  of  paper  or  fragments  of  gold 
leaf;  and  the  long  filaments  of  the  silk,  if  there 
be  any,  will  be  seen  to  repel  each  other. 

2.  These  bodies  are  said  to  be  electrically 
excited^  and  the  phsenomena  are  called  electrical 
phaenomena ;  the  peculiar  circumstances  under 
which  they  occur,  are  best  observed  by  the  use 
of  an  instrument  called  the  electrical  machine  ; 
it  consists  of  a  cylinder  of  glass*  supported 
upon  glass  pillars,  and  which  can  be  made  to 
revolve,  so  as  to  press  against  a  cushion  of  silk 
rubbed  over  with  a  little  amalgam  of  zinc  and 
mercury ;  and  of  two  cylinders  of  metal,  one 
in  contact  with  the  cushion,  and  the  other  op- 
posite to  the  glass  cylinder,  both  supported 
upon  glass. 

g.  If  two  gilt  pith  balls,  suspended  upon 
strings  of  silk  covered  with  tinsel,  be  hung  upon 
a  wire,  placed  in  contact  with  either  of  the  me- 
tallic cylinders,  and  the  machine  be  put  in 
action,  the  balls  will  repel  each  other;  but  if 
one  ball  be  attached  to  a  wire,,  connected  with 
one  metallic  cylinder,  and  the  other  ball  be 
*  Plate  II.  fig.  % 


[  1"  ] 

attached  to  a  wire  connected  with  the  other, 
the  two  balls,  when  the  machine  is  put  into 
action,  will  attract  each  other ;  and  at  the  mo- 
ment that  they  come  in  contact,  sparks  of 
light  will  be  perceived,  if  the  experiment  be 
made  under  favourable  circumstances. 

As  the  two  balls,  when  in  contact  with  the 
same  cylinder,  may  be  considered  as  receiv- 
ing the  same  impulse  or  impression,  they  are 
said  to  be  similarly  eleclrijied;  but  -when  in 
contact  with  different  cylinders,  they  are  said 
to  be  differently  eleclrijied;  and  electrified  bodies 
that  repel  each  other,  are  considered  as  in  the 
same  electrical  states ;  those  th?t  attract  each 
other  as  in  different  electrical  states. 

4.  There  are  probably  no  two  bodies  differ- 
ing in  nature,  which  are  not  capable  of  exhibit- 
ing electrical  phsenomena,  either  by  contact, 
pressure,  or  friction ;  but  the  first  substances  in 
which  the  property  was  observed,  were  vitreous 
and  resinous  bodies ;  and  hence  the  different 
states  were  called  states  of  resinous  and  vitreous 
electricity ;  and  resinous  bodies  bear  the  same 
relation  to  flint  glass,  as  silk.  The  terms,  ne^p,' 
tive  and  positive  electricity,  have  been  likewise 
fidopted,  on  the  idea,  that  the  phaenomeija  de- 
pend upon  a  peculiar  subtile  fluid,  which  be- 
comes in  excess  in  the  vitreous,  and  deficient  in 
the  resinous  bodies;  and  which  is  conceived 


[  m  ] 

by  its  motion  and  transfer,  to  produce  the  elec- 
trical phaenomena. 

5.  Flint  glass  and  silk,  silk  and  sulphur, 
sulphur  and  metals,  resin  and  metals,  all  by 
friction  or  contact,  become  strongly  electrical, 
and  of  course  attractive,  and  communicate  their 
attractive  powers  to  small  masses  of  matter 
brought  in  contact  with  them  ;  a  pith  ball, 
or  a  slip  of  gold  leaf  that  has  been  touched 
by  flint  glass,  excited  by  silk,  will  be  repelled 
by  a  ball  or  slip  that  has  been  touched  by  silk 
excited  by  sulphur,  or  by  a  ball  or  slip  that  has 
been  touched  by  sulphur  excited  by  metals,  so 
that  the  attractive  and  repellent  slates,  depend 
entirely  upon  the  actions  of  the  two  substances, 
and  not  upon  any  power  peculiar  to,  and  inhe- 
rent in  each. 

6.  It  is  upon  this  circumstance,  that  the  elec- 
trometer, which  might  be  called  the  differeniial 
one,  is  framed  ;  it  consists  of  two  gold  leaves 
attached  to  a  metallic  plate,  and  included  in  a 
hollow  cylinder  of  glass,*  fixed  upon  another 
metallic  plate,  which  is  connected  with  two 
pieces  of  tin  foil,  pasted  upon  the  glass  oppo- 
site to  the  leaves.  When  any  electrified  body  is 
made  to  touch  the  upper  plate,  the  gold  leaves 
diverge  ;  if  their  divergence  is  increased  by  the 
approach  of  flint  glass  excited  by  silk,  they  are 

•  Plate  II.  fig- 10, 


[  129  ] 

said  to  have  tlie  same  state  as  the  glass,  the 
vitreous  or  the  positive ;  if  their  divergence  is 
diminished,  they  are  said  to  be  in  the  opposite 
state,  or  to  possess  the  resirlous  or  negative 
electricity. 

1.  Wheri  luminous  phaenomena  are  connected 
with  electrical  excitation,  the  different  states 
may  be  known  by  presenting  a  metallic  point 
to  the  excited  body  ;  if  rays  of  light  Issue  from 
the  point  to  the  body,  it  is  said  to  be  negatively 
electrified :  but  if  the  point  appears  simply 
luminous,  without  sending  off  any  rays,  the 
selectricity  is  said  to  be  positive. 

8.  For  measuring  small  degrees  of  electricity 
of  bodies,  as  compared  with  those  of  others  of 
the  same  kind,  the  eleclrical  balance  of  Coulomb 
is  applied;  it  consists  of  a  giJt  pith  ball,  placed 
upon  a  metallic  rod,  on  the  opposite  extremity 
of  which  is  a  thin  leaf  of  metal ;  *the  rod  is 
suspended  horizontally,  by  a  fine  metallic  wire, 
which  passes  into  a  glass  tube,  to  the  top  of 
which  it  is  attached  ;  the  glass  tube  is  inserted 
into  a  cylinder  of  glass,  which  contains  a  cop- 
per ball,  connected  with  a  small  bar  of  metal, 
which  is  carried  through  an  aperture  in  the 
glass  cylinder,  into  the  atmosphere;  a  very 
small  force  only  is  required  to  twiit  the  wire, 
and  when  the  two  balls  are  brought  in  contact, 
and  the  bar  touched  by  the  electrified  body^ 

VOL.  1,  K 


[  130  ] 

thev  gain  the  same  kind  of  electricity,  and  re- 
pel each  other;  and  the  degree  of  their  repulsion 
may  be  measured  by  a  scale  of  degrees,  made 
on  the  circumference  of  the  cylinder.* 

9.  Bodies  receive  the  electrical  influence  in- 
different manners.  If  a  rod  of  glass  be  brought 
in  contact  with  any  excited  electrical  body,  it 
will  receive  the  electrical  influence  in  the  part 
where  it  touched  the  body,  and  will  be  elec- 
trical, to  a  little  distance,  round  the  point  of 
contact;  but  its  remote  parts  will  not  be  affected. 
A  rod  of  metal,  on  the  contrary,  suspended  on 
a  rod  of  glass,  and  brouglit  in  contact  with  an 
electrical  surface,  instantly  becomes  electrical 
throughout.  The  glass,  in  common  philoso- 
phical language,  is  said  to  be  a  nonconductor  of 
electricity,  or  an  substance;  the  metal 

a  conductor.  Some  bodies  are  affected  to  a  much 
greater  extent  than  glass;  but  not  nearly  so 
much  as  metals,  such  are  animal  and  vegetable 
substances,  water,  and  fluids  containing  water ; 
they  are  said  to  be  imperfect  conductors.  Ac- 
cording to  the  statements  of  Mr.  Cavendish, 
iron  conducts  400  millions  of  times  better  than 
water,  sea  water  100  times  better  than  distilled 
water,  and  water  saturated  with  salt,  720  times 
better.  The  mineral  acids  are  the  best  fluid 
conducting  substances  known,  and  after  them, ' 
*  Plate  II.  fig.  11. 


[  131  ] 

saline  solutions,  the  powers  of  which  appear  to 
be  nearly  in  proportion  to  the  quantities  oP 
salts  they  coniain.  Charcoal  and  metals,  and 
the  greater  number  of  inflammable  metallic 
compounds,  are  onduclors.  Alcohol  and  ether^ 
are  very  imperfect  conductors ;  and  sulphur^ 
oils,  resinous  substances,  metallic  oxides  and 
compounds  of  chlorine,  nonconductors. 

10.  There  is  a  stone  found  in  many  parts  of 
the  world,  called  tourmaline,  which  is  sometimes 
crystallized  as  a  nine-sided  prism,  terminated  by 
a  three-sided  and  a  six-sided  pyramid ;  when  this 
subbtance  is  gently  heated,  it  becomes  electrical, 
and  one  extremity,  that  terminated  by  the  six- 
sided  pyramid,  is  positive,  the  other  is  negative  ; 
to  a  certain  extent,  its  electricities  are  exalted 
by  increasing  the  temperature  ;  when  it  begins 
to  cool,  it  is  sdii  found  electrical;  but  the  elec- 
tricities are  changed,  the  pyramid,  before  posi- 
tive, is  now  negative,  and  vice  versa.  When 
the  stone  is  of  considerable  size,  flashes  of  lig-ht 
may  be  seen  along  its  surface. 

There  are  other  gems  and  crystallized  sub- 
stances, which  possess  a  property  similar  to  that 
of  the  tourmaline.  The  luminous  appearance 
of  some  diamonds,  when  heated,  probably  de- 
pends upon  their  electrical  excitation.  The  sub- 
stance called  the  Boracite,  which  is  a  cube, 
having  its  edges  and  angles  defective,  btcomes 

K  2 


[  132  ] 

electrical  by  heat,  and  in  one  variety  presents 
no  less  than  eight  sides,  in  different  states,  four 
positive,  four  negative;  ;ind  the  opposite  poles 
are  in  the  direction  of  the  axes  of  tlie  crystal. 

11.  It  would  appear,  that  in  all  cases  of  elec- 
trical action,  the  two  electrical  states  are  always 
coincident,  either  in  different  parts  of  the  same 
body,  or  in  two  bodies  ;  and  that  they  are  always 
equal,  and  capable  of  neutralizing  each  other. 
If  a  connection  be  made  by  a  wire,  between  the 
positive  and  negative  conductors  of  tlie  elec- 
trical machine,  during  the  time  of  its  action,  all 
electrical  effects  cease;  and  to  produce  a  suc- 
cession of  effects,  both  conductors  must  be 
brought  near  bodies  connected  with  the  ground, 
which  gain  the  opposite  slate,  in  consequence  of 
what  may  be  called  induclion,  and  which  will  be 
explained  in  the  next  paragraph. 

12.  When  a  nonconductor,  or  imperfect 
conductor,  provided  it  be  a  ihin  plate  of  matter, 
placed  upon  a  conductor,  is  brought  in  con- 
tact, with  an  excited  electrical  body;  the  surface, 
opposite  to  that  in  contact,  gains  the  opposite 
electricity  from  that  of  the  excited  body ;  and 
if  the  plate  be  removed  from  the  conductor  and 
the  source  of  electricity,  it  is  found  to  possess 
two  surfaces  in  opposite  states.  If  a  conductor 
be  brought  into  the  neighbourhood  of  an  ex- 
iiited  body,  the  air,  which  is  ^  nonconductor, 


[  133  ] 

being  between  them ;  that  extremity  of  the 
conductor,  which  is  opposite  to  the  excited 
body,  gains  the  opposite  electricity,  and  the 
other  extremity,  if  opposite  to  a  body  connected 
with  the  ground,  gains  the  same  electricity,  and 
the  middle  point  is  not  electrical  at  all.  This 
is  easily  proved,  by  examining  the  electricity 
of  three  sets  of  gilt  pith  balls  raised  on  wires 
on  the  dilferent  parts  of  the  conductor,  which 
is  thus  affected  by  induced  electricity. 

If,  instead  of  air,  a  plate  of  mica  or  glass  be 
between  the  two  conductors,  the  same  phaeno- 
mena  will  occur  ;  so  that  it  would  appear  that 
the  conductor  merely  gains  two  opposite  elec- 
tricities, or  polar  electricities,  of  the  same  kind 
as  those  of  the  nonconductor.  The  phsenoraena 
of  sparks,  of  discharges,  and  of  accumulated 
electricity,  depend  upon  this  law.  In  the  case  of 
the  common  electrical  spark,  a  stratum  of  air  is 
charged  in  the  same  manner  as  a  glass  bottle, 
partially  coated  with  tin  foil,  is  charged  in  the 
Leyden  experiment ;  *  when  the  hand  is  held 
near  the  positive  conductor  of  an  electrical 
machine,  the  person  standing  on  the  ground, 
the  hand  is  rendered  negative,  and  the  states 
become  exalted,  till  the  polarities,  as  they  may 
l^e  called,  are  annihilated  through  the  air, 
*  Plate  II.  fig.  12. 


[  134  ] 

producing  a  spark,  a  snap,  and  a  distinct  sensa- 
tion. If  a  number  of  small  pith  balls,  placed 
upon  a  surface  of  metal,  are  caused  to  approach 
an  electrified  body,  they  are  brought  into  the 
opposite  state  by  induction,  and  are  attracted 
towards  the  body ;  but  when  they  come  in 
contact  with  it,  this  state  is  destroyed,  they 
gain  the  same  state,  and  are  repelled ;  and  if 
they  are  properly  placed,  their  alternate  attrac- 
tions and  repulsions  may  be  produced,  as  long 
as  the  machine  is  in  action. 

13.  If  a  number  of  cylinders  of  metal,  iimi' 
lated  on  glass,  be  placed  in  a  line  with  each 
other,  but  not  in  contact,  and  the  last  be  con- 
nected with  the  ground  ;*  when  a  powerfully  elec- 
trified conductor  of  a  machine,  is  brought  op- 
posite to  the  first,  they  will  all  become  electrical, 
and  every  insulated  cylinder  will  present  two 
poles  ;  the  negative  pole  of  one  being  opposite  to 
the  positive  pole  of  the  other  ;  and  if  a  spark  is 
produced  by  means  of  the  last,  sparks  occur 
throughout  the  whole  arrangement.  In  like 
manner  a  series  of  Leyden  jars  may  be  made  to 
charge  each  other,  the  outer  surface  of  the  first 
renderins;  neoiative  the  inner  surface  of  the 
second,  and  so  on  ;  and  by  connecting  the  sur- 
faces, that  have  the  same  kind  of  electricity,  in, 

*  Plate  III.  fig.  13. 


[  135  ] 

the  first  place,  and  then  connecting  two  oppo- 
site surfaces  in  the  series,  a  powerful  explosion* 
may  be  produced. 

14.  When  a  point  connected  with  the  ground, 
is  brought  near  an  electrified  substance,  it 
rapidly  gains  the  opposite  state,  and  an  imme- 
diate discharge  takes  place,  which  continues  till 
the  equilibrium  is  restored.  Large  surfaces  are 
electrified  by  induction  much  more  slowly 
than  small  ones,  and  are  capable  of  accumulat- 
ing much  more  electricity  ;  which  renders  the 
discharge  from  them  much  more  violent.  In- 
deed the  electrical  powers  seem  entirely  to 
belong  to  the  surfaces  of  bodies,  and  not  to  be 
connected  with  the  quantity  of  solid  matter 
they  contain. 

15.  It  is  in  consequence  of  the  principle  of 
induction,  that  the  condensing  electrometer  is 
so  much  more  sensible  than  the  common  electro- 
meter ;  this  instrument  consists  of  two  plates 
of  polished  metal,-f  the  surfaces  of  which  are 
parallel,  one  connected  with  the  plate  of  the 
electrometer,  the  other  moveable,  in  connexion 
with  the  ground,  and  the  plates  are  very  near 
each  other.  When  the  body  supposed  to  be 
electrical,  is  made  to  touch  the  top  of  the  electro- 
meter, and  is  afterwards  removedj  in  separating 
the  plates,  the  effect  will  be  perceived. 

*  Plate  in.  fig.  14.  t  Plate  III.  fig.  15. 


[  136  ] 

16.  The  difference  in  what  are  called  the 
conducting   powers  of  bodies,  seems  to  de- 
pend entirely  upon  the  different  manner  in 
which  they  receive  the  electrical  polarities,  or 
in  which  their  parts  become  capable  of  com- 
municating attractive  or  repellent  powers,  to 
other  matter.  Nonconductors  appear  to  receive 
polarities,  only  with  great  diSicultyj  but  retain 
them  for  a  long  while,  and  present  probably  a 
number  of  different  alternations  of  poles,  within 
a  small  space,  and  cannot  be  effected  to  any 
great  distance.    Imperfect  conductors  receive 
polarity  with  more  facility,  but  present  fewer 
alternations,  and  piieserve  their  electricities  for 
a  shorter  time.    Perfect  conductors  are  easily 
affected  throughout ;  but  present  at  most  only 
two  poles,  and  the  powers  rapidly  destroy  each 
other.    The  diflScuIty  with  which  nonconduc- 
tors receive  polarity,  is  shewn  in  the  phaeno. 
mena  of  charging  thick  and  thin  coated  plates 
of  glass  and  mica.  The  thin  plates  are  capable 
of  being  charged  much  more  highly  than  the 
thick  ones,  and  the  accumulation  on  the  oppo- 
site surfaces  is  much  greater. 

Rarefied  air  or  gaseous  matter,  is  much  more 
susceptible  of  receiving  polarities,  than  dense 
air  or  gaseous  matter  ;  and  hence,  the  electrical 
spark  will  pass  much  further  through  rarefied 
air  or  light  gasses,  than  through  dense  air  or 


[  137  3 

heavy  gasses  ;  it  passes  much  further  likewise 
in  gasses  J  than  in  nonconducting  fluids. 

17.  If  a  nonconducting  surface,  coated  with 
two  conducting  surfaces,  and  charged  so  as  to 
give  a  spark  of  an  inch  in  length,  through  air, 
be  connected  by  both  its  conducting  surfaces, 
with  a  similar  apparatus  not  charged  ;  then  both 
systems  piay  be  discharged  together;  but  the 
spark  they  will  give,  will  be  only  half  as  long  as 
the  single  one  would  have  given,  if  discharged 
alone.  The  quantity  of  the  electricity  in  this 
Cc^se,  is  conceived  not  to  be  altered,  but  its 
intensity,  is  said,  to  be  only  half  as  great  when  it 
is  discharged  fron^  a  double  siirface ;  and  these 
expressions  of  intensity  and  quantity,  though 
it  is  not  easy  to  attach  any  very  definite  ideas 
to  them,  are  nevertheless  useful,  in  giving  more 
facility  to  the  arrangement  of  some  important 
electrical  phsenomena. 

18.  When  very  small  conducting  surfacesare 
used  for  conveying  very  large  quantities  of'elec- 
tricity,  they  become  ignited  ;  and  of  the  different 
conductors  that  have  been  compared,  charcoal  is 
most  easily  heated  by  electrical  discharges,*  next 
iron,  platina,  gold,  then  copper,  and  lastly  zinc. 
The  phtcnomena  of  electrical  ignition,  whether 

*  The  conclusions  are  drawn  from  experiments  made  by 
^he  electricity  of  the  Voltaic  apparatus. 


[  138  J 

faking  place  in  gaseous,  fluid,  or  solid  bodies, 
always  seem  to  be  the  result  of  a  violent  exertion; 
ofthe  electrical  attractive  and  repellent  powers, 
which  may  be  connected  with  molions  ofthe  par- 
ticles of  the  substances  affected.  That  no  subtile 
fluid,  such  as  the  matter  of  heat  has  been  ima- 
gined to  be,  can  be  discharged  from  these  sub- 
stances, in  consequence  of  the  effect  ofthe  eleC' 
tricity,  seems  probable,  from  the  circumstance, 
that  a  wire  of  platina  may  be  preserved  in  a  state 
of  intense  ignition  in  vacuo,  by  means  of  the 
Voltaic  apparatus,  (an  instrument  which  will 
be  immediately  described),  for  an  unlimitecT 
time  ;  and  such  a  wire  cannot  be  supposed  to 
contain  an  inexhaustible  quantity  of  subtile 
matter. 

19.  Certain  changes  in  the  forms  of  sub- 
stances, are  always  connected  with  electrical  ef- 
fects. Thus  when  vapour  is  formed  or  con- 
densed, the  bodies  in  contact  with  the  vapour, 
become  electrical.  IF,  for  instance,  a  plate 
of  metal,  strongly  heated,  be  placed  upon 
an  electrometer,  and  a  drop  of  water  be  poured 
upon  the  plate,  at  the  moment  the  water  rises 
in  vapour,  the  gold  leaves  of  the  electrometer 
diverge  with  negative  electricity.  Sulphur,,, 
when  melted,  becomes  strongly  electrical  dur- 
ing the  time  of  congelation ;  and  the  case  seems 


I 


[  139  1 

to  be  analo2;ous,  with  respect  to  nonconducting 
substances  in  general,  when  they  change  their 
forms. 

20.  As  electricity  appears  to  result  from  the- 
general  powers  or  agencies  of  matter,  it  is  ob- 
vious, that  it  must  be  continually  exhibited  in 
nature,  and  that  a  number  of  important  phseno- 
mena  must  depend  upon  its  operation.  When 
aqueous  vapour  is  condensed,  the  clouds  formed 
are  usually  more  or  less  electrical ;  and  the  earth 
below  them  being  brought  into  an  opposite  state, 
by  induction,  a  discharge  takes  place  when  the 
clouds  approach  within  a  certain  distance,  con* 
stituting  lightning ;  and  the  undulation  of  the 
air,  produced  by  the  discharge,  is  the  cause  of 
thunder,  which  is  more  or  less  intense,  and  of 
longer  or  shorter  duration,  according  to  the 
quantity  of  air  acted  upon,  and  the  distance  of  the 
place,  where  the  report  is  heard  from  the  point 
of  the  discharge.  It  may  not  be  uninteresting 
to  ffive  a  further  illustration  of  this  idea;  elec- 
trical  effects  take  place  in  no  sensible  time  ;  it 
has  been  found,  that  a  discharge  through  a  cir- 
cuit of  four  miles,  is  instantaneous  ;  but  sound 
moves  at  the  rate  of  about  twelve  miles  in  a  minute. 
Now,  supposing  the  lightning  to  pass  through 
a  space  of  some  miles,  the  explosion  will  be 
first  heard  from  the  point  of  the  air  agitated, 
jiearest  to  the  spectator ;  it  will  gradually  come 


[  140  ] 

from  the  more  distant  parts  of  the  course  of 
the  electricity,  and  last  of  all,  will  be  heard 
from  the  remote  extremity  ;  and  the  different 
degrees  of  the  agitation  of  the  air,  and  likewise 
the  difference  of  the  distance,  will  account  for 
the  different  intensities  of  the  sound,  and  its 
apparent  reverberations  and  changes. 

21.  In  a  violent  thunder  storm,  when  the 
sound  instantly  succeeds  the  flash,  the  persons 
who  witness  the  circumstance,  are  in  some  dan- 
ger;  M'hen  the  interval  is  a  quarter  of  a  minute, 
they  are  secure.  In  a  thunder  storm,  the  lowest 
ground  is  the  safest  place,  and  a  horizontal  pos,- 
ture,  the  least  dangerous ;  the  neighbourhood 
of  trees,  or  buildings,  should  be  avoided,,  par-, 
ticularly  of  trees,  the  living  juices  of  which  are 
calculated  to  conduct  the  electricity,  and  make 
part  of  a  circuit.  In  a  house,  the  cellars  are 
the  safest  places,  and  in  a  room  the  person 
should  stand  as  far  as  possible  from  the  fire. 
The  means  adopted  by  Franklin  have,  however, 
to  a  great  extent,  averted  the  destructive  effects 
of  atmospheric  electricity;  and  by  pointed 
conductors,  the  thunder  cloud  is  disarmed  of 
its  terrors,  and  the  lightning  slowly  discharged 
in  harmless  corruscations. 

If  a  school-boy's  kite  be  mounted  high  in  the 
atmosphere,  by  means  of  a  string,  containing  fila-, 
i^ients  of  metal,  fastened  to  a  cowductor,  fixed  on. 


[HI] 

a  glass  rod;  the  conductor  usually  gives  signs  of 
electricity,  which  will  be  greatest,  when  clouds 
are  floating  in  the  atmosphere ;  and  it  was  by 
means  of  a  simple  apparatus  of  this  kind,  that 
the  American  Philosopher  effected  his  grand 
discovery  of  the  identity  of  electricity  and 
lightning. 

The  water-spout  is  probably  the  result  of 
the  operation  of  a  weakly  electrical  cloud,  at  an 
inconsidei able  elevation  above  the  sea,brou2;ht 
into  an  opposite  state  :  and  the  attraction  of  the 
lower  part  of  the  cloud,  for  the  surface  of  the 
water,  may  be  the  immediate  cause  of  this 
extraordinary  phenomenon. 

The  corruscations  of  the  Aurora  Borealis, 
and  Australis,  precisely  resemble  strong  artifi- 
cial electricity,  discharged  through  rare  air; 
and  as  the  poles  are  nonconductors,  being  coated 
with  ice  or  snow,  and  as  vapouf  must  be  con» 
stantly  formed  in  the  atmosphere  above  them  ; 
the  idea  of  Franklin  is  not  improbable,  that 
the  Auroras  may  arise  from  a  discharge  of  elec- 
tricity, accumulated  in  the  atmosphere  near  the 
poles,  into  its  rarer  parts ;  though  other  solu- 
tions of  the  phsenomena  may  be  given  on  the 
idea,  that  the  earili  itself  is  endowed  with  elec- 
trical polarity;  or  that  the  motions  of  the  at- 
mosphere produce  the  effect ;  but  all  views  on 
this  subject  must  be  hypothetical,  and  the  light 


^  t  142  J 

may  result  from  other  causes  than  electrical 
action. 

22.  The  common  exhibition  of  electrical  ef- 
fects, is  in  attractions  and  repulsions,  in  which 
masses  of  matter  are  concerned;  but  there  are 
other  effects,  in  which  the  changes  that  take 
place,  operate  in  a  manner,  in  small  spaces  of 
lime  imperceptible,  and  in  which  the  effects  are 
produced  upon  the  chemical  arrangements  of 
bodies. 

If  a  piece  of  zinc  and  a  piece  of  copper  be 
brought  in  contact  with  each  other,  they  will 
form  a  weak  electrical  combination,  of  which 
the  zinc  will  be  positive,  the  copper  negative  ; 
this  may  be  learnt  by  the  use  of  a  delicate  con- 
densing electrometer;  or  by  pouring  zinc  filings 
through  boles,  in  a  plate  of  copper,  upon  a 
■common  electrometer;  but  the  power  of  the 
combination  may  be  most  distinctly  exhibited 
in  the  experiments,  called  Galvanic  experiments, 
by  connecting  the  two  metals,  which  must  be 
in  contact  with  each  other,  with  a  nerve  and 
muscle  in  the  limb  of  an  animal  recently  de- 
prived of  life,  a  frog  for  instance;  at  the  mo- 
ment the  contact  is  completed,  or  the  circuit 
made,  one  metal  touching  the  muscle,  the  otiier" 
the  nerve,  violent  contractions  of  the  limb  will 
be  occasioned.  If  a  piece  of  zinc  and  copper, 
in  contact  with  each  other  in  one  point,  b^j 


placed  in  contact  in  other  points  with  the  sams 
portion  of  water ;  the  zinc  will  corrode  and 
attract  oxygene  from  the  water,  much  more 
rapidly  than  if  it  had  not  been  in  contact  with 
the  copper;  and  if  a  small  quantity  of  sulphuric 
acid  be  added  to  the  water,  it  will  be  seen  that 
globules  of  inOammable  air  are  given  off  from 
the  copper,  though  it  is  not  dissolved  nor  acted 
upon. 

23'  The  connection  of  chemical  effects,  with 
the  exhibition  of  electrical  pov/ers,  is  however 
best  witnessed  in  combinations,  in  which  these 
powers,  are  accumulated  by  alternations  of  dif- 
ferent metals  and  fluids.  If  plates  of  copper 
and  zinc  two  or  three  inches  square,  and  pieces 
of  cloth  of  the  same  size  soaked  in  a  solution 
of  salt,  or  sal  ammoniac,  or  nitre,  be  arranged  in 
the  order  of  copper,  zinc,  moistened  cloth,  and 
so  on,  and  made  into  an  insulated  pile,  of  which 
the  series  are  200  f  several  remarkable  pheno- 
mena will  occur. 

When  one  hand  is  applied  to  the  bottom 
of  the  pile,  and  the  other  to  the  top,  both 
hands  being  moistened,  a  shock  will  be  per- 
ceived. 

When  a  metallic  wire,  having  a  bit  of  well 
burned  charcoal  at  its  extremity,  is  made  to  con- 
nect the  two  extremities  of  the  pile,  a  spark  will 
•  See  Plate  III.  fig.  15,  l6. 


[  144  ] 

he  percdved,  or  the  point  of  Uie  charcoal  will 
become  ignited. 

A  wire  connected  with  the  top  of  the  jsile, 
brought  in  contact  with  a  sensible  electrometer, 
will  cause  theleaves  to  diverge ;  and  by  removing 
the  wire  and  applying  excited  glass  to  the  elec- 
trometer, it  will  be  found  that  the  electricity  is 
positive ;  a  wire  connected  with  the  bottom  of 
the  pile  will  affect  it  with  negative  electricity  * 
a  wire  from  the  middle  of  the  pile  will  have  no 
influence  on  the  instrument. 

If  wires  of  platina  from  the  extremities  of  the 
pile  be  introduced  into  water,  or  into  two  pot"- 
tiorls  of  water  connected  by  moist  substances, 
oxygene  gas  vv^ill  separate  at  the  wire  exhibiting 
the  positive  electricity,  and  hydrogene  gas  at  the 
wire  exhibiting  the  negative  electricity;  and  th^ 
proportions  are  such,  when  the  proper  circurri- 
stances  existj  that  they  will  produce  water  when 
exploded  by  the  electrical  spark,  that  is,  the 
volume  of  hydrogene  will  be  to  that  of  oxygene^ 
as  two  to  one. 

If  the  same  wires  be  introduced  into  a  strong 
solution  of  sulphuric  or  phosphoric  acid,  or  into 
metallic  solutions,  oxygene  will  separate  at  the 
positive  surface,  the  inflammable  or  metallic 
matter  contained  in  the  solution,  at  the  negative 
surface. 

When  any  substance  rendered  fluid  by  heat^ 


[  145  ] 

■consisting  of  water,  oxygene  and  inflammable 
or  metallic  matter,  is  exposed  to  those  wires, 
similar  phseoomeoa  occur. 

When  any  solution  of  a  neutral  salt  contain- 
ing acid,  united  to  alkaline,  earthy,  or  common 
metallic  matter,  is  used ;  besides  the  other  phae- 
nomena  that  take  place,  acid  matter  collects 
round  the  positively  electrified  surface;  alkali, 
earth,  or  oxide,  round  the  negative  surface ;  and 
if  two  separate  vessels  are  employed  to  contain 
the  solution,  connected  by  moist  asbestus,  it  is- 
found,  that  the  acid  collected  in  the  vessel  con- 
taining the  wire,  positively  electrified,  will  be 
in  definite  proportion  to  the  matter  collectedin 
the  other  cup ;  that  is,  it  will  form  with  it  a 
neutrosaline  compound. 

If  a  solution  of  muriatic  acid  in  water,  be 
acted  on  by  the  wires,  hydrogene  will  separate 
at  the  negative  surface,  and  chlorine  or  oxy- 
muriatic  gas,  at  the  positive  surface. 

24.  This  apparatus,  which  exhibits  in  so 
distinct  a  manner  the  relations  of  electrical 
polarities  to  chemical  attractions,  is  the  graijd 
invention  of  Volta,  made  known  in  the  first 
year  of  this  century;  its  electrical  effects  have 
been  long  known,  but  the  phsenomena  of  its 
operation  in  decomposing  bodies,  are  of  n^rie 
recent  discovery. 

Several  modes  of  constructing  it  have  been 

VOL.  I,  L 


[  146  ] 


adopted,  some  of  which  are  much  superior  ia 
point  of  convenience,  to  that  which  has  been  just 
described. 

One  mode  is  by^  soldering  the  plates  of  zinc 
and  copper  together,  and  by  cementing  them 
into  troughs  of  baked  wood,  covered  with  ce- 
ment, in  the  regular  order,  so  as  to  form  cells 
to  be  filled  with  the  fluid  menstruum;  each 
surface  of  zinc  being  opposite  to  a  surface  of 
copper;  and  this  combination  is  very  simple 
and  easy  of  application. 

Another  form  is  that  of  introducing  plates  of 
copper  and  of  zinc,  fastened  together  by  a  slip 
of  copper,  into  a  trough  of  porcelain  contain- 
ing a  number  of  cells  corresponding  to  the 
number  of  the  series.  The  different  series  may 
be  introduced  separately  into  the  troughs,  and 
taken  out  without  the  necessity  of  changing  the 
fluid,  or  they  may  be  attached  to  a  piece  of 
baked  wood  (and  when  the  number  is  not  very 
large)  introduced  into  the  cells,  or  taken  out 
together.* 

25'  Similar  polar  electrical  arrangements  to 
those  formed  by  zinc  and  copper,  may  be 
made  by  various  alternations  of  conducting 
and  imperfect . conducting  substances;  but  for 
the  accumulation  of  the  power,  the  series  must 
€onsiist   of  three   substances   or  more,  and 

•■-    •   ■       :  -  ^    » -Plate  IIL  fig.  IT- 


[147] 

one  at  least  must  be  a  conductor.  Silver  or. 
copper  when  brought  in  contact  with  a  solu- 
tion of  a  compound  of  solphur  and  potassa,  at 
one  extremity,  and  in  contact  with  water  or  a 
solution  of  nitric  acid,  at  the  other  extremity, 
some  saline  solution  being  between  the  sulphu- 
retted and  the  acid  solutions,  forms  an  element 
of  a  powerful  combination,  which  will  give 
shocks  when  fifty  are  put  together ;  the  order 
is  copper,  cloth  of  the  same  size  moistened  with 
solution  of  nitric  acid,  cloth  moistened  in  solu- 
tion of  common  salt,  cloth  moistened  in  solu- 
tion of  the  compound  of  sulphur,  copper,  and 
so  on;  the  specific  gravities  of  the  solutions  • 
should  be  in  the  order  in  which  they  are  ar- 
ranged, to  prevent  the  mixture  of  the  acid  and 
sulphuretted  solution  ;  that  is,  the  heaviest  so- 
lution should  be  placed  lowest. 

The  tables  annexed  contain  some  series,  which 
form  Voltaic  electrical  combinations,  arranged 
in  the  order  of  their  powers ;  the  substance 
most  active  beins;  named  first  in  each  column. 


A 


[  148  ] 


Table  of  some  Electrical  Arrangements,  ivhich  by 
Combination  form  Voltaic  Batteries,  composed  of 
two  Conductors  and  one  imperfect  Conductor. 


Zinc 

Each  of  the^e  is  the 

Solutions  of  nitric  acid 

Iron 

positive  pole  to  all  the 

of  muriatic  acid 

Tin 

metals  below  it,  and 

of  sulphuric  acid 

Lead 

negative  with  respect 

of  sal-ammoniac 

Copper 
Silver 

to  the  metals  above  it 

of  nitre 

in  the  column. 

other  neutral  salts 

Gold 

Platina 

Charcoal 

I'able  of  some  Electrical  Arrangements ,  consisting 
of  one  Conductor  and  two  imperfect  Conductors. 


Solution  of  sulphur  and  potash 

Copper 

Nitric  acid 

of  potash 

Silver 

Sulphuric  acid 

of  soda 

Lead 

Muriatic  acid 

Tin 

Any  solutions 

Zinc 

containing  acid 

other  motals 

Charc(  al 

The  metals  having  the  strongest  attraction 
for  oxygene,  are  the  metals  which  form  the 
positive  pole,  in  all  cases  in  which  the  fluid 
menstrua  act  chemically  by  affording  oxygene ; 
but  when  the  fluid  menstrua  affrjrd  sulphur  to 
the  metals,  the  metal  having;  the  strongest  at' 
traction  for  sulphur  under  the  existing  circum- 
stances, determines  the  positive  pole  ;  thus  in  a 
series  of  copper  and  iron,  introduced  inio  a  por- 
celain trough,  the  cells  of  which  are  filled  with 
water  or  with  acid  solutionSj  the  iron  is  positive, 


[  149  ] 

and  the  copper  negative;  but  when  the  cells  are 
filled  with  solution  of  sulphur  and  potash,  the 
copper  is  positive  and  the  iron  negative. 

In  all  coiTibinations  in  which  one  metal  is 
concerned,  the  surface  opposite  the  acid,  is  ne- 
gative, that  in  contact  with  solution  of  alkali 
and  sulphur,  or  of  alkali,  is  positive. 

26.  The  energy  of  a  combination  to  give  re- 
pulsive or  attractive  powers  to  masses  of  matter 
or  to  affect  the  electrometer,  seems  to  increase 
with  the  number  of  the  series,  as  does  the  power 
to  give  shocks,  and  to  decompose  bodies  ;  but 
as  long  as  the  surface  of  the  gold  leaves  in  the 
electrometer,  or  of  the  human  body,  or  of  the 
water  acted  upon,  is  the  same,  and  less  than  that 
of  the  acting  plates,  increase  of  surface  of  the 
plates  is  connected  with  no  increase  of  power. 
In  the  operation  upon  metallic  substances  or 
charcoal,  or  upon  good  imperfect  conductors,  the 
case,  however,  is  different.  Thus,  though  a  bat- 
tery composed  of  plates  of  copper  and  zinc  a  foot 
square,  will  not  affect  the  condensing  electro- 
meter more,  nor  decompose  more  water,  nor 
give  greater  shocks  to  the  fingers,  than  a  battery 
containing  plates  of  an  inch  square,  yet  it  will 
ignite  more  than  100  times  as  much  fine  platina 
wire,  and  decompose  sulphuric  acid,  and  the 
water  in  strong  saline  solutions  with  infinitely 
more  rapidity.    This  has  been  expressed  by 


[  150  ] 

Mr.  Cavendish  in  the  statement,  that  the  inten- 
sity is  the  same  in  both  cases  ;  but  that  the 
quantity  is  in  some  ratio  as  the  surface.  The 
quantity  in  the  small  plates  is  as  much  or  more 
than  such  imperfect  conductors  as  water  and 
the  human  body  can  carry  off  by  a  small  sur- 
face;  whilst  better  conductors  can  transmit 
the  whole  quantity  afforded  by  the  large  plates, 
even  when  used  in  very  thin  laminae  or  wires. 
The  correctness  of  this  view  may  be  shewn  by 
a  very  simple  experiment.  Let  two  platina 
wires,  from  the  extremities  of  a  battery  com- 
posed of  plates  of  a  foot  square,  be  plunged  into 
water,  the  quantity  of  gas  disengaged  from  the 
wires  will  be  nearly  the  same  as  from  an  equal 
number  of  plates  of  an  inch  square  ;  let  the  fin- 
gers of  each  hand,  moistened  with  water,  be 
applied  to  the  two  extremities  of  the  battery,  a 
shock  will  be  perceived  nearly  the  same  as  if 
there  had  been  no  connection  between  the  wires 
and  the  water.  Whilst  the  circuit  exists  through 
the  human  body  and  through  water,  let  a  wire 
attached  to  a  thin  slip  of  charcoal  be  made 
to  connect  the  two  poles  of  the  battery,  the 
charcoal  will  become  vividly  ignited.  The  wa- 
ter and  the  animal  substance  discharge  the  elec- 
tricity of  a  surface,  probably  not  superior  to 
their  own  surface  of  contact  with  the  metals ; 
the  wires  discharge  all  the  residual  electricity 


r  ] 


of  the  plates;  and  if  a  similar  expeiiment  be 
made  on  plates  of  an  inch  square,  there  will 
scarcely  be  any  sensation,  when  the  hands  are 
made  to  connect  the  ends  of  the  battery,  a 
circuit  being  previously  made  through  water ; 
and  no  spark  when  charcoal  is  made  the  me- 
dium of  connection,  imperfect  conductors  hav- 
ing been  previously  applied. 

The  first  distinct  experiment  upon  the  igni- 
ting powers  of  large  plates  was  performed  by 
M,  M.  Fourcroy,  Vauquelin,  and  Thenard.  But 
the  grandest  combination  ever  constructed  for 
exhibiting  the  effects  of  extensive  surface,  was 
made  by  Mr.  Children:  it  consists  of  twenty 
double  plates  four  feet  by  two  ;  of  which  the 
whole  surfaces  are  exposed,  in  a  wooden 
trough,  in  cells  covered  with  cement,  to  the 
action  of  diluted  acids.  This  battery,  when 
in  full  action,  had  no  more  effect  on  water 
or  on  the  human  body  than  one  containing 
an  equal  number  of  small  plates;  but  when 
the  circuit  was  made  through  metallic  wires, 
the  phsenomena  were  of  the  most  brilliant 
kind.  A  platina  wire  of  one  thirtieth  of  an 
inch  in  thickness,  and  eighteen  inches  long, 
placed  in  the  circuit  between  bars  of  copper, 
instantly  became  red  hot,  then  white  hot,  the 
brilliancy  of  the  light  was  soon  insupportable 
to  the  eye,  and  in  a  few  seconds  the  metal  fell 


[  152  ] 

fused  into  globules.  The  other  metals  were 
easily  fused  or  dissipated  in  vapour  by  this 
power.  Points  of  charcoal  ignited  by  it  pro- 
duced a  light  so  vivid;  that  even  the  sunshine 
ciDmpared  with  it  appeared  feeble. 

Mr.  Children  has  another  battery  in  con- 
struction, the  plates  of  which  are  double  the  size 
of  that  just  described,  and  which  are  to  be  ar- 
ranged in  pairs  in  single  troughs,  and  connected 
by  means  of  plates  of  lead  in  regular  order. 

27.  The  most  pov/erful  combination  that  exists 
in  which  number  of  alternations  is  combined 
with  extent  of  surface,  is  that  constructed  by  the 
subscriptions  of  a  few  zealous  cultivators  and  pa- 
trons of  science,  in  the  laboratory  of  theRoyal  In- 
stitution. It  consists  of  two  hundred  instruments, 
connected  together  in  regular  order,  each 
composed  often  double  plates  arranged  in  cells 
of  porcelain,  and  containing  in  each  plate  thirty- 
two  square  inches  ;  so  that  the  whole  number 
of  double  plates  is  2000,  and  the  whole  surface 
128000  square  inches.  This  battery,  when  the 
cells  were  filled  with  60  parts  of  water  mixed 
with  one  part  of  nitric  acid,  and  one  part  of  sul- 
phuric acid,  afforded  a  series  of  brilliant  and 
impressive  effects.  When  pieces  of  charcoal 
about  an  inch  long  and  one  sixth  of  an  inch  in 
diameter,  were  brought  near  each  other  (within 
the  thirtieth  or  fortieth  part  of  an  inch,)  a  bright 


[  153  ] 

spark  was  produced,  and  more  than  half  the 
volume  of  the  charcoal  became  ignited  to  white- 
ness, and  by  withdrawing  the  points  from  each 
other  a  constant  discharge  took  place  through 
the  heated  air,  in  a  space  equal  at  least  to  four 
inches,  producing  a  most  brilliant  ascending 
arch  of  light,  broad,  and  conical  in  form  in  the 
middle.*   When  any  substance  was  introduced 
into  this  arch,  it  instantly  became  ignited  ;  pla- 
tina  melted  as  readily  in  it  as  wax  in  the 
flame  of  a  common  candle  ;  quartz,  the  sap- 
phire, magnesia,  lime,  all  entered  into  fusion ; 
fragments  of  diamond,  and  points  of  char- 
coal and  plumbago,  rapidly  disappeared,  and 
seemed  to  evaporate  in  it,  even  when  the  con- 
nection was  made  in  a  receiver  exhausted  by  the 
air  pump  ;  but  there  was  no  evidence  of  their 
having  previously  undergone  fusion. 

When  the  communication  between  the  points 
positively  and  negatively  electrified  was  made 
in  air,  rarefied  in  the  receiver  of  the  air  pump, 
the  distance  at  which  the  discharge  took  place 
increased  as  the  exhaustion  was  made,  and 
when  the  atmosphere  in  the  vessel  supported 
only  one  fourth  of  an  inch  of  mercury  in  the 
barometrical  gage,  the  sparks  passed  through 
a  space  of  nearly  half  an  inch  ;  and  by  with- 
drawing the  points  from  each  other,  the  dis- 
charge was  made  through  six  or  seven  inches, 
*  Plate  III.  fig.  18. 


t  154  ] 

producing  a  most  beautiful  corruscation  of  pur- 
ple light,  the  charcoal  became  intensely  ignited, 
aild  some  platina  wire  attached  to  it,  fused  with 
brilliant  scintillations,  and  fell  in  large  globules 
upon  the  plate  of  the  pump.    All  the  phaeno- 
mena  of  chemical  decomposition  were  produced 
with  intense  rapidity  by  this  combination.  When 
the  points  of  charcoal  were  brought  near  eacK. 
other  in  nonconducting  fluids,  such  as  oils, 
ether,  and  oxymuriatic  compounds,  brilliant 
sparks  occurred,  and  elastic  matter  was  rapidly 
generated ;  and  such  was  the  intensity  of  the 
electricity,  that  sparks  were  produced,  even  in 
good  imperfect  conductors,  such  as  the  nitric 
and  sulphuric  acids. 

When  the  two  conductors  from  the  ends  of 
the  combination  were  connected  with  a  Leyden 
battery,  one  with  the  internal,  the  other  with 
the  external  coating,  the  battery  instantly  be- 
came charged,  and  on  removing  the  wires,  and 
making  the  proper  connections,  either  a  shock 
or  a  spark  could  be  perceived ;  and  the  least 
possible  time  of  contact  was  sufficient  to  renew 
the  charge  to  its  full  intensity. 

28.  The  general  facts  of  the  connection  of 
the  increase  of  the  different  powers  of  the  bat- 
tery with  the  increase  of  the  number  and  sur- 
face of  the  series,  are  very  distinct ;  but  to  de- 
termine the  exact  ratio  of  the  connection  is  a 
problem  not  easy  of  solution. 


[  155  3 


M.  M.  Gay  Lussac  and  Thenard  have  an- 
nounced, that  the  power  of  chemical  decompo- 
sition increases  only  as  the  cube  root  of  the 
number  of  plates ;  but  their  experiments  were 
made  with  parts  of  piles  of  a  construction  very 
unfavourable  for  gaining  accurate  results ;  and 
in  various  trials  made  witli  great  care  in  the 
laboratory  of  the  Royal  Institution,  the  results 
were  altogether  different.    The  batteries  em- 
ployed were  parts  of  the  great  combination, 
carefully  insulated,  and  similarly  charged  ;  arcs 
of  "zinc  and  silver  presenting  equal  surfaces,  and 
arranged  in  equal  glasses  filled  with  the  same 
kind  of  fluid,  were  likewise  used ;  and  the 
tubes  for  collecting  the  gasses  were  precisely 
similar,  and  filled  with  the  same  solution  of 
potassa.*  In  these  experiments  ten  pairs  of  plates 
produced  fifteen  measures  of  gas  :  twenty  pairs 
in  the  same  time  produced  forty  nine :  again, 
ten  pairs  produced  five  measures  ;  forty  pairs  in 
the  same  time  produced  seventy-eight  measures. 
In  experiments  made  with  arcs,  and  which  ap- 
peared unexceptionable,  four  pairs  produced 
one  measure  of  gas  ;  twelve  pairs  in  the  same 
time  produced  nine  and       of  gas :  six  pairs 
produced  one  measure  of  gas  ;  thirty  pairs, 
under  like  circumstances,  produced  24-5  rnea- 

«-  Plate  IV.  fig.  19. 


[156] 

sures  ;  and  these  quantities  are  nearly  as  the 
squares  of  the  numbers, 

.  It  would  appear  from  the  experiments  of 
Vanmarum  and  Pfaff,  confirmed  by  those  of 
Messrs.  Wilkinson,  Cuthbertson,  and  Singer, 
that  the  increase  of  power  of  batteries,  the 
plates  of  which  have  equal  surfaces,  is  as  the 
number.  I  found  that  ten  double  plates,  each 
having  a  surface  of  a  hundred  square  inches, 
ignited  two  inches  of  platina  in  wire  of  one 
eightieth  of  an  inch  ;  twenty  plates,  live  inches ; 
forty  plates,  eleven  inches ;  but  the  results  of 
experiments  on  higher  numbers  were  not  sa- 
tisfactory ;  for  one  hundred  double  plates  of 
thirty-two  square  inches  each,  ignited  three 
inches  of  platina  wire  of  one  seventieth,  and 
one  thousand  ignited  only  thirteen  inches,  and 
the  charges  of  diluted  acid  were  similar  in  both 
cases. 

The  power  of  ignition  for  equal  numbers  of 
plates,  seems  to  increase  in  a  veiy  high  ratio 
with  the  increase  of  surface,  probably  higher 
than  even  the  square  ;  for  twenty  double  plates, 
containing  each  two  square  feet  did  not  ignite 
one  sixteenth  as  much  wire  as  twenty,  con- 
taining each  eight  square  feet,  the  acid  em- 
ployed being  of  the  same  strength  in  both 
cases. 


[  157  1 

Numerous  circumstances  are.  opposed  to  the 
accuracy  of  experiments  made  with  high  num- 
bers, or  very  large  surfaces;  the  activity  of  com- 
binations rapidly  diminishes  in  consequence  of 
the  decomposition  of  the  menstruum  used  ;  and 
this  decomposition  is  much  more  violent,  the 
greater  the  number  and  surface  of  the  alterna- 
tions ;  the  vapour  rising  likewise,  when  the  ac- 
tion is  intense,  interferes  by  its  conducting 
power,  and  the  gas  by  its  want  of  conducting 
power ;  and  when  series  containing  above  five 
hundred  double  plates  are  used,  unless  the  in- 
sulation is  very  perfect,  there  is  a  considerable 
loss  of  electricity  ;  thus  the  great  battery  of  two 
thousand  double  plates  belonging  to  the  Royal 
Institution,  will  scarcely  act  by  its  true  poles, 
when  arranged  on  a  floor  of  stone,  and  requires 
not  merely  the  insulation  of  porcelain,  but 
likewise  of  dry  wood ;  and  when  arranged  on 
a  stone  floor,  it  is  hardly  possible  to  walk  near 
any  of  the  approaching  series  without  receiving 
shocks.    In  cases  of  the  ignition  of  wire,  the 
cooling  influence  of  the  substances  in  contact, 
and  of  that  part  of  the  chain  not  ignited,  inter- 
feres most,  when  small  quantities  of  wire  are 
employed  and  with  feeble  powers;  and  hence  the 
effect  is  at  first  in  a  lower  and  then  in  a  higher 
ratio  than  the  number,  when  the  whole  ranaie 
is  small,  as  in  the  experiments  above  stated.  If 


[  158  ] 

there  is  an  imperfect  connection  in  any  of  the 
series,  a  great  diminution  of  power  is  the  conse- 
quence. If  one  plate  is  corroded,  or  covered  with 
more  oxide  than  the  rest,  there  is  a  general  loss 
of  effect.  If  copper  is  substituted  for  zinc,  or  zinc 
for  copper,  in  a  single  series,  the  result  is  similar ; 
and  I  find  that  a  platina  wire,  introduced  in  the 
place  of  an  arc  of  silver  and  zinc,  in  a  series  of 
thirty,  diminished  its  power  of  producing  gas  so 
much,  that  it  was  equal  only  to  that  of  four. 

Q9.   The  circumstance  most  important  in 
electricity,  perhaps,  is  its  connection  with  the 
chemical  powers  of  matter,  and  the  manner  in 
which  it  modifies,  exalts,  or  destroys  these 
powers.    Most  of  the  substances  that  act  dis- 
tinctly upon  each  other  electrically,  are  likewise 
such  as  act  chemically,  when  their  particles  have 
freedom  of  motion;  this  is  the  case  with  the 
different  metals,  with  sulphur  and  the  metals, 
with  acid  and  alkaline  substances  ;  and  the  rela 
tions  of  bodies  are  uniform ;  those  that  have  the 
highest  attracting  powers  being  in  the  relation 
of  positive^  in  arrangements  in  which  chemical 
changes  can  go  on.   Thus,  as  is  shown  in  the 
tables,  page  I48,  zinc  is  positive  with  respect  to 
iron,  iron  with  respect  to  copper,  copper  with 
respect  to  silver,  and  so  on  in  all  combinations 
in  which  oxygcne  is  capable  of  being  combined 
with  the  metal;  but  copper  is  positive  \vith 


[  159  } 

respect  to  iron  in  compoimd  menstrua  contain- 
ing sulphur  ;  the  electrical  power  being  in  all 
eases  apparently  connected  with  the  power  of 
chemical  combination. 

Crystals  of  oxalic  acid  touched  by  dry  quick- 
lime exhibit  electrical  powers;  and  the  acid  is 
negative,  the  lime  positive. 

All  the  acid  crystals,  upon  which  I  have 
experimented  when  touched  by  a  plate  of 
metal,  render  it  positive.  And  in  Voltaic  com- 
binations with  single  plates  or  arcs  of  metal,  as 
is  stated  in  page  149,  the  metal  is  negative  on 
the  side  opposed  to  the  acid,  and  positive  on 
the  side  or  pole  opposed  to  the  alkali. 

Bodies  that  exhibit  electrical  effects  previous 
to  their  chemical  action  on  each  other,  lose 
this  power  during  combination.  Thus,  if  a 
polished  plate  of  zinc  is  made  to  touch  a 
surface  of  dry  mercury,  and  quickly  sepa- 
rated, it  is  found  positively  electrical,  and  the 
effect  is  increased  by  heat ;  but  if  it  be  so  heated 
as  to  amalgamate  with  the  surface  of  the  mer- 
cury, it  no  longer  exhibits  any  marks  of  elec- 
tricity. The  case  is  analogous  with  copper 
and  sulphur ;  and  iron  acts  more  powerfully 
than  zinc  with  quicksilver  in  a  permanent  elec- 
trical combination,  as  in  the  experiments  of 
Colonel  Haldane ;  apparently,  because  under, 
common  circumstances  it  is  incapable  of  amal- 
gamating with  that  metal.  When  any  conduct- 


[  160  ] 


ing  substance,  capable  of  combining  with  oxy- 
gene,  has  its  positive  electricity  increased,  it 
will  attract  oxygene  with  more  energy  from 
any  imperfect  conducting  medium  ;  and  metal- 
lic bodies  that  in-  their  common  state  have  no 
action  upon  water,  such  as  silver,  attract  oxy- 
gene from  it  easily,  when  connected  with  the 
positive  pole  in  the  Voltaic  circuit;  and  bodies 
that  act  upon  water,  such  as  zinc  and  iron, 
so  as  to  decompose  it  slowly,  refuse  to  attract 
oxygene  from  it  when  they  are  negatively  elec- 
trified in  the  Voltaic  circuit. 

Acids,  which  are  negative  with  respect  to 
alkalies,  metals,  and  earths,  are  separated  from 
these  bodies  in  the  Voltaic  circuit  at  the 
positive  surface ;  and  alkalies,  metals,  and 
earths,  are  separated  from  acids  at  the  negative 
surface :  and  such  are  the  attracting  powers  of 
these  surfaces,  that  acids  are  transferred  through 
alkaline  solutions,  and  alkalies  through  acid 
solutions,  to  the  surfaces  where  they  have  their 
points  of  rest.  It  is  easy  to  shew  this  by  making 
a  combination  of  three  agate  cups,*  one  con- 
taining sulphate  of  potassa,  one  weak  nitric 
acid,  and  the  third  distilled  water,  and  connect- 
ing them  by  asbestus  moistened  in  pure  water, 
in  such  a  manner,  that  the  surface  of  the  acid 
is  lower  than  the  surface  of  the  fluid  in  the 
*  Plate  IV.  fig.  20. 


[161] 

©ther  two  cups.  When  two  wires  of  platlna 
from  a  powerful  Voltaic  apparatus  are  intro- 
duced into  the  two  extreme  cups,  the  solution 
of  the  salt  being  positively  electrified,  a  decom- 
position will  take  place,  and  in  a  certain  time  a 
portion  of  potassa  will  be  found  dissolved  in 
the  cup  in  contact  with  the  negative  wire, 
though  the  fluid  in  the  middle  cup  will  still  be 
sensibly  acid. 

30.  Such  are  the  decomposing  powers  of 
electricity,  that  not  even  insoluble  compounds 
are  capable  of  resisting  their  energy  ;  for  even 
glass,  sulphate  of  baryta,  fluor  spar,  8cc.  when 
moistened  and  placed  in  contact  with  elec- 
trified surfaces  from  the  Voltaic  apparatus,  are 
slowly  acted  upon,  and  the  alkaline,  earthy,  or 
acid  matter  carried  to  the  poles  in  the  common 
order.  Not  even  the  most  solid  aggregates,  nor 
the  firmest  compounds,  are  capable  of  resisting 
this  mode  of  attack  ;  its  operation  is  ^low,  but 
the  results  are  certain  ;  and  sooner  or  later,  by 
means  of  it,  bodies  are  resolved  into  simpler 
forms  of  matter. 

31.  It  is  in  consequence  of  the  phaenomena 
of  electrical  decomposition,  in  which  metals, 
inflammable  bodies,  alkalies,  earths  and  oxides, 
are  determined  to  the  negative  surface,  and 
oxygene,  chlorine,  and  acids  to  the  positive  sur- 
face, thai  for  some  time  it  was  conqeived,  that 

VOL.  I.  M 


[  162  ] 


various  substances,  might  be  composed  from 
pure  water,  by  means  of  electricity,  st  ch  as 
potassa,  soda,  and  muriatic  acid.  A  strict  inves- 
tigation of  the  circumstances  under  which  these 
substances  appeared,  led  me  to  discover  that 
they  were  always  furnished  from  the  vessels,  or 
from  impurities  in  the  water,  and  enabled  me  to 
determine  the  general  principles  of  electrical 
decomposition,  and  to  apply  this  power  to  the 
resolution  of  some  species  of  matter,  of  unknown 
nature,  into  their  elements. 

32.  The  connection  of  electrical  pbaenomena 
and  chemical  changes  is  evident  likewise  in  the 
general  phsenomena  of  the  battery.  The  most 
powerful  Voltaic  combinations  are  formed  by 
substances  that  act  chemically  with  most  energy 
upon  each  other ;  and  such  substances  as  undergo 
no  chemical  changes  in  the  combination,  fe;shibit 
no  electrical  powers.  Thus  zinc,  copper,  and  ni- 
tric acid  form  a  powerful  battery  ;  whilst  silver, 
gold,  and  water,  which  do  not  act  chemically  on 
each  other,  in  series  of  the-same  number,  produce 
no  sensible  effect.  These  circumstances  led  some 
philosophers  to  suppose,  at  an  early  period  of  the 
investigation  of  the  electrical  powers  of  metals, 
that  they  were  entirely  the  result  of  chemical 
changes  :  that  as  heat  was  produced  by  this 
action,  when  exerted  under  common  circum- 
stances, so  electricity  resulted  from  it  under 


[  163  ] 

other  circumstances  ;  and  many  of  the  phaeno- 
mena  were  conformable  to  such  an  idea,  and 
some  ingenious  enquirers  adopted  it  to  such  an 
extent,  as  to  suppose  electricity  in  all  cases 
owing  to  this  cause. 

This  generalization,  whether  applied  to  Vol- 
taic or  to  common  electricity,  seems,  however, 
to  be  incorrect.  Zinc  and  copper,  as  has  been 
stated,  diffefent  metals  and  oxalic  acid,  diffe- 
rent metals  and  sulphur,  or  charcoal,  exhibit 
electrical  effects  after  mere  contact,  and  that  in 
cases  when  not  the  slightest  chemical  change  can 
be  observed  ;  and  if  in  these  experiments  chemi- 
cal pha:nomena  are  produced  by  the  action  of 
menstrua,  all  electrical  effects  immediately  cease: 
and  if  is  not  philosophical  to  assume  a  cause 
to  account  for  an  effect,  when  no  such  cause  can 
be  perceived. 

It  has  been  supposed  that  the  action  of 
the  common  electrical  machine  depends  upon 
the  oxidation  of  the  amalgam  ;  but  I  found  by 
mounting  a  small  machine  in  a  glass  vessel,  in 
such  a  manner  that  it  could  be  made  to  revolve 
in  any  species  of  gas,  that  it  was  active  in  hy- 
drogene  gas,  and  more  active  in  carbonic  acid 
gas  than  in  the  atmosphere  (probably  owing  to 
its  greater  density).  The  experiment  has  been 
several  times  repeated  under  different  circum- 
stasoGes,  and  uniformly  with  the  same  results ; 

M  S 


[  164  ] 

and  may  be  regarded  as  decisive  in  this  im- 
portant question. 

33-  Electrical  effects  are  exhibited  by  the  same 
bodies,  when  acting  as  masses,  which  produce 
chemical  phaenomena  when  acting  by  their  par- 
ticles ;  it  is  not  therefore  improbable,  that  the 
primary  cause  of  both  may  be  the  same,  and 
that  the  same  arrangements  of  matter,  or  the 
same  attractive  powers,  which  place  bodies  in 
the  relations  of  positive  and  negative,  i.  e.  which 
render  them  attractive  of  each  other  electrically, 
and  capable  of  communicating  attractive  powers 
to  other  matter,  may  likewise  render  their  par- 
ticles attractive,  and  enable  them  to  combine, 
when  they  have  full  freedom  of  motion. 

It  is  not  a  little  in  favour  of  this  hypothesis, 
that  heat,  and  sometimes  heat  and  light,  result 
from  the  exertion  of  both  electrical  and  che- 
mical attractive  powers  ;  and  that  by  rendering 
bodies,  which  on  contact  are  in  the  relation  of 
positive  to  othersj  still  more  highly  positive, 
as  has  been  stated,  page  160,  their  powers  of 
combination  are  increased ;  whereas,  when  they 
are  placed  in  a  state  corresponding  to  the  nega- 
tive electrical  state,  their  powers  of  union  are 
destroyed.  That  acids  can  be  detached  from 
alkalies,  oxygene  and  chlorine  from  inflammable 
matter  by  metallic  substances,  or  by  a  fluid  men- 
struum highly  positive,  is  likewise  favourable 
to  the  supposition. 


[  165  ] 

$4'  This  view  of  the  possibility  of  the  de- 
pendance  of  electrical  and  chemical  action  upon 
the  same  cause,  has  been  much  misrepresented. 
It  has  been  supposed  that  the  idea  was  enter- 
tained, that  chemical  changes  were  occasioned 
by  electrical  changes  ;  than  which  nothing  is 
further  from  the  hypothesis,  which  I  have  ven- 
tured to  advance.    They  are  conceived,  on  the 
contrary,  to  be  distinct  phaenomena  ;  but  pro- 
duced by  the  same  power,  acting  inone  case  on 
masses,  in  the  other  case  on  particles.  The  hy- 
pothesis has  been  attempted  to  be  controverted 
by  experiments  which  are  far  from  satisfactory, 
and  some  of  which  have  no  connection  with  it. 
It  has  been  said  that  acids  rendered  positive 
by  the  common  machine,  will  still  combine 
with  alkalies,  and  that  other  contradictory  re- 
sults may  be  obtained  ;  but  a  non-conducting 
acid,  though  brought  in  contact  with  a  positive 
surface,  electrified  by  the  common  machine,  is 
not  rendered  positive  throughout ;  but  gains 
a  polar  electricity,  which  extends  only  to  a 
certain  depth  into  the  crystals,  and  the  ex- 
terior surface,  if  electrical  at  all,  is  negative: 
and  if  a  wire,   positively  electrified  by  the 
common  machine,  be  introduced  into  an  acid 
solution,  this  solution,  if  at  all  affected,  when 
made  to  act  upon  another  solution,  will  be  ne- 
gative at  its  point  of  action ;  that  is,  it  will  be 


[  166  ] 

positive  near  the  wire,  but  will  be  in  the  oppo- 
site state  with  regard  to  another  surface.  And 
eommon  electricity  is  too  small  in  quaistity,  in  its 
usual  form  of  application,  to  influence  chemical 
changes  ;  for  it  requires  a  very  strong  machine 
acting  upon  a  very  small  surface,  to  produce 
any  sensible  polar  decompositions  of  bodies. 

35'  The  power  of  action  of  the  Voltaic  ap- 
paratus, seems  to  depend  upon  causes  similar 
to  those  which  produce  the  accumulation  in  the 
Leyden  battery  namely,  the  property  of  non- 
conductors and  im perfect  conductors  to  receive 
electricar  polarities  from,  and  to  communicate 
them  to  conductors  ;  but  its  permanent  action  is 
connected  with  the  decomposition  of  the  chemical 
menstrua  between  the  plates.  Each  plate  of  zinc 
is  made  positive,  and  each  plate  of  copper  ne- 
gative, by  contact ;  and  all  the  plates  are  so  ar- 
ranged with  respect  to  each  other  as  to  have  their 
electricities  exalted  by  induction,  so  that  every 
single  polar  arrangement,  heightens  the  electri- 
city of  every  other  polar  arrangement ;  and  the 
accumulation  of  power  increases  with  the  number 
of  the  series.    When  the.  battery  is  connected 
in  a  circle,  the  effects  are  demonstrated  by  its 
constant  exhibition  of  chemical  agencies,  and 
the  powers  exist  as  long  as  there  is  any  men- 
struum to  decompose :  but  when  it  is  insulated, 
and  the  extreme  poles  of  zinc  and  copper  are 


E  167  3 


unconnected,  no  effects  whatever  are  perceived 
to  take  place,  no  chemical  changes  go  on,  and 
it  exhibits  its  influence  only  by  communi- 
cating very  weak  charges  to  the  electrometer, 
the  end  terminated  by  zinc  communicating  a 
positive  charge,  that  terminated  by  copper,  a 
negative  charge. 

That  each  plate  of  the  most  oxidable  metal  in 
the  apparatus,  is  in  the  relation  of  positive,  and 
each  plate  of  the  least  oxidable,  in  the  relation 
ef  negative,  and  that  every  series  is  possessed 
of  similar  and  equal  polarity,  is  shewn  by  a  very 
simple  experiment ;  forty  rods  of  zinc  of  the 
same  size,  connected  with  forty  silver  wires 
precisely  similar,  were  introduced  in  the  regu- 
lar order  into  similar  glasses  filled  with  a  solu- 
tion of  muriate  of  ammonia,  rendered  slightly 
acid  by  muriatic  acid ;  as  long  as  the  extreme 
parts  remained  unconnected,  no  gas  was  dis- 
engaged from  the  silver,  and  the  zinc  was 
scarcely  acted  upon;  when  they  were  connected, 
all  the  plates  of  zinc  were  dissolved  much  more 
rapidly,  and  hydrogene  gas.  was  evolved  from 
every  silver  wire.  And  in  another  experiment, 
in  which  several  of  these  wires  at  equal  dis- 
tances were  introduced  into  small  glass  tubes, 
it  was  found  that  equal  quantities  of  hydrogene 
were  produced, 

36,  It  seems  absolutely  necessary  for  the  ex- 


[  168  ] 

hibition  of  the  powers  of  the  Voltaic  apparatus, 
that  the  fluid  between  the  plates  should  be  sus- 
ceptible of  chemical  change,  which  appears  to 
be  connected  with  the  property  of  double  po- 
larity, of  being  rendered  positive  at  one  surface, 
and  negative  at  the  other.  There  are  substances 
that  are  imperfect  conductors,  v/hich  are  capa- 
ble of  receiving  only  one  kind  of  electricity, 
when  made  parts  of  the  Voltaic  circuit,  and 
which  M.  Elirmans  who  discovered  them,  has 
named  unipolar  bodies.    Perfectly  dry  soap, 
and  the  flame  of  phosphorus,  when  connected 
with  the  two  extremities  of  the  Voltaic  appa- 
ratus, and  with  the  ground,  discharge  only  the 
negative  electricity.    The  flames  of  alcohol, 
hydrogene,  wax,  and  oil,  discharge  under  like 
circumstances  only  the  positive  electricity ;  but 
all  these  bodies   when   connected  with  one 
pole  only  oF  the  pile,  and  with  the  ground, 
destroy  the  divergence  of  the  leaves  of  the 
electrometer  connected  with  that  end.  It  is  not 
difficult  to  exhibit  these  phsenomena  when  the 
atmosphere  is  dry,  by  means  of  two  hundred 
pair  of  plates  carefully  insulated  :  an  insulated 
gold  leaf  electrometer  having  a  moveable  wire 
attached  to  it,  should  be  connected  with  each  end 
of  the  pile  :  when  either  electrometer  is  brought 
in  contact  with  soap,  the  soap  being  connected 
with  Ihe  ground,  the  slight  divergence  of  the 


[  169  ] 

leaves  will  cease;  when  the  soap  is  connected 
with  both  electrometers  and  with  the  ground, 
the  divergence  of  the  leaves  of  the  electrometer 
connected  with  the  end  terminated  by  the  zinc, 
will  continue,  the  leaves  of  the  other  electro- 
meter will  collapse.  The  opposite  effect  occurs, 
when  the  flame  of  a  taper  is  connected  with 
both  electrometers  and  with  the  ground. 

The  unipolar  conductors  are  incapable  of 
being  active  in  any  part  of  the  pile,  and  in  this 
respect  agree  with  nonconductors;  many  of 
which,  it  is  probable,  if  examined  in  their  rela* 
tions  to  electricities  of  low  intensity,  would 
exhibit  similar  differences, 

37-  There  are  no  fluids  known,  except  such 
as  contain  water,  which  are  capable  of  being 
made  the  medium  of  connection  between  the 
metals,  or  metal  of  the  Voltaic  apparatus  ;  and 
in  cases  in  which  Voltaic  batteries  have  been 
said  to  be  constructed  by  metals  and  paper,  or 
metals  and  starch,  or  other  like  substances,  the 
feeble  effects  produced,  are  merely  owing  to 
the  small  quantity  of  water  adhering  to  these 
substances,  which  will  not  act  when  carefully 
dried.  The  instrument,  called  by  M.  de  Luc, 
the  electrical  column,  formed  of  zinc,  Dutch 
leaf,  and  paper,  and  which  he  appears  to  con- 
sider as  a  different  combination  from  the  pile  of 
Volta,,  seems  to  be  merely  a  feeble  Voltaic  appa^ 


[  170  ] 


ratus,  in  which  the  quantity  of  electricity  is  not 
sufficiently  great  to  produce  any  chemical  chan- 
ges, or  distinct  phaenomena  of  ignition  ;  but  in 
which  the  intensity  of  the  small  quantity  exist- 
ing, when  the  combination  amounts  to  40O  or 
500,  is  sufficient  to  enable  it  to  affect  the  electro- 
meter, and  to  act  through  a  plate  of  air. 

It  is  very  probable  that  the  power  of  water 
to  receive  double  polarities,  and  to  evolve 
oxygene  and  hydrogene,  is  necessary  to  the 
constant  operation  of  the  connected  apparatus  ; 
and  that  acids,  or  saline  bodies,  increase  the 
action,  by  affording  elements  which  possess  op- 
posite electricities  to  each  other,  when  mutually 
excited ;  the  action  of  the  chemical  menstrua 
exposes  continually  new  surfaces  of  metal ;  and 
the  electrical  equilibrium  may  be  conceived  in 
consequence,  to  be  alternately  destroyed  and 
restored,  the  changes  taking  place  in  impercep- 
tible portions  of  time. 

The  manner  in  which  aqueous  fluids  receive 
and  communicate  electrical  polarity,  is  sheww 
by  a  very  simple  experiment ;  let  a  number  of 
fine  metallic  surfaces  or  flattened  wires  (of  tin 
for  instance)  be  made  to  swim  in  a  narrow 
trough  containing  water ;  and  let  two  wires  from 
the  exiFeraities  of  a  Voltaic  battery  of  1000 
double  plates,  be  plunged  into- the  remote  ends 
of  the  trough,  one  into  one  end,  the  other  into 


t  171  ] 

the  other  end.  The  metals  swiramhig  on  the 
water  will  immediately  acquire  electrical  po- 
larity ;  and  the  positive  and  negative  poles  will 
be  regularly  opposed  to  each  other,  the  pole  of 
the  metal  ©pposite  to  the  wire  positively  elec- 
trified, will  be  found  to  be  negative,  giving  off 
hydrogene,  the  other  pole  will  deposite  oxide  ; 
the  next  wire  to  this  will  present  the  alternate 
order,  which  will  be  preserved  in  all  of  them ; 
those  most  remote  from  the  right  line  of  the 
circuit,  will  be  least  affected.  If  the  battery 
be  in  a  ,  highly  active  state,  tlie  different 
wires  will  attract  each  other  by  their  opposite 
poles,  and  Ihe  circle  will  at  length  be  closed 
with  the  production  of  brilliant  sparks.  The 
phasiiomena  are  precisely  analogous  to  those 
pbasnomena  in  magnetism,  presented  by  a 
number  of  flattened  wires  of  soft  iron,  made  to 
swim  upon  water,  and  rendered  magnetic  by 
the  opposite  poles  of  two  powerful  magnets ; 
each  wire  has  a  north  pole  and  a  south  pole; 
and  in  the  alternation,  the  different  poles  are 
attractive  of  each  other. 

38.  That  the  decomposition  of  the  chemical 
agents  is  connected  with  the  enera^ies  of  the 
pile,  is  evident  from  all  the  experiments  that 
have  been  made;  as  yet  no  sound  objection  has 
been  urged  against  the  theory  that  the  contact 
of  the  metals  destroys  the  electrical  equilibrium, 


[  172  ] 

and  that  the  chemical  changes  restore  ft ;  and 
in  consequence  that  the  action  exists  as  long  as 
the  decompositions  continue ;  and  this  conclu- 
sion is  confirmed  by  the  late  researches  made 
by  M.  M.  Gay  Lussac  and  Thenard,  on  the  great 
pile  constructed  by  order  of  the  French  govern- 
ment. The  manner  in  which  chemical  changes 
tend  to  restore  the  electrical  equilibrium,  is 
shewn  by  a  remarkable  experiment  on  the  elec- 
trization of  mercury,  which  I  have  very  lately 
made.  A  few  globules  of  mercury  are  placed  in 
a  vessel  containing  commsn  pump  water ;  or  any 
water  that  contains  a  small  quantity  of  saline  im- 
pregnation ;  wires  from  a  battery  of  iOOO  double 
plates,  not  very  strongly  charged,  are  introduced 
into  the  vessel  opposite  to  each  other,  so  as  to 
reach  the  bottom ;  as  soon  as  the  circle  is  com- 
pleted, the  mercury  will  be  violently  agitated, 
each  globule  will  become  elongated  towards 
the  positive  pole,  but  will  retain  its  circular 
outline  in  the  part  opposite  to  the  negative 
pole  ;  oxide  will  be  given  off  from  this  part, 
which  is  positive,  but  no  hydrogene  from  the 
part  which  is  negative,  and  the  oxide  will  pass 
in  a  rapid  current  from  the  positive  towards  the 
negative  pole.  As  long  as  no  hydrogene  is  given 
off,  the  globule  is  in  contained  agitation,  and 
a  stream  of  oxide  flows  with  great  rapidity  from 
the  positive  to  the  negative  surfaces ;  and  the 


[  173  ] 

negative  surfaces  of  the  mercury  approach 
rapidly  towards  the  positive,  vkrhich  are  at  rest ; 
if  the  conducting  power  of  the  water  is  exalted 
by  the  addition  of  more  of  the  saline  impreg- 
nation, or  if  the  charge  of  the  battery  be  in- 
creased, hydrogene  will  be  given  off  from  the 
negative  poles ;  and  the  instant  this  happens 
the  globules  become  stationary  ;  as  if  the  same 
power  which  gave  motion  to  the  mercury  was 
neutralized  by,  or  employed  in,  the  evolution  of 
the  hydrogene.    There  are  many  other  remark- 
able phsenomena  connected  with  the  operation 
of  electricity  on  mercury,  in  contact  with  water  ; 
which  may  be  urged  in  favour  of  the  idea,  that 
chemical  and  electrical  attraction  depend  upon 
the  same  cause,  and  which  will  possibly  lead  to 
new  views  respecting  the  elements  of  matter ; 
but  the  consideration  of  them  properly  belongs 
to  a  more  advanced  division  of  this  work. 

39.  The  illustrious  inventor  of  the  new  elec- 
trical apparatus,  has  given  it  the  name  of  the 
electromotive  apparatus,  and  has  founded  his 
theory  of  its  operation  upon  the  Franklinian 
idea  of  an  electrical  fluid,  for  which  certain 
bodies  have  stronger  attractions  than  others; 
and  he  conceives,  that  in  his  pile  the  upper 
plate  of  zinc  attracts  electricity  from  the  copper, 
the  copper  from  the  water,  the  water  again  from 


-E  ] 


the  next  plate  of  zinc,  the  next  plate  of  zinc 
from  the  next  plate  of  copper,  and  so  on. 

This  hypothesis  applies  very  happily  to 
most  of  the  phaenomena  of  the  action  of  the 
insulated  pile,  and  the  pile  connected  by  either 
of  its  extremities  with  the  ground ;  but  does 
not  explain  with  the  same  facility,  the  powers 
of  the  apparatus  connected  in  a  circle,  in 
which  each  plate  of  zinc  must  be  supposed 
to  have  the  same  quantity  of  electricity  as  each 
plate  of  copper  ;  for  it  can  only  receive  as  much 
as  the  copper  can  give,  unless  indeed  the  phse- 
nomena  of  the  circular  apparatus  be  considered 
as  depending  upon  the  constant  and  rapid  cir- 
culation of  the  natural  quantity  of  electricity, 
in  the  different  series  ;  which  requires  the  proof 
of  a  constant  power  to  attract  electricity  from 
one  body,  at  the  same  time  that  it  is  giving  it 
off,  to  another. 

40.  Whatever  may  be  the  happiest  approxi- 
mation to  the  true  theory  of  the  Voltaic  instru- 
ment, it  can  scarcely  be  doubted  that  the 
electrical  organs  of  certain  animals  depend 
upon  similar  arrangements  of  exciting  bodies. 
The  shock  of  the  G/mnotus  Electricus,  and 
the  7or/>^f/(3,  resemble  the  Voltaic  shock;  and 
the  power  resides  in  organs  which  consist  of 
^  number  of  similar  alternations  of  different 


[  175  ] 

substances.  Tlie  ejGTects  are  analogous  to  those 
which  a  Voltaic  apparatus  of  small  surface,  con- 
sisting of  very  numerous  but  not  very  powerful 
series,  would  produce.  It  has  been  conceived 
that  other  phaenomena  of  living  action  may  be 
connected  with  the  operation  of  weak  electrical 
powers;  such  a^  secretion  ;  and  some  ingenious 
hints  on  this  subject  have  been  advanced  by  Dr. 
Wjoliaston  and  Mr.  Home,  and  some  experi- 
ments relating  to  the  subject  instituted  by  Mr. 
Brande.  Such  enquiiies  are  worthy  of  further 
pursuit,  as  they  may  tend  to  elucidate  some  im- 
portant functions  of  the  animal  oeconomy :  but 
they  must  not  be  confounded  with  certain, 
vague  speculations,  that  have  been  advanced  by 
some  authors,  on  the  general  dependence  of 
nervous  or  sensitive  action,  and  muscular  or 
irritable  action,  upon  electricity ;  such  specu- 
lations are  mere  associations  of  words  derived 
from  known  phaenomcna,  and  applied  illogi- 
cally  to  unknown  things.  The  laws  of  dead  and 
living  nature  appear  to  be  perfectly  distinct : 
material  powers  are  made  subservient  to  the 
purposes  of  life,  and  the  elements  of  matter  are 
newly  arranged  in  living  organs ;  but  they  are 
merely  the  instruments  of  a  superior  principle. 
As  electrical  changes  are  almost  constantly 
taking  place  in  the  atmosphere,  and  as  the  dif- 
ferent substances  composing  the  exterior  of  the 


[  176  ] 

globe,  bear  different  electrical  relations  to  each 
other,  it  is  very  probable  that  many  of  the  che- 
mical changes  taking  place  on  the  surface,  are  in- 
fluenced by  the  action  of  weak  electrical  powers : 
such  as  the  decomposition  of  the  surfaces  of 
rocks,  the  modifications  of  soils,  the  formation 
of  acid,  and  developement  of  alkaline  com- 
pounds; and  the  mutual  agencies  of  the  ele- 
ments in  the  earth,  the  sea,  and  the  atmosphere, 
may  be  assisted  or  modified  by  the  circumstances 
of  general  electrical  action. 

41.  With  regard  to  the  great  speculative 
questions,  whether  the  electrical  phsenomena 
depend  upon  one  fl,uid,  in  excess  in  the  bodies 
positively  electrified,  and  in  deficiency  in  the 
bodies  negatively  electrified,  or  upon  two  dif- 
ferent fluids,  capable  by  their  combination 
of  producing  heat  and  light,  or  whether  they 
may  be  particular  exertions  of  the  general  at- 
tractive powers  of  matter,  it  is  perhaps  impos- 
sible to  decide  in  the  present  imperfect  state  of 
our  knowledge.  The  application  of  electricity 
as  an  instrument  of  chemical  decomposition,  and 
the  study  of  its  effects,  may  be  carried  on  inde- 
pendent of  any  hypothetical  ideas  concerning 
the  origin  of  the  pbaenomena;  and  these  ideas 
are  dangerous  only  when  they  are  confounded 
with  facts.  Some  modern  writers  have  asserted 
the  existence  of  an  electrical  fluid  with  as  much 


[ "?  ] 

confidence  as  they  would  assert  the  existence 
of  water,  and  have  even  attempted  to  shew  that 
it  is  composed  of  several  other  elements  ;  hut 
it  is  impossible  in  sound  philosophy  to  adopt 
such  hasty  generalizations;  Franklin,  Caven- 
dish, Epinus,  and  Volta,  the  illustrious  advo- 
cates for  the  idea  of  a  single  electrical  fluid,  have 
advanced  it  only  as  hypothetical,  as  accounting 
in  a  happy  way  for  most  of  the  phaenomena  ; 
and  none  of  the  facts  that  have  been  brought 
forward  in  favour  of  the  actual  existence  either 
of  one  or  of  two  fluids,  can  be  considered  as 
conclusive. 

From  a  very  ingenious  experiment  of  Mr. 
Cuthbertson,  it  appears  that  when  a  stream  of 
electrical  sparks  is  passed  through  tlie  flame  of 
a  candle  between  two  electrified  surfaces,  the 
surface  which  is  negative  is  most  heated  ;  and 
it  has  been  argued  that  a  current  must  pass  from 
the  positive  surface  to  the  negative. 

But  it  is  more  probable,  that  this  phaenome- 
non  depends  upon  the  positive  unipolar  qualiij- 
of  the  flame  of  wax  or  tallow  referred  to  above  ; 
for  supposing  this  flame  to  become  positive, 
which  would  seem  to  be  the  case,  it  must  be 
attracted  by  the  negative,  and  not  by  the  posi- 
tive surface  and  this  view  is  confirmed  by  an 
experiment  I  made  on  an  arch  of  flame  between 
the  two  poles  of  the  great  Voltaic  apparatus  of 

VOL.    I,  N 


[  178  ] 

2000  plates.  Platina  melted  with  more  fa- 
cility in  the  arch  at  the  positive  than  at  the  ne- 
gative extremity,  and  this  arch  was  common  air 
intensely  ignited,  through  which  the  electricity 
was  discharged  ;  and  if  any  mechanical  current 
existed  from  the  positive  pole  to  the  negative, 
the  maximum  of  heat  must  have  been  produced 
at  the  negative.  When  a  wire  of  platina 
was  made  positive,  and  brought  in  contact  with 
charcoal  rendered  negative,  it  became  ignited 
much  sooner,  and  fused  into  larger  globules, 
than  when  made  negative,  and  brought  in  con- 
tact with  the  charcoal  rendered  positive  ;  and 
that  the  effect  did  not  depend  upon  the  greater 
heat  of  the  charcoal,  appears  from  the  circum- 
stance, that  similar  phsenomena  occurred  when 
the  experiment  was  made  by  contact  with  mer- 
cury. But  when  an  imperfectly  conducting  fluid, 
such  as  sulphuric  acid,  was  used,  the  result  was 
reversed.  The  wire  being  negatively  electrified, 
and  the  acid  positively,  the  point  in  contact 
with  the  surface  of  the  acid  instantly  became 
white  hot ;  in  the  opposite  case  a  spark  of  blue 
light  only  was  produced. 

The  different  appearance  of  the  light  on 
points  positively  and  negatively  electrified,  has 
been  urged  in  favour  of  the  idea  of  a  fluid  pro^ 
ceeding  from  the  positive  to  the  negative  sur- 
face.   This  phsenomenon  occurs  as  well  in  the 


179  ] 

Voltaic,  as  in  the  common  discharge:  for  when 
the  arch  of  flame  passes  between  two  points 
of  charcoal,  a  vivid  spot  of  white  light  is  al- 
ways perceived  on  the  negative  point,  and  rays 
seem  to  diverge  from  the  positive  point.  The 
effect  of  the  dijBPerence  of  the  appearance  of  diffe- 
rently electrified  points,  I  find,  does  not  depend 
upon  the  nature  of  the  elastic  medium,  for  it  takes 
place  in  hydrogene,  carbonic  acid,  and  chlorine, 
though  it  is  less  distinct  in  the  heavier  gasses, 
probably  from  their  being  worse  conductors ;  but 
the  affections  of  light  in  passing  from  the  dif- 
ferent parts  of  the  circuit,  can  with  no  more 
propriety  be  urged  in  favour  of  a  specific  fluid, 
than  the  chemical  changes  produced  by  the 
different  poles. 

When  folds  of  paper  are  perforated  by  a 
discharge  from  an  electrical  jar,  there  is  a  burr 
on  both  sides,  which  may  be  urged  as  an  argu- 
ment against  any  fluid  passing  through  ;  for  it 
could  penetrate  in  one  direction  only,  and  the 
experiment  is  favourable  to  the  idea  that  elec- 
tricity is  an  exhibition  of  attractive  powers 
acting  in  peculiar  combinations,  for  the  sub- 
stance of  the  paper  which  was  negative,  may 
be  conceived  violently  attracted  to  the  positive 
surface,  and  the  part  which  was  positive,  to  the 
negative,  at  the  moment  the  discharge  tak^s 
place* 

It  will  be  useless  to  pursue  any  further  tbi» 

N  2 


[  180  ] 

recondite  part  of  the  subject;  whatever  view  is 
taken,  active  powers  must  be  supposed  to  be 
bestowed  upon  some  species  of  matter,  and  the 
impulse  must  be  ultimately  derived  from  the 
same  source.  In  the  universe,  nothing  can  be 
said  to  be  automatic,  as  nothino;  can  be  said  to 
be  without  design.  An  imperfect  parallel  may 
be  found  in  human  inventions  ;  springs  may 
move  springs,  and  wheels,  indexes ;  but  the 
motion  and  the  regulation  must  be  derived  from 
the  artist;  sounds  may  be  produced  by  undu- 
lations in  the  air,  undulations  of  the  air  by 
vibrations  of.musical  strings  ;  but  the  impulse 
and  the  melody  must  arise  from  tlie  master. 

VIII.  On  Anal/sis  and  Synthesis  ;  on  the  Circiim- 
stances  to  be  attended  to  in  these  Operations,  and 
on  the  Arrangement  of  undecompoimded  Bodies. 

I.  When  a  substance  is  capable  of  being 
resolved  into  other  forms  of  matter,  it  is  said 
to  be  compounded;  thus,  if  mild  magnesia, 
(subcarbonate  of  magnesia)  be  strongly  heated 
for  an  hour  in  a  green  glass  retort,  having  its 
beak  connected  with  a  flaccid  bladder,  elastic 
matter  will  collect  in  the  bladder;  and  the 
magnesia,  when  examined,  will  be  found  to 
have  lost  in  weight,  and  to  be  altered  in  its 
properties,  it  will  not  effervesce  with  acids,  and 
It  is  harsher  to  the  feel.  The  weiffht  oi  the 
elastic  matter  collected  in  the  bladder  is  exactly 


[  181  ] 

equal  to  that  lost  by  the  magnesia  ;  it  cannot  by 
any  means  be  converted  into  magnesia,  and  the 
mild  magnesia  gives  only  a  limited  quantity  oF 
it ;  so  it  is  evident  that  mild  magnesia  consists 
of  a  matter  which  can  be  rendered  permanently 
gaseous,  and  a  fixed  substance;  it  is  a  com- 
pounded body. 

The  metal  called  zinc,  if  heated  strongly  in 
close  vessels,  rises  in  the  elastic  form,  but  when 
condensed  by  cold,  it  appears  unaltered  in  its 
properties.  It  may  be  distilled  any  number  of 
times,  but  it  wiii  be  still  the  same  :  nothing 
permanently  elastic  will  be  given  off  from  it ; 
and  if  the  operations  be  conducted  with  care, 
it  will  be  found  undiminished  in  weight.  Not 
even  the  intense  heat  of  the  Voltaic  battery  ap- 
plied in  a  vessel  exhausted  of  air,  effects  any 
change  in  it;  it  easily  enters  into  new  combi- 
nations, but  can  be  resolved  into  no  other 
forms  of  matter;  it  is  considered  as  an  undecom» 
pounded  body. 

The  term  element  is  used  as  synonymous  with 
undecompounded  body  ;  but  in  modern  chemistry 
its  application  is  limited  to  the  results  of  ex- 
periments* The  improvements  taking  place  in 
the  methods  of  examining  bodies,  are  constantly 
changing  the  opinions  of  chemists  with  respect 
to  their  nature,  and  there  is  no  reason  to  sup- 
pose that  any  real  indeslructibk  principle  haes 


I  m  ] 

been  yet  discovered.  Matter  may  ultimately  be 
found  to  be  the  same  in  essence,  differing  only 
in  the  arrangements  of  its  particles ;  or  two  or 
three  simple  substances  may  produce  all  the  va- 
rieties of  compound  bodies.  The  results  of 
our  operations  must  be  considered  as  offering 
at  best  approximations  only  to  the  true  know- 
ledge of  things,  and  should  never  be  exalted  as 
a  standard  to  estimate  the  resources  of  nature. 

2.  By  analysis  compounded  bodies  are  re- 
solved into  their  constituents  ;  hy  sj^nthesis  they 
are  produced  in  consequence  of  the  union  of 
these  constituents  ;  and  when  the  weight  of  the 
compound  corresponds  to  that  of  the  constitu- 
ents, the  processes  are  considered  as  accurate. 

The  words  analysis  and  synthesis  are  applied 
incases  when  bodies  are  resolved  into,  or  com-  - 
pounded  from,  any  other  forms  of  matter,  with- 
out relation  to  the  elementary  nature  of  these 
forms ; — thus  crystals  of  Glauber's  salt  may 
be  resolved  analytically  into  sulphate  of  soda 
and  water,  or  compounded  synthetically  from 
these  substances  ;  and  sulphate  of  soda  may  be 
formed  by  synthesis  from  sulphuric  acid  and 
soda,  both  of  which  are  compounded  bodies- 

3.  In  all  conclusions  upon  the  results  of 
analytical  and  synthetical  experiments,  it  is  of 
the  greatest  importance  that  the  agencies  of  all 
the  substances  concerned,  should  be  accurately 


[  1^3  ] 

known,  that  no  circumstance  should  be  taken 
for  granted,  and  that  the  nature  of  the  real 
constituents  of  the  body  should  be  shewn  to  be 
unchanged  during  the  process. 

Whatever  instruments  of  experiments  be 
used,  their  relations  to  the  substances  acted 
upon  should  be  well  known,  and  their  influ- 
ence fif  any)  estimated.  Thus  if  a  hard  stone 
be  pulverized  in  a  mortar  of  porcelain,  agate, 
or  iron,  the  comparison  of  weights  before  and 
after  the  process,  should  be  carefully  made,  to 
ascertain  what  quantity  of  matter  may  have 
been  abraded  from  the  mortar.  When  sub- 
stances are  fused,  or  heated,  in  vessels  on  which 
they  are  capable  of  acting,  the  same  precautions 
should  be  taken.  It  should  either  be  shewn, 
that  the  vessel  has  been  unchaneed  durins;  the 
operation,  or  the  nature  and  extent  of  the 
change  should  be  demonstrated. 

Many  celebrated  chemists  have  been  led  into 
error  in  the  infancy  of  their  investigations, 
from  a  want  of  attention  to  these  circumstances. 
Thus  the  illustrious  Scheele  for  some  time  sup- 
posed that  silicious  earth  was  composed  of 
fluoric  acid  and  water,  because  he  obtained  it 
by  mixing  together  an  acid  gas,  (procured  from 
fluor  spar)  and  water ;  but  subsequent  experi- 
ments, by  demonstrating  the  loss  of  weight  of 
the  glass  vessels  in  which  his  operations  were 


[  184  ] 


conducted,  shewed  that  the  silicious  earth  was 
derived  from  these  vessels,  and  dissolved  in  the 
gas. 

4.  Water  is  tlie  great  solvent  employed  in 
chemical  processes,  and  its  operation  therefore 
should  be  strictly  attended  to.  It  has  been  too 
much  the  custom  to  consider  its  elements  as 
almost  passive  in  the  processes  of  dissolution 
and  decomposition  ;  but  there  are  a  number  of 
instances  in  which  these  elements  are  newly 
arranged,  and  in  which  their  transfer  and 
changes  produce  very  important  phenomena. 

When  oxymuriatic  or  chlorine  gas  is  ex- 
posed to  light,  it  undergoes  no  change,  but 
when  a  solution  of  it  in  water  is  placed  under 
the  same  circumstances,  oxygene  gas  is  given 
off,  and  a  solution  of  muriatic  acid  is  found  in 
the  water.  Hence  it  was  concluded,  without 
any  reference  to  v/eights,  that  oxymuriatic  gas 
consists  of  muriatic  acid  gas  and  oxygene,  and 
that  the  water  acted  in  no  other  way  than  in 
assisting  the  expulsion  of  the  oxygene,  by  its 
attraction  for  the  muriatic  acid  gas. 

This  inference,  however,  is  now  known  to  be 
incorrect,  and  it  affords  a  striking  instance  of  the 
present  object  of  discussion.  If  aqueous  vapour 
in  small  quantities,  and  chlorine  gas,  be  passed 
through  an  ignited  tube  of  glass,  the  steam  en- 
tirely disappears,  and  oxygene  gas,  and  muriatic 


[  185  ] 


acid  gas  are  formed ;  therefore  the  water  must 
have  entered  into  the  composition  of  the  mu- 
riatic acid  gas,  or  must  have  been  decomposed ; 
its  hydrogene  combined  with  the  chlorine,  to 
form  muriatic  acid  gas,  and  the  oxygene  gas 
set  free ;  and  that  hydrogene  actually  enters 
into  the  composition  of  muriatic  acid  gas,  is 
proved  by  the  experiment  detailed  in  page  111; 
nor  can  oxygene  gas  be  procured  in  any  expe- 
riments upon  chlorine,  in  which  bodies  not 
known  to  contain  oxygene,  alone  are  concerned ; 
nor  have  any  means  been  found  by  which  this 
substance  can  be  decompounded. 

To  give  another  example:  when  concentrated 
oil  of  vitriol,  which  consists  of  sulphuric  acid 
and  water,  is  poured  upon  common  salt,  and 
they  are  heated  together,  muriatic  acid  gas  flies 
off,  and  sulphate  of  soda  is  obtained ;  hence  it 
was  concluded,  that  common  salt  consists  of 
muriatic  acid  gas  and  soda :  and  that  the  sul- 
phuric acid  merely  displaced  the  muriatic  acid 
gas ;  and  no  account  was  taken  of  the  water  of 
the  sulphuric  acid  in  the  operation;  yet  the 
whole  change  depends  upon  this  water:  and 
no  soda  and  no  muriatic  acid  can  be  procured 
from  common  salt,  without  water ;  and  common 
salt  is  made  directly  by  heating  sodium,  th^ 
metal  which  I  discovered  to  be  the  basis  of  soda, 
and  chlorine  together,  and  th^se  are  both  as  yet 


[  186  ] 

undecompounded  bodies  ;  and  if  92  parts  of  oil 
of  vitriol,  which  consists  of  75  parts,  by  weight, 
of  sulphuric  acid,  and  17  parts  of  water,  be 
made  to  act  upon  111  parts  of  common  salt, 
which  consists  of  44  sodium,  and  67  chlorin^^ 
the  water  will  be  decomposed,  15  of  oxygene 
will  combine  with  the  sodium  to  form  59  of 
soda,  and  2  of  hydrogene  will  combine  with 
67  of  chlorine  to  form  69  of  muriatic  acid  gas, 
and  the  sulphate  of  soda  will  be  I34  parts. 

5.  There  are  numbers  of  substances  which 
possess  an  attraction  of  a  peculiar  kind  for 
water;  they  absorb  water  without  undergoing 
any  remarkable  change  in  their  properties,  and 
in  small  proportions.  Such  are  charcoal,  dif- 
ferent earths,  and  animal  and  vegetable  sub- 
stances. If  well  burnt  charcoal  be  exposed  to 
the  atmosphere  for  some  days,  it  will  increase  in 
weight  from  10  to  I4  grains  per  cent.,  and  the 
increase  is  almost  entirely  owing  to  its  absorbing 
water,  which  existed  in  the  form  of  vapour  in 
the  air  ;  and  by  heating  charcoal  that  has  been 
exposed  to  air,  in  close  vessels,  the  water  may  be 
collected  unaltered.  Baryta,  strontia,  and  lime, 
absorb  definite  proportions  of  water,  and  form 
what  are  called  hydrates,  in  which  the  water 
18  in  chemical  combination,  and  requires  an 
intense  heat  for  its  expulsion ;  and  magnesia, 
alumina,  silica,  glucina,  and  zircona,  likewise 


[  187  ] 


increase  in  weight  by  attracting  aqueous  vapour 
from  the  atmosphere,  and  seem  to  form  analo- 
gous combinations  ;  they  give  off  all  the  water 
they  had  absorbed  at  the  temperature  of  dull 
ignition,  so  that  it  is  retained  in  them  by  a  very 
weak  attraction ;  and  that  the  water  absorbed 
in  this  way,  is  in  true  chemical  union  with  the 
earths,  is  still  farther  proved  by  the  circum- 
stance that  a  hydrate  of  one  of  these  bodies, 
exists  in  nature,  namely,  the  wavellite  or  hy- 
drate of  alumine,  and  this  is  a  crystallized  body, 
and  requires  a  strong  red  heat  for  the  expulsion 
^o£  its  water. 

Compounds  of  the  earths  in  fine  powder, 
that  have  been  heated  red,  increase  in  weight, 
from  the  absorption  of  atmospheric  moisture : 
and  the  case  is  the  same  with  almost  all  sub- 
stances, except  the  metals,  and  certain  inflam- 
mable bodies ;  so  that  in  all  experiments  of 
analysis,  the  solid  products  obtained,  should 
be  strongly  heated,  and  weighed  whilst  warm, 
and  before  they  have  been  long  exposed  to 
the  atmosphere,  or  the  quantity  of  water  they 
have  absorbed  should  be  exactly  known.  And 
the  same  precautions  should  be  used,  and  more 
strictly,  with  respect  to  alkaline,  acid,  and 
saline  bodies  that  enter  into  chemical  combi- 
nation with  water,  and  attract  it  rapidly  from 
the  atmosphere. 


[  188  ] 

6.  Gaseous  bodies  are  usually  procured  from 
substances  that  contain  water,  and  many  of 
them  are  collected  over  water ;  it  is  therefore 
of  considerable  importance  in  analytical  pro- 
cesses, that  their  relations  to  this  substance 
should  be  distinctly  understood. 

It  has  been  already  stated,  that  common  air 
contains  aqueous  vapour,  or  water  in  an  invi- 
sible elastic  form,  which  is  greater  in  propor- 
tion as  the  temperature  is  high,  air  at  the  tem- 
perature of  65°  Fahrenheit,  containing  about 
-jV  of  its  volume.  From  the  experiments  of 
Desormes  and  Clement,  it  appears  that  all  the 
gasses  not  absorbable  to  any  extent  by  water, 
such  as  oxygene,  azote,  carbonic  acid,  and 
hydrogene  gasses,  contain  in  equal  volumes, 
the  same  quantity  of  vapour  as  common  air ;  so 
that  vapour,  when  it  exists  in  these  bodies,  can 
only  be  regarded  as  mixed  with  them  ;  and  it 
is  separated  by  substances  that  have  a  strong 
chemical  attraction  for  water,  such  as  lime,  mu- 
riate of  lime,  sulphuric  acid,  hydrate  of  potassa, 
8cc.  ;  and  in  all  accurate  experiments  in  which 
gasses  are  examined,  they  should  be  previously 
freed  from  vapour  by  exposure  for  some  hours 
to  substances  that  have  a  strong  attraction  for 
water,  but  possessed  of  no  chemical  action  on 
the  gas. 

The  relations  of  water  to  gasses  with  which 


[  189  1 

it  is  capable  of  combining  chemically,  (which 
gasses  will  be  described  hereafter,)  are  very 
different.  It  is  evident  that  no  pure  aqueous 
vapour  can  exist  in  them  in  a  state  mixture ^ 
but  they  may,  and  probably  in  almost  all  cases 
do  contain  a  gaseous  compound  of  water,  and 
the  peculiar  elastic  fluid.  If  a  drop  of  water 
be  introduced  into  a  flask  filled  with  amrlio- 
niacal  gas,  it  rapidly  absorbs  the  gas,  and  in- 
creases in  size  ;  but  if  a  minute  drop  of  a  con- 
centrated solution  of  ammonia  be  introduced, 
and  the  temperature  of  the  flask  be  gently 
raised,  the  drop  disappears,  and  continues  in- 
visible, as  long  as  the  heat  is  preserved  uniform. 
The  instances  are  similar  when  analogous  ex- 
periments are  made  upon  muriatic  acid  and 
silicated  fluoric  acid  gasses  ;  and  I  have  found 
that  these  elastic  fluids  collected  at  the  tempera- 
ture of  75°  deposited  a  slight  dew,  consisting  of 
strong  solution  of  acid  in  water,  when  intensely 
cooled  by  a  freezing  mixture.  There  is  reason 
to  believe  that  the  case  must  be  the  same  with 
fluoboric  acid,  and  that  this  body  may  contain 
a  minute  quantity  of  the  compound  which  may 
be  called  hydrate  of  fluoboric  acid  ;  and  this  is 
confirmed  by  the  phenomena  of  the  action  of 
potassium  upon  the  gas,  for  1  have  never  been 
able  to  decompose  it  by  this  substance,  without 
procuring  small  quantities  of  hydrogene. 


[  190  ] 

The  quantity  of  water  in  the  gasses  for 
which  it  has  a  chemical  attraction,  must  depend 
upon  the  degree  of  volatility  of  the  fluid  com- 
pound of  the  gas  and  water,  and  upon  the 
proportion  of  water  it  contains.  Sulphureous 
acid  gas,  which  has  only  a  Weak  attraction 
for  water,  would,  there  is  every  reason  to 
believe,  contain  most  of  the  gaseous  hydrate ; 
but  even  in  this  it  is  most  likely  there 
must  be  less  water  than  in  common  air  at  the 
same  temperature  ;  ammonia  would  probably 
be  next  in  order,  then  silicated  fluoric  gas,  mu- 
riatic acid  gas,  nitrous  acid  gas,  and,  last  of  all, 
fluoboric  gas. 

The  temperatures  at  which  the  compounds 
of  water  and  gasses  rise  in  vapour,  seem  to  de- 
pend upon  the  strength  of  the  attraction,  by 
which  they  are  combined,  and  upon  the  degree 
of  volatility  of  the  gaseous  element.  All  solu- 
tions of  sulphureous  acid,  and  ammonia,  boil  at 
temperatures  which  differ  very  little  from  the 
boiling  point  of  water.  The  highest  point  of 
the  ebullition  of  solution  of  muriatic  acid  gas  in 
water  is  about  232°  Fahrenheit ;  that  solution 
of  nitric  acid  which  gives  a  compound  vapour, 
does  not  boil  at  a  temperature  below  248°  ;  the 
temperature  at  which  hydrated  fluoric  acid  boiis^ 
according  to  M  M.  Gay  Lussac  and  Thenard, 
is  not  very  high ;  but  the  vapour  contains  a 


[  191  ] 

considerable  quantity  of  water,  compared  with 
other  acid  vapours. 

Whether  substances  will  attract  water  from 
the  absorbable  gasses,  must  depend  upon  the 
strength  of  their  affinity  for  water,  as  compared 
with  that  of  the  gas.  Dry  hydrate  of  potassa 
will  slowly  attract  moisture  from  ammonia,  and 
dry  muriate  of  lime  from  sulphureous  acid  gas  ; 
but  muriate  of  lime  does  not  appear  to  act  upon 
the  water  in  muriatic  acid  gas,  Silicated  fluoric 
acid  gas  and  fluoboric  gas,  instantly  render 
cloudy  sulphureous  acid  gas  by  attracting 
moisture  from  it,  and  fluoboric  gas,  if  mixed 
with  fluoric  acid  gas,  renders  it  very  slightly 
cloudy.  Probably  there  are  no  substances 
which  will  attract  water  from  the  vapour  of 
hydrated  fluoboric  acid ;  but  the  quantity  is 
too  minute  to  influence  to  any  extent,  the  results 
of  experiments  on  gasses  containing  it. 

In  cases  when  elastic  fluids  are  produced  in 
contact  with  substances  which  afford  peculiar 
vapours,  such  as  volatile  oils,  alcohol,  ether, 
See. ;  these  vapours  should  be  separated  either 
by  agitating  the  gasses  in  water,  or  solutions 
of  substances  which  are  capable  of  absorbing 
them,  such  as  solution  of  potassa,  8cc.  and  the 
aqueous  vapour  separated  afterwards  by  the 
means  above  mentioned. 


[  192  ] 

7.  In  stating  the  weights,  of  bodies  which 
are  the  results  of  analytical  experiments,  the 
temperature  should  be   noticed  ;  and  in  the 
case  of  elastic  fluids,  the  degree  of  pressure  of 
the  atmosphere,  as  indicated  by  the  barometer. 
When  gaseous  compounds  are  resolved  into 
simpler  gaseous  bodies,  or  when  gasses  are  com- 
pared with  each  other,  as  they  are  all  similarly 
affected  by  heat  and  pressure,  there  is  no  ne- 
cessity for  any  specific  statements  of  these  cir- 
cumstances, and  in  describing  the  specific  gra- 
vity of  a  gaseous  body,  it  is  necessary  only  to 
give  the  relation  of  its  weight  to  that  of  air; 
thus  the  v/eight  of  air  being  1000,  that  of 
oxygene  gas  will  be  1097.    As  hydrogene  gas 
is  much  lighter  than  any  other  elastic  fluid, 
and  as  it  is  the  body  which  combines  with 
other  substances  in  the  smallest  proportions,  it 
would  perhaps  assist  the  progress  of  chemical 
inquiry  to  denote  its  specific  gravity,  by  unity, 
which  would  harmonize  with  the  idea  of  repre- 
senting the  proportion  in  which  it  combines 
likewise  by  unity,  and  would   facilitate  the 
means  of  comparing  the  absolute  weights  of 
gaseous  bodies  concerned  in  experiments,  with 
the  numerical  symbols  representing  their  ele- 
ments.   The  specific   gravity  of  hydrogene 
being  considered  as  1,  that  of  common  air  will 


C  193  ] 

be  13-7,  and  that  of  oxygene,  as  has  beeii 
stated  in  page  1 12,  15. 

8.  In  treating  of  the  different  substances 
which,  by  their  agencies,  combinations,  or  de- 
compositions, produce  the  phgenomena  of  che- 
mistry— radiant  ox  ethereal  matters , will  be  first 
considered,  as  their  principal  effects  seem  ra- 
ther to  depend  upon  their  communicating 
motion  to  the  particles  of  common  matter,  or 
modifying  their  attractions,  than  to  their  ac- 
tually  entering  into  combination  with  them ; 
and  as  from  the  laws  of  their  motions,  or  from 
their  extreme  subtileness,  they  are  incapable  of 
being  weighed. 

The  undecompounded  substances  which  are 
permanent  in  their  forms,  will  be  considered  in 
an  order  of  arrangement  depending  upon  their 
electrical  relations ;  those  determined  to  the 
positive  surface  in  the  Voltaic  electrical  circiait, 
being  arranged  in  one  class,  and  those  determined 
to  the  negative  surface  in  another;  and  the  sub- 
divisions of  the  classes  will  be  made  according 
to  their  natural  relations. 

The  general  principle  adopted  will  be,  that 
no  compounded  body  shall  be  treated  of,  tiUits 
constituents  have  been  described. 

The  relations  of  bodies  derived  from  their 
electrical  powers,  are  coincident  with  those  de- 
pendent upon  their  agencies  in  combustion; 

VOL.  I.  O 


[  194  ] 

that  Is,  one  class  contains  supporters  of  combus- 
tion, and  the  other  class  combustible  bodies  ; 
but  as  the  heat  and  light  produced  in  combus- 
tion, seem  to  be  merely  indications  of  the 
strength  of  attraction  of  the  acting  substances  ; 
and  as  these  phaenomena  occur  in  cases  in  which 
inflammable  matters  act  upon  each  other,  com- 
bustibility can  scarcely  be  considered  as  a  defi- 
nite idea ;  though  the  importance  of  the  common 
phaenomena  of  combustion,  have  made  them 
the  grand  objects  in  all  the  early  theories  of 
chemistry. 


r  195  ] 


DIVISION  II. 

OF  RADIANT  OR  ETHEREAL  MATTER. 

i.  Of  the  Effects  of  radiant  Matter,  in  •producing 
the  Phenomena  of  Vision. 

1.  The  phasnomerp  of  vision  depend  upon 
the  presence  of  the  sun,  of  the  heavenly  bodies, 
or  on  the  mutual  action  of  certain  substances  on 
the  surface  of  the  earth. 

2.  It  has  been  demonstrated  by  Roemer,  and 
confirmed  by  the  discoveries  of  Bradley,  that  the 
motion  of  light  is  progressive  ;  it  is  about  eight 
minutes  in  passing  from  the  sun  to  the  earth. 

$.  When  light  is  entirely  intercepted  by 
a  body  placed  between  the  luminous  object 
and  the^ye,  that  body  is  said  to  be  opaque; 
and  the  manner  in  which  the  light  is  inter- 
cepted, proves  that  it  proceeds  in  right  lines  or 
rays  from  the  luminous  body  as  a  center. 

4.  Luminous  objects  may  be  seen  through 
certain  substances  ;  and  these  bodies  are  said  to 
-be  transparent.  Bodies  differ  considerably  in 
the  degree  of  their  transparency  ;  some  trans- 
mit many  more  rays  than  others,  and  there  are 
gradations  from  perfect  opacity,  when  all  the 

0  2 


[  196  ] 


rays  are  intercepted,  to  a  high  degree  of  trans- 
parency,  when  by  far  the  greater  number  are 
transmitted. 

5=^  Of  the  rays  that  are  not  transmitted,  some 
are  lost,  as  it  were  absorbed  by  the  body ; 
others  are  thrown  back  again,  or  reflected  from 
its  exterior  or  inner  surfaces,  and  these  rays  are 
called  reflected  rays. 

6.  The  rays  of  light  in  their  transmission 
through  bodies,  or  reflection  from  their  sur- 
faces, undergo  certain  modifications,  of  great 
importance  in  their  connection  with  the  laws 
of  vision,  and  the  general  properties  of  radiant 
matter. 

7»  If  rays  of  light  pass  from  one  transparent 
substance  not  crystallized  into  another,  in  an 
oblique  direction,  their  path  is  altered,  and  they 
are  bent  downwards  or  upwards,  according  as 
the  medium  is  more  or  less  dense,  or  according: 
as  it  differs  in  chemical  qualities  ;  inflammable 
substances,  or  compounds  containing  inflam- 
mable substances,  having  the  highest  power  of 
bending  towards  the  perpendicular  or  of  refract- 
ing, as  it  is  called,  the  rays  of  light ;  and,  in 
th  e  same  substances,  the  sines  of  the  angles  of  re- 
fraction  bear  always  the  same  relations  to  those 
of  the  angles  of  incidence. 

8»  The  rays  of  light  in.passing  through  obli- 
quangular  crystalline  bodies,  follow  different 


[  197  3 

laws.  If  a  ray  of  light  be  received  perpendicu- 
larly upon  a  plain  surface  of  island  crystal,  or 
rhomboidal  carbonateof  lime,  onepartof  itpasses 
through  without  altering  its  direction  ;  another 
part,  on  the  contrary,  is  refracted  in  a  plane 
parallel  to  the  diagonal,  joining  the  two  obtuse 
angles  of  the  crystal,  so  that  images  seen  through 
the  crystal  appear  double  ;  and  this  phseno- 
menon,  first  scientifically  reasoned  upon  by 
Huygens,  is  called  the  phsenomenon  of  double 
refraction. 

If  a  ray  of  light  which  has  suffered  double 
refraction  from  one  crystal,  be  received  by 
another  crystal  placed  in  a  similar  and  parallel 
position,  there  will  be  no  new  division  of  rays, 
and  no  change  in  their  direction ;  but  if  the 
second  crystal  be  placed,  so  that  its  planes  of 
perpendicular  refraction  are  at  right  angles  to 
those  of  the  first  crystal,  then  there  will  be  a  new 
phsenomenon,  and  that  part  of  the  ray  which  be- 
fore passed  through  the  ordinary  refraction,  will 
receive  the  extraordinary  refraction,  and  recipro- 
cally that  which  underwent  the  ordinary  will  suf- 
fer the  extraordinary  refraction.  If  the  second 
crystal  be  turned  gradually  round  in  the  same 
plane,  when  it  has  made  a  quarter  of  a  revolution^ 
there  will  be  four  divisions  of  the  ray,  and  they 
will  be  reduced  to  two  in  the  half  of  the  revolu- 
tion, so  that  the  retracting  power  depends  upoD 


[  198  ] 

the  relations  of  the  position  of  the  particles  of 
the  crystals,  to  the  rays  passing  through  them. 

Similar  phsenomena  to  those  presented  by 
island  crystal,  are  exhibited  in  a  greater  or 
less  degree  by  other  crystalline  bodies,  and  pro- 
bably would  belong  to  all  of  them,  if  they  were 
siiEciently  transparent  to  admit  of  the  passage 
of  light  through  strata  of  considerable  thick- 
ness. Very  thin  pieces  of  the  rhomboidal  car- 
bonate of  lime  even  do  not  give  perceptibley 
double  images. 

9.  When  light  is  reflected  from  bodies  ; 
under  most  circumstances  it  is  unaltered  in  its  re- 
lations to  the  refractive  powers  of  transparent 
substances,  and  the  angle  of  reflection  is  equal 
.  to  the  angle  of  incidence.  But,  in  certain  cases, 
at  angles  which  differ  for  diflPerent  bodies,  the 
reflected  rays  have  the  same  property  as  the 
extraordinary  refracted  rays,  that  have  passed 
through  island  crystal.  This  important  fact, 
discovered  by  M.  Malus,  is  easily  exemplified. 
If  the  flame  of  a  taper  reflected  at  an  angle  of 
5£°  45'  from  the  surface  of  water,  be  viewed 
through  a  piece  of  double  refracting  spar,  one 
of  the  images  will  vanish  every  time  that  the 
crystal  makes  a  quarter  of  a  revolution. 

If  a  ray  of  light  be  reflected  from  a  surface  of 
glass,  at  an  angle  of  54.35',  and  fall  upon  ano- 
ther plane  of  glass  at  the  same  angle,  it  will 


[  199  ] 


suffer  no  new  reflection,  and  will  pass  through 
the  glass  unaltered,  provided  that  the  planes  of 
reflection  or  refraction  be  perpendicular  to  each 
other;  but  if  they  are  in  the  same  direction, 
nothing  i"emarkable  will  happen. 

Direct  light  is  most  copiously  reflected,  as  its 
incidence  is  less  perpendicular  ;  but  light  once 
reflected  follows  different  laws,  and  the  quantity 
that  suffers  the  second  reflection,  depends  en- 
tirely upon  the  relations  of  the  angles  made  by 
the  reflecting  surfaces  with  the  rays. 

10.  When  a  ray  of  light  is  made  to  pass 
through  a  triangular  prism  of  glass,  and  the 
transmitted  light  is  received  upon  a  sheet  of 
white  paper,  it  is  found  to  be  of  different  colours; 
the  most  distinct  of  which  are  red,  orange,  yel- 
low, green,  blue,  indigo,  and  violet.  Newton 
has  ascertained,  that  if  the  coloured  image,  or 
spectrum,  as  it  is  called,  be  divided  into  360 
parts,  the  red  will  occupy  45  of  these  parts,  the 
orange  27,  the  yellow  48,  the  green  60,  the 
blue  60,  the  indigo  40,  and  the  violet  80.  The 
red  rays  are  least  refracted,  the  violet  rays 
most,  and  the  other  coloured  rays  are  refran- 
gible inversely,  in  the  order  in  which  they  have 
been  named. 

According  to  Dr.  Wollaston,  when  the  beam 
of  light  is  only  ~  of  an  inch  broad,  and  received 
by  the  eye  at  the  distance  of  ten  feet,  through  a 


[  200  ] 


clear  prism  of  flint  glass,  four  colours  only  ap- 
pear, red,  yellowish  green,  blue,  and  violet. 

If  the  differently  coloured  rays  of  light  separ- 
ated by  the  prism,  be  concentrated  upon  one 
spot  by  means  of  lenses,  they  produce  white 
light ;  and  Newton  has  beautifully  explained 
the  different  colours  of  bodies,  by  supposing 
that  they  retain  certain  of  the  coloured  rays  of 
light,  and  reflect  others  ;  thus  red  bodies  are 
supposed  to  reflect  red  light,  and  to  absorb  all 
the  other  coloured  rays. 

The  different  coloured  rays  of  light,  as  has 
been  shewn  by  Dr.  Herschel,  differ  in  their 
power  of  rendering  objects  visible  ;  at  least  in 
the  state  of  division,  which  is  obtained  by  means 
of  a  prism.  If  an  equal  portion  of  these  rays  be 
made  to  illuminate  a  printed  page,  the  words 
may  .  be  seen  from  the  greatest  distance,  when 
exposed  to  the  lightest  green  or  deepest  yellow 
light ;  and  the  effects  of  illumination  for  equal 
quantities  of  the  rays,  diminish  from  the  cen- 
tral parts  towards  the  extremities  of  the  spec- 
trum. It  may,  however,  be  said  that  there  are 
more  green  rays  in  a  given  part  of  the  spectrum 
than  blue  raySj  and  the  difference  of  illuminating 
power  may  depend  on  this  circumstance. 

11.  The  rays  separated  by  one  prism  are  not 
capable  of  being  further  divided  by  being  passed 
through  another;  and  in  their  relations  to 


f 


[201] 

double  refraction  and  reflection,  they  appear  to 
agree  with  direct  light:  an  object  illuminated 
by  any  of  the  rays  in  the  spectrum,  is  seen 
double  through  island  crystal,  in  the  same 
manner  as  if  it  had  been  visible  by  white 
light. 

12.  The  minute  investigation  of  the  proper- 
ties of  radianf  matter,  in  their  relations  to  the 
phaenoroena  of  visiorij  constitutes  the  object  of 
a  particular  branch  of  science — Optics.  The  few 
statements  that  have  been  made  on  this  subject, 
it  will  be  found  in  the  following  pages,  are  con- 
nected with  the  chemical  effects  and  nature  of 
radiant  matter  ;  and  it  will  immediately  be  seen, 
that  the  same  causes  which  produce  the  most, 
numerous  and  important  of  our  sensations,  and 
which  give,  as  it  were,  language  to  the  ex- 
ternal world,  are  likewise  subservient  to  the 
orderly  successioii  of  events  in  the  oeconomy  of 
nature. 

XL  Of  the  Operation  of  radiant  Matter  in  produc- 
ing Heat. 

1.  When  similar  thermometers  are  placed  in 
the  difierent  parts  of  the  solar  beam,  separated 
by  the  prism,  it  is  found  that  different  effects 
are  produced  in  the  different  coloured  rays. 
The  greatest  heat  is  exhibited  in  the  red  rays, 


[  ,202  ] 

the  least  in  the  violet  rays  ;  and  in  a  space 
beyond  the  red  rays,  where  there  is  no  visible 
light,  the  increase  of  temperature  is  greatest  of 
all.  This  important  discovery  was  made  by 
Dr.  Herschel*  He  estimates  the  power  of 
heating  in  the  red  rays,  to  be  to  that  of  the 
green  rays  as  55  to  26,  and  to  that  of  the  violet 
rays  as  55  to  16.  A  thermometer,  in  the  full 
red  rays,  indicated  an  increase  of  temperature 
of  7°  Fahrenheit  in  ten  minutes  ;  beyond  the  red 
rays,  in  an  equal  time,  the  increase  was  9°  Fah- 
renheit. 

2.  From  these  facts,  which  have  been  con- 
firmed by  Sir  H.  Englefield,  and  other  good 
observers,  it  is  evident  that  matter  set  in  motion 
by  the  sun,  has  the  power  of  producing  heat 
without  light,  and  that  its  rays  are  less  refran- 
gible than  the  visible  rays. 

Some  persons  have  concluded  from  the  phse- 
nomena,  that  all  the  rays  which  produce  heat 
in  the  solar  beam,  are  distinct  from  those  that 
produce  light;  but  this  does  not  seem  to  be 
warranted  by  the  experiments,  for  if  it  were  tlie 
case,  they  would,  probably,  be  entirely  separated 
from  the  coloured  rays  by  the  prism,  as  the 
coloured  rays  are  from  each  otiier.  It  has 
been  used  as  an  argument,  in  favour  of  the  dis- 

*  Philosophical  Transactions,  1800,  p.  26 1. 


[  203  ] 

tinctness  of  the  rays  producing  light,  and  those 
producing  heat,  that  the  beams  from  the  moon 
illuminate  without  heating  ;  but  it  is  possible 
that  a  greater  number  of  the  most  heat  making 
rays,  than  of  the  other  rays,  may  be  absorbed 
by  that  planet ;  and  supposing  all  the  rays  re- 
flected that  fail  upon  the  moon,  yet  still  their 
intensity  would  be  9589O  times  less  than  that  of 
the  solar  rays,  at  the  surface  of  the  earth ;  and 
it  appears  from  experiment,  that  the  real  inten- 
sity of  the  ligh  t  of  the  moon  to  that  of  the  sun 
is  less  than  1  to  300,000,  and  such  rays  con- 
centrated by  the  most  powerful  lenses,  could 
not  be  expected  to  produce  any  effect  on  com- 
mon thermometers ;  and  as  yet  no  very  deli- 
cate experiments  have  been  published  on  the 
subject. 

3,  The  invisible  rays  that  produce  heat,  are 
capable  of  reflection  as  well  as  refraction,  in  the 
same  manner  as  the  visible  rays.  It  is  well 
known  that  an  intense  degree  of  heat  may  be 
produced  by  the  concentration  of  the  solar 
beams  upon  a  single  spot,  by  a  concave  mirror, 
or  by  several  mirrors  ;  and  there  is  no  reason 
to  disbelieve  the  possibility  of  the  inventions 
ascribed  to  Archimedes,  who,  it  is  said,  by  the 
combined  effect  of  a  number  of  plane  mirrors, 
set  fire  to  the  Roman  ships  during  the  siege  of 
Svracuse  ;  thoup^h  the  immense  means  and  labour 


[  504  ] 

required  for  such  an  operation,  renders  the 
narrative  very  doubtful. 

4.  Rays  capable  of  producing  heat  with  and 
without  light  proceed  from  bodies  at  the  sur- 
face of  the  globe  under  peculiar  agencies  or 
changes,  as  well  as  from  the  sun ;  and  the  phze- 
nomena  that  are  usually  called  the  phscnomena 
of  the  radiation  of  terrestrial  heat  are  of  great 
extent  and  importance,  and  well  worthy  of  be- 
ing studied. 

5.  If  a  thermometer  be  held  near  an  icrnited 
body  it  receives  an  impression  connected  with 
an  elevation  of  temperature:  this  is  partly  pro- 
duced by  the  conducting  powers  of  the  air; 
but  it  is  likewise  partly  produced  by  another 
impulse  which  is  instantaneously  communicated, 
even  to  a  considerable  distance.  If  a  laro-e  con- 
cave  metallic  mirror  be  placed  upon  the  ground, 
and  the  hot  body  be  raised  some  feet  above  it, 
a  thermometer  will  instantly  rise  in  the  focus  of 
the  mirrorj  though  it  is  evident  that  no  current 
of  hot  air  can  pass  downwards  from  the  body. 

This  effect  is  commonly  caUed  the  radiation 
of  terrestrial  heat.  It  is  best  observed,  by  em- 
ploying two  mirrors  parallel  to  each  other,  and 
to  the  surface  of  the  earth.  If  the  mirrors  be 
of  copper  tinned,  and  be  well  polished,  and  as 
much  as  2  feet  in  diameter,  and  distant  ordy 
12  feet,  a  small  pan  of  red  hot  charcoal,  placed 


[  505  ] 

in  the  focus  *  of  the  upper  mirror,  will  cause 
gunpowder  to  explode  in  the  focus  of  the  lower 
mirror. 

6.  In  cases  when  no  light  is  emitted  from  a 
hot  body,  the  effect  of  the  concentration  of 
heat  by  the  mirrors  may  still  be  produced. 
Thus,  if  a  vessel  filled  with  boiling  water,  be 
placed  in  the  focus  of  the  upper  mirror,  a  ther- 
mometer placed  in  the  focus  of  the  lower  one 
will  have  its  temperature  increased. 

These  phaenomena  of  the  radiation  of  terres- 
trial matter  producing  heat,  were  made  known  by 
the  academicians  Del  Cimento,  Hooke,  Scheele, 
and  Pictet :  and  there  is  another  fact,  still  more 
extraordinary,  which  has  been  called  the  radicif 
Hon  of  cold,  first  observed  by  the  Italian  philso- 
phers,  and  afterwards  by  Pictet.  If  in  the  ar- 
rangement of  the  two  parallel  mirrors,  a  piece 
of  ice  be  introduced  into  the  lower  focus,  the 
thermometer  in  the  upper  focus  will  indicate  a 
diminution  of  temperature. 

7.  All  these  phaenomena  coincide  with  the 
phaenomena  of  the  reflection  of  the  solar  beams ; 
and  even  the  apparent  radiation  of  cold  is  in  har- 
mony with  them  ;  for  if  it  be  supposed,  that  rays 

•  In  the  usual  form  of  the  experiment,  the  mirrors  are 
placed  opposite  to  each  other  on  the  ground.  This  arrange- 
ment, which  I  have  been  long  in  the  habit  of  employing,  in 
the  demonstrations  in  the  Theatre  of  the  Royal  Institution, 
more  distinctly  exhibits  the  effect.   See  Plate  IV.  Fig.  21.  j 


1 


I  206  ] 

capable  of  producing  heat,  emanate  from  all  ter- 
restrial bodies,  but  in  quantities  greater  in  some 
increasing  proportion  as  their  temperatures  are 
higher,  then  the  introduction  of  a  cold  body  into 
the  focus  of  one  mirror,  ought  to  diminish  the 
temperature  of  a  thermometer  in  the  focus  ofthe 
other,  in  the  same  manner  as  a  black  body- 
placed  in  one  focus,  would  diminish  the  quantity 
of  light  in  the  other  focus  ;  and  the  eye  is  to  the 
rays  producing  light,  a  measure,  similar  to  that 
which  the  thermometer  is  to  rays  producing  heat. 

8.  If  a  large  lens  be  placed  before  an  ignited 
body,  and  the  I  '^ht  be  refracted  to  a  focus,  a  ther- 
mometer placed  in  the  focus  will  be  very  slowly 
affected.  The  increase  of  temperature  will  be  in- 
finitely less  than  that  produced  in  the  focus  of  a 
mirror  of  the  same  size,  and  is  such  as  may  be 
principally  ascribed  to  the  increased  radiation  of 
heat  by  the  lens  itself.  Likewise,  if  glass  screens 
be  placed  between  the  two  mirrors,  in  the  experi- 
ments in  which  the  ignited  coals,  or  water,  or  ice 
are  used,  the  effect  is  in  great  measure  destroyed. 
This  establishes  a  difference  between  the  agency 
of  the  radiant  matter  producing  heat  on  the 
surface  of  the  earth,  and  of  that  from  the  sun. 
Mr.  Leslie  has  supposed  that  the  phsenomena 
ofthe  radiation  of  terrestrial  heat,  depend  upon 
certain  pulsations  or  undulations  of  the  atmos- 
phere capable  of  being  reflected,  but  not  of 


[  207  J 

being  refracted  ;  but  none  of  his  facts  prove  this 
ingenious  hypothesis,  though  many  of  them  are 
favourable  to  it,  I  had  an  apparatus  made,  by 
which  platina  wire  could  be  heated  in  any  elastic 
medium,  or  in  vacuo  ;  and  by  which  the  effects 
of  radiation  could  be  distinctly  exhibited  by 
two  mirrors,  the  heat  being  excited  by  a  Voltaic 
battery.  In  several  experiments,  in  which  the 
same  powers  were  employed  to  produce  the 
ignition,  it  was  found  that  the  temperature  of  a 
thermometer  rose  nearly  three  times  as  much 
in  the  focus  of  radiation,  when  the  air  in  the  re- 
ceiver was  exhausted  to  ~— ,  as  when  it  was 

I20' 

in  its  natural  state  of  condensation.*  The 
cooling  power,  by  contact  of  the  rarified  air, 
was  much  less  than  that  of  the  air  in  its 
common  state,  for  the  glow  of  the  platina  was 
more  intense  in  the  first  case  than  in  the  last  ; 
and,  this  circumstance  perhaps  renders  the  ex- 
periment not  altogether  decisive,  but  the  results 
seem  favourable  to  the  Idea,  that  the  terrestrial 
radiation  of  heat  is  not  dependent  upon  any 
motions  or  affections  of  the  atmosphere. 

9.  Another  fact  coinciding  with  this  opinion, 
is  found  in  the  effects  of  the  refraction  of  the 
rays  from  charcoal,  ignited  by  Voltaic  electri- 
city. When  a  small  lens  was  placed  before  the 
brilliant  star  of  light,  produced  by  the  battery 

*  See  Plate  IV.  Fig,  22. 


[  208  j 

of  two  thousand  double  plates,  and  its  focus 
thrown  upon  the  ball  of  a  small  differential 
thermometer,  the  instrument  instantly  indicated 
an  elevation  of  temperature. 

10.  The  manner  in  which  the  temperatures 
of  bodies  are  affected  by  rays  producing  heat, 
is  different  for  different  substances,  and  is  very 
much  connected  with  their  colours.  The  bodies 
that  absorb,  as  it  is  called,  most  light,  and  of 
course  that  reflect  least,  are  most  heated  when 
exposed  either  to  solar  or  terrestrial  rays.  Black 
bodies  in  general  are  more  heated  than  red ; 
red  more  than  green  ;  green  more  than  yellow  ; 
and  yellow  more  than  white. 

Metals  are  less  heated  than  earthy  or  stony 
bodies,  or  than  animal  or  vegetable  matters. 
Polished  surfaces  are  less  heated  than  rough 
surfaces. 

11.  The  bodies  that  have  their  temperatures 
most  easily  raised  by  the  action  oi'  rays  produc- 
ing heat  are  likewise  those  that  are  most  easily 
cooled  by  their  own  radiation,  or  that  at  the 
same  temperature  emit  most  heat  making  rays. 
Metals  radiate  less  heat  than  glass  j  glass  less 
than  vegetable  substances ;  and  charcoal  has  the 
highest  radiating  powers  of  any  body  as  yet 
made  the  subject  of  experiment 

From  Mr.  Leslie's  ingenious  researches,  it 
appears  that  the  radiating  power  of  lamp-black, 


[  209  ] 

being;  taken  as  100  :  the  fbllowina;  substances 
radiate  in  a  proportion  that  mav  be  thus  ex- 
pressed. Sealing  wax,  95  :  crown  glass  90 ; 
China  ink  S8  ;  ice  85  ;  minium  80;  isinglass 
80;  plumbago  75;  tarnished  lead  45;  clean 
lead  19;  polished  iron  15;  tin  plate,  gold, 
silver,  and  copper  12. 

IQ.  There  are  some  practical  applications  of 
the  doctrines  of  radiant  Iseat,  to  the  (Economy 
of  some  of  the  useful  arts  and  processes  of  com- 
mon life. 

Vessels  that  are  intended  to  retain  their  heat, 
should  be  metallic  and  highly  polished  ;  and, 
independent  of  elegance  and  delicacy,  there  is 
a  reason  obvious,  from  the  preceding  facts,  why 
metallic  vessels  for  the  purposes  of  the  table, 
should  be  kept  as  bright  as  possible.  Steam  or 
air  pipes  for  warming  houses,  should  be  polished 
in  those  parts  where  the  heat  is  not  required  to 
be  communicated,  and  covered  with  some  ra- 
diating substance,  such  as  lamp  black,  or  plum- 
bago, in  those  rooms  v/hich  arr  to  be  heated  by 
them. 

Culinary  implements  should  be  blackened, 
and  not  polished  on  those  parts,  which  are 
to  receive  heat.  The  heated  surfaces  of  fire- 
places or  stoves  should  not  be  metallic  ;  but  of 
stony  or  earthy  materials,  and  in  this  case  much 
more  heat  will  be  communicated  by  radiation.'* 

*  Count  Rumford.    Phil.  Trans.  ]804i  page  IfS, 
VOL.  I.  P 


[  .910  ] 


HI.  Of  the  Effects  of  radiant  Matter  in  producing 
chemical  Changes. 

1.  A  number  oFthe  effects  of  radiant  matter  in 
producing  chemical  changes,  may  be  ascribed  to 
its  poAvers  of  heating  bodies.  The  heat  produced 
by  the  concentration  of  rays  has  been  ah'eady 
referred  to,  and  the  focus  of  a  powerful  lens  or 
mirror  exposed  to  the  sun,  offers  means  of  ex- 
cidng  heat  inferior  only  to  those  afforded  by 
Voltaic  electricity.  In  some  cases  the  direct 
solar  light  produces  effects  similar  to  those  pro- 
duced by  a  degree  of  heat  much  higher  than 
could  be  excited  by  their  influence  upon  an 
opaque  body,  thus  as  M.  Gay  Lussac,  Thenard, 
and  Dalton  have  shewn,  chlorine  and  hydros;ene 
detonate  when  a  mixture  of  them  is  exposed  to 
the  solar  beams,  though  the  same  effect  is  nol 
produced  by  the  application  of  a  heat  below 
that  of  ignition.  This  has  been  explained  by 
supposing  that  the  temperature  of  particles  of 
substances  is  raised  considerably  and  instanta- 
neously by  the  rays  ;  but  it  may  likewise,  and 
with  more  probability,  be  supposed  to  depend 
upon  a  specific  and  peculiar  influence  of  radiant 
matter,  and  that  such  an  influence  exists,  is 
proved  by  many  circumstances. 

2.  If  moist  horn  silver,  muriate  of  silver 
I'  N,  be  exposed  to  the  different  rays  in  the 


[211] 

jprlsmatlc  spectrlim ;  it  will  be  found  that 
no  effect  is  produced  upon  it  in  the  least  re- 
frangible rays,  which  occasion  heat  without 
light,  a  slight  discqloration  only,  will  be  occa* 
sioned  by  the  red  rays,  the  effect  of  blackening 
will  be  e-reater  towards  the  violet  part  of  the 
spectruiii,  and  in  a  space  beyond  the  violet, 
where  there  is  no  sensible  heat  Or  li^ht,  the 
ehemical  effect  '*v!i]  be  very  distinct. 

This  observation  made  by  M.  Ritter,  and 
Dr.  Woliaston,  proves,  that  there  are  rays  more 
refrangible  than  the  rays  producing  light  and 
heat;  and  from  the  observations  ofM.  Berthol« 
let,  it  appears,  that  muriatic  acid  gas  is  formed 
v/hen  horn  silver  is  blackened  by  light,  so  that 
they  may  be  called  hydrogenating  rays. 

S.  It  has  been  supposed  that  these  invisible 
rays  are  mixed  with  the  other  rays  throus;hout 
the  coloured  part  of  the  spectrum  ;  but  it  seems 
equally  probable,  that  the  same  rays  that  pro- 
duce light,  may  likewise  produce  chemical 
effcctSj  and  effects  of  heat ;  and  Dr.  Young  has 
shewn  that  the  invisible  fays  are  liable  to  the 
same  affections  as  visible  rays,  when  they  are 
reflected  from  thin  plates  of  air,  as  in  the  phss-' 
BOmena  of  coloured  ringSj* 

■4.  I  found  that  a  mixture  of  chlorine  and 
hydrogene  acted  more  rapidly  upon  each  other, 
coHibining  without  explosion,  when  exposed  to 


[  212  ] 

the  red  rays,  than  when  placed  in  the  violet 
rays  ;  but  that  solution  of  chlorine  in  water, 
became  solution  of  muriatic  acid  most  rapidly, 
when  placed  in  the  most  refrangible  rays  in  the 
spectrum. 

I  found  that  the  puce-coloured  oxide  of  lead 
when  moistened,  gradually  gained  a  tint  of  red 
in  the  least  refrangible  rays,  and  at  last  became 
black,  but  was  not  aiTected  in  the  most  refran- 
gible rays  ;  and  the  same  change  was  produced 
by  exposing  it  to  a  current  of  hydrogene  gas. 
The  oxide  of  mercury  procured  by  solution  of 
potassa  and  calomel,  exposed  to  the  spectrum, 
was  not  changed  in  the  most  refrangible  rays, 
but  became  red  in  the  least  refrangible  rays, 
which  must  have  depended  upon  its  absorbing 
oxygene.  The  violet  rays  produced  upon 
moistened  red  oxide  of  mercury,  the  same  ef- 
fects as  hydrogene  gas. 

6.  The  general  facts  of  the  refraction  and 
effects  of  the  solar  beam  offer  an  analogy  to  the 
agencies  of  electricity.  In  the  voltaic  circuit  the 
maximum  of  heat  seems  to  be  at  the  positive 
pole  where  the  power  of  combining  with  oxy- 
gene is  given  to  bodies,  and  the  agency  of  ren- 
dering bodies  inflammable  is  exerted  at  the  op- 
posite surface  ;  and  similar  chemical  effects  are 
produced  by  negative  electricity,  and  by  the 
most  refrangible  rays  of  the  solar  beam. 


213  ] 

7.  In  general,  in  nature,  the  efTects  oF  the 
solar  rays  are  very  compounded.  Healthy  ve- 
getation depends  upon  the  presence  of  the  solar 
beams,  or  oF  light,  and  whilst  the  heat  gives 
fluidity  and  mobility  to  the  vegetable  juices, 
chemical  effects  likewise  are  occasioned,  oxy- 
gene  is  separated  from  them,  and  inflammable 
compounds  formed.  Plants  deprived  of  light 
become  wliite,  and  contain  an  excess  of  sac- 
charine and  aqueous  particles  ;  and  flowers  owe 
the  variety  of  their  hues  to  the  influence  of  the 
Golar  beams. 

Even  animals  require  the  presence  of  the 
rays  of  the  sun,  and  their  colours  seem  mate- 
rially to  depend  upon  the  chemical  influence 
of  these  rays  ;  a  comparison  between  the 
polar  and  tropical  annnaiS,  ai  id  between  the 
parts  of  their  bodies  exposed,  and  those  not 
exposed,  to  iightj  shev.'s  the  correctness  of  ihis 
opinion. 

IV.  Of  the  JYature  of  the  Motions  or  AJections 
of  radiant  Matter. 

1.  Two  hypotheses  have  been  invented  to 
account  for  tlie  principal  operations  of  radiant 
matter.  In  the  first  it  is  supposed  that  the, 
universe  contains  a  hishly  rare  elastic  sub* 
stance,  which  when  put  into  a  state  oi  itndiilaiiiin^ 
produces  those  eflects  en  our  prgaus  of  sight. 


[  214  ] 

wliicliccnststnte  the  sensations  of  vision,  and  rfie 
other  phaeaomena  occasioned  by  solar  and  ter- 
restrial rays.  In  the  second  it  is  conceived  that 
particles  are  crdlted  or  sent  off  from  luminous  or 
lieat-raaking  bodies  with  great  velocity,  and 
that  they  produce  their  effects  by  coinniuoi- 
cating  tlieir  motions  to  substances,  or  by  enter- 
ing into  themj  and  changing  their  composition.' 

2.  The  first  of  these  siipposidoos  was  adopted 
by  Hooke,  Huygens.  and  Euler; — the  second 
by  Newton,  and  the  philosophers  of  the  New- 
tonian School.  Many  of  the  pbcsnomena  may 
be  accounted  For  by  either  hypothesis,  but  the 
Newtonian  doctrine  applies  much  more  happily 
to  most  of  the  facts  discovered  respecting 
the  modifications  of  ligiit  by  double  refraction 
snd  reflection.  Indeed  it  does  not  seem  possible, 
as  Newton  has  shewn,  to  account  for  the  cir- 
cumstance ;  that  a  ray  which  has  suffered 
extraordinary  refraction  in  passing  through 
one  crystal,  should  suffer  ordinary  refraction  ip. 
massing  in  another  direction,  through  another 
like  crystal,  on  the  idea  of  the  effect  being  a 
mere  undulation  of  an  ethereal  medium  ;  but 
it  may  be  explained  by  supposing  the  rays  to 
consist  of  particles  endowed  with  rectilineal  mo- 
tion, and  possessed  of  a  certain  polarity,  that  is, 
parts  attractive  with  respect  to  some  surfaces  of 
the  crystal^  and  repulsive  with  respect  lo^other^j 


[  215  ] 

5.  M.  Mains  has  supposed,  in  his  ingenious 
speculations  on  these  remarkable  phcenomena, 
that  the  molecules  producing  light,  are  pos- 
sessed of  three  rectangular  axes,  of  which  one 
is  always  in  the  direction  of  the  ray,  and  the 
other  two  are  made  by  the  influence  of  the 
repulsive   forces  exerted  by  the  crystalline 
raediura,  perpendicular  to  the  direction  of  these 
forces  ;  and  such  a  form,  and  sueh  an  effect 
would  correspond  with  the  idea  of  the  luminous 
particles  being  octaedrons. 

4.  As  the  coloured  rays  separated  by  the 
prism,  bear  the  same  relation  to  double  refrac- 
tion, that  direct  light  bears,  it  follows  that  the 
polarity  of  the  diiferent  particles  must  be  of  the 
same  kind,  and  this  is  what  might  be  expected. 
The  same  crystalline  substance  always  affects 
the  same  primary  forms.  When  a  tourmaline 
is  broken  into  pieces,  the  pieces  are  found 
to  possess  similar  electrical  powers  to  the  ori- 
ginal crystal,  and  a  large  rhomb  of  calcareous 
spar,  easily  breaks  into  a  number  of  small 
rhombs. 

5.  Newton  has  attempted  to  explain  the  dif- 
ferent refrangibility  of  the  rays  of  light,  by 
supposing  them  composed  of  particles  differing 
in  size,  and  this  hypothesis  is  not  contradictory 
to  the  idea  of  their  being  regular  solids  endowed 
with  similar  polarities.    The  same  great  man 


1 


[  216  ] 


has  put  the  query  whether  h'ght  and  common 
matter  are  not  convertible  into  each  other  ;  and 
adopting  the  idea  that  the  pbacnomena  of  sen- 
sible heat  depend  upon  vibrations  of  the  parti- 
cles of  bodies,  supposes  that  a  certain  Intensity 
of  vibrations  may  send  ofif  particles  into  free 
space,  and  that  particles  in  rapid  motion  in 
right  lines,  in  losing  their  own  motion,  may 
communicate  a  vibratory  motion  to  the  particles 
of  terrestrial  bodies.* 

*  The  views  of  Newton  are  so  clearly  developed  in  the 
fallowing  passages,  and  they  are  40  much  connected  with  the 
refined  philosophy  of  Chemistry,  that  the  reader  probably 
will  require  no  apology  for  the  insertion  of  them  in  a  note. 

Quere.  29.  Are  not  .  the  rays  of  light  very  small  bodies 
emitted  from  shining  substances  ?  Foi;  such  bodies  will  pass 
through  uniform  mediums  in  right  lines,  without  bending  into 
the  shadow,  which  is  the  nature  of  the  rays  of  light.  They 
will  also  be  capable  of  several  properties,  and  be  able  to  con- 
serve their  properties  unchanged,  in  passing  through  several 
mediums  wnicn  is  another  condition  of  the  rays  of  light- 
Pellucid  substances  act  upon  the  rays  of  hght  at  a  distance, 
in  refracting,  reflecting,  and  inflecting  them  ;  and  the  rayg 
mutually  agitate  the  parts  of  those  substances  at  a  distance 
^ar  heating  them  ;  and  this  action  and  re-action  at  a  distance, 
wry  much  resembles  an  attractive  force  between  bodies.  1^ 
refraction  be  performed  by  attraction  of  the  rays,  the  sines  of 
incidence  must  be  to  the  sines  of  refraction  in  a  given  pro- 
portion;  as  we  shewed  in  our  principles  of  philosophy,  and 
this  rule  is  true  by  experience.  The  rays  of  light  in  going  out 
of  a  glass  into  a  vacumn,  arc  bent  towards  the  glass ;  and  if 
they  fall  too  obliquely  on  the  vacuum,  they  are  bent  back- 
wards into  the  glass,  and  totally  reflected ;  and  this  reflection 
Cannot  be  ascribed  to  the  resistance  of  an  absolute  'vacuum. 


I  217  1 


6.  As  particles  of  any  gaseous  medium  wlien 
put  into  a  state  of  unduiatory  motion  are  capable 

but  mu9t.be  caused  by  the  power  of  the  glass  attracting  tlie 
rays  at  their  going  out  of  it  into  ihetiacuum,  and  bringing  them 
back.  For  if  the  farther  surface  of  the  glass  be  moistened  witk 
water,  or  clear  oil,  or  liquid  and  clear  honey,  the  rays  which 
would  otherwise  be  reflected,  will  go  into  the  water,  oil,  or 
honey,  and  therefore  are  not  reflected  before  they  arrive  at 
the  farther  surface  of  the  glass,  and  begin  to  go  out  of  it.  But 
if  they  go  out  of  it  into  a  vacuum,  which  has  no  attraction  ts 
balance  that  of  the  glass,  the  attraction  of  the  glass  either 
bends  and  refracts  them,  or  brings  them  back  and  reflects  them« 
And  this  is  still  more  evident  by  laying  together  two  prisms 
of  glass,  or  two  object-glasses  of  very  long  telescopes,  the  one 
plain,  the  other  a  little  convex,  and  so  compressing  them  that 
they  do  not  fully  touch,  nor  are  too  far  asunder.  For  the 
light,  which  falls  upon  the  further  surface  of  the  first  glass* 
where  the  interval  between  th,e  glasses  is  not  above  the  ten 
hundred  thousandth  part  of  an  inch,  will  go  through  tha* 
surface,  and  through  the  air,  or  vacuum  between  the  glasses, 
and  enter  into  the  second  glass,  as  was  explained  in  the  first, 
fourth,  and  eighth  observations  of  the  first  fart  of  the  second 
Book.  But  if  the  second  glass  be  taken  away,  the  light,  which, 
goes  out  of  the  second  surface  of  the  first  glass  into  the  air, 
or  vacuum,  will  not  go  on  forwards,  but  turns  back  into  the 
Tst  glass,  and  is  reflected  ;  and  therefore  it  is  drawn  back  by 
the  power  of  the  first  glass,  there  being  nothing  else  to  turn 
it  back.  Nothing  more  is  requisite  for  producing  all  the  va- 
riety of  colours,  and  degrees  of  refrangibility,  than  that  the 
rays  of  light  be  bodies  of  different  sizes ;  the  least  of  whichi 
may  make  a  violet,  the  weakest  and  darkest  of  the  colours* 
and  the  mure  easily  diverted  by  refracting  surfaces  from  the 
light  course ;  and  the  rest  as  they  are  bigger  and  bigger,  may- 
make  the  stronger  and  more  lucid  colours,  blue,  green,  yel- 
low,  and  red,  and  be  more  and  more  difficultly  diverted. 
JSfothing  more  is  requisite  for  putting  the  rays  of  light  intQ 


[  218  ] 


of  producing  the  sensation  of  sound  by  actiog 
upon  the  auditory  organsj  so  it  may  be  con- 
fits  of  easy  reflection  and  easy  transmission,  than  that  they 
be  small  bodies,  which  by  their  attractive  powers,  or  some 
other  forces,  stir  up  vibrations  in  what  they  act  upon  ;  which 
vibrations  being  swifter  than  the  rays,  overtake  them  succes- 
sively, and  agitate  them,  so  as  by  turns  to  increase  and  de- 
crease their  velocities,  and  thereby  put  them  into  those  fits. 
And  lastly,  the  unusual  refraction  of  island  crystal,  looks 
very  much  as  if  it  were  performed  by  some  kind  of  attractive 
virtue,  lodged  in  certain  sides,  both  of  the  rays,  and  of  the 
particles  of  the  crystal,  and  not  in  their  other  sides;  for 
\vere  it  not  for  some  kind  of  disposition  or  virtue  lodged  in 
some  sides  of  the  particles  of  the  chrystal,  and  which 
inclines  and  bends  the  rays  towards  the  coast  of  unusual 
refraction  ;  the  rays  which  fall  perpendicularly  on  the 
crystal,  would  not  be  refracted  towards  that  coast,  rather 
than  towards  any  other  coast,  both  at  their  incidence,  and  at 
their  emergence,  so  as  to  emerge  perpendicularly,  by  a  con- 
trary situation  of  the  coast  of  unusual  refraction,  at  the  second 
surface ;  the  crystal  acting  upon  the  rays,  after  they  have 
passed  through  it,  and  are  emerging  into  the  air,  or,  if  you 

.please,  into  a  mcmim.  And  since  the  crystal,  by  this  <lispo- 
sition,  or  virtue,  does  not  act  upon  the  rays,  unless  when 
one  of  their  sides  of  unusual  refraction,  looks  towards  that 
coast ;  this  argues  a  virtue  or  disposition  in  those  sides  of  the 
rays,  which  answers  to,  and  sympathises  with  that  virtue  or 
disposition  of  the  crystal,  as  the  poles  of  two  magnets  answer 
to  one  another.  And  as  magnetism  may  be  intended  and  re- 
mitted, and  is  found  only  in  the  magnet  and  in  iron,  so  this 
virtue  of  refi'acting  the  perpendicular  rays  is  greater  in  island 
crystal,  less  in  crystal  of  the  rock,  and  is  not  yet  found  in 
other  bodies.   I  do  not  say  that  this  virtue  is  magnetical;  it 

'  seems  to  be  of  another  kind  ;  I  only  say,  that  whatever  it  be, 
it  is  difficult  to  conceive  how  the  rays  of  light,  unless  they  be 
bodies,  can  have  a  permanent  virtue  in  two  of  tlifiir  sid«s 


[  S19  ] 

ceivedj  that  certain  particles  or  aggregates  of 
particles  from  any  matter  moving  with  great  and 
equal  velocity  may  occasion  the  sensations  o£ 
vision,  and  the  lother  effects  of  the  solar  beams; 
and  the  dilEculty  of  refracting  terrestrial  radianfe 
heat,  may  be  conceived  to  depend  upon  the 
greater  size  of  the  aggregated  particles  ;  undk 
according  to  the  Newtonian  hypothesis,  any 
matter  moving  with  considerable  quickness  m 
right  lines  may  be  conceived  capable  of  com"* 
mtmicating  an  expansive  motion  to  the  particles 
of  bodies. 

7.  If  specific  highly  rare  imponderable  fluids 
be  assumed,  to  account  for  the  phjenomena,  as 
many  must  be  adopted,  as  there  are  different 
series  of  efiects  produced  by  different  rays. 
There  must  be  a  matter  of  violet  light,  a  matter 

which  is  not  in  their  other  sides  ;  and  this  without  a,ny  regard 
to  their  position  to  the  space,  or  medium,  through  which  they 
pass"  Optics. 

May  not  the  experiments  of  Dr.  Young,  Phil.  Trans.  1804-, 
page  2,  which  he  considers  as  proving  that  homogeneous  light,, 
at  certain  equal  distances,  in  the  direction  of  its  motion,  is 
possessed  of  opposite  qualities  capable  of  neutralizing  each, 
other,  and  of  extinguishing  the  light  when  they  happen  to  be 
united  ;  be  explained  on  the  idea  of  attractive  poles  in  oppo- 
site sides  of  ihe  {^articles  of  light.  That  able  philosopher  con- 
sidered them  as  favourable  to  the  theory  of  undulation ;  but 
if  the  attractions  of  other  matter  can  destroy  the  motions  of 
light,  as  in  the  case  of  its  action  on  black  bodies,  may  not  the 
same  result  be  produced  by  the  attractions  of  its  particles  for 
each  other  ? 


[  S20  ] 

of  blue  light,  and  so  on  :  and  likewise  a  deoxi- 
dating ethereal  matter,  a  calorific  solar  matter, 
and  a  calorific  terrestrial  matter,  which  is  very- 
contradictory  to  the  usual  simplicity  of"  causes 
observable  in  the  oeconomy  of  things  ;  and  the 
idea  likewise  is  rendered  improbable,  by  ex- 
periments on  solar    phosphori.     When  a 
mixture  of  calcined  oyster  shells,  and  sulphur, 
that  have  been  heated   together,  is  exposed 
to  the  solar  rays,  it  forms  a  good  solar  phos- 
phorus, it  becomes  luminous,  and  continues 
so  for  some  minutes  in  the  dark  :  and  to  which- 
ever of  the  prismatic  rays  it  be  exposed,  its 
light  is  always  the  same,  pale  yellow.  It  is  easy 
to  explain  the  phaenomenon,  on  the  idea  that 
vibratory  motion  is  communicated  to  particles 
of  the  substance  by  the  rays,  in  consequence  of 
which,  some  of  its  own  particles  are  slowly  sent 
ofF,  or  that  the  particles  have  been  formed  into, 
new  aggregates  in  consequence  of  the  attraction 
of  the  substance  ;  but  if  light  be  supposed  spe- 
cific in  its  kind,  and  absorbed  and  emitted  ; 
then  when  the  phosphorus  is  exposed  to  blue 
rays,  blue  rays  alone  ought  to  be  emitted,  which 
is  not  the  case. 

8.  Many  authors  have  written  of  the  combi- 
nations of  light  and  heat  ;  but  from  the  views 
that  have  been  developed,  even  taking  the 
Newtonian  theory  of  emission  for  granted,  it  is 


[  22i  ] 

evident  tliat  such  combinations  are  merely  hy- 
pothetical. When  the  solar  rays  are  absorbed^ 
as  it  is  called,  by  a  black  body,  it  must  be  con- 
ceived, on  this  theory,  that  their  motion  is 
communicated  to  the  particles  of  the  body,  but 
whether  they  adhere  to  it,  or  are  thrown  off  in 
new  aggregates,  as  radiant  heat,  cannot  well  be 
discussed,  For  we  have  no  means  accurate 
enough  to  determine  whether  in  such  cases 
there  is  an  increase  of  weight;  and  this  is  the 
only  test  to  be  depended  upon,  of  true  chemical 
combinationj  or  of  mechanical  mixture. 

The  fire  produced  in  a  number  of  che- 
mical processes,  particularly  in  combustion, 
on  the  Newtonian  view,  may  be  ascribed  to 
particles  sent  into  free  space,  in  consequence  of 
the  repulsion  exerted  by  other  particles  at  the 
moment  of  their  entering  into  chemical  union. 
Any  solid  bodies  may  be  made  to  emit  light, 
when  exposed  to  a  blast  of  air  very  hot,  though 
not  luminous ;  the  light  is  always  of  the  same 
kind,  and  this  circumstance  is  favourable  to  the 
idea  of  the  possibility  of  the  conversion  of  com- 
mon matter  into  radiant  matter. 

Many  phsenomena  which  have  been  attributed 
to  combined  light,  appear  to  be  electricalj  or  to 
be  merely  the  effect  of  the  ignition  of  the  sub- 
stances,  for  whenever  heat  rises  beyond  a  cer- 
tain degree,  bodies  become  luminous ;  pieces 


quartz  rubbed  together  are  rendered  electrical ; 
and  by  percussion  or  friction  any  hard  bodies, 
may  be  intensely  healed. 

During  the  putrefaction  of  certain  animal 
and  vegetable  substances,  light  is  emitted  ;  and 
this  is  no  more  difficult  to  account  for,  than  the 
feeat  produced  during  similar  operations. 

The  light  emitted  by  certain  living  insectsj 
appears  to  depend  upon  ihe  secretion  of  a  sub* 
stance  very  easy  of  decomposition:  and  any 
chemical  change  may  be  supposed  adequate  to 
the  production  of  light. 

It  has  been  sometimes  supposed  that  a  specific 
imponderable  substance,  capable  of  producing 
light,  is  GOhtained  in  oxygene  gas  ;  and  it  has 
been  also  imagined  that  such  a  substance  exists 
in  inflammable  bodies  ;  but  the  facts  are  contra- 
dictory to  the  hypothesis.  Iron,  when  heated 
to  whiteness,  burns  with  amazing  brilliancy  ifi 
oxygene  gas,  throwing  off  sparks  intensely 
luminous ;  but  when  heated  to^600°  Fahren- 
heit, it  combines  slowly  with  the  oxygene^ 
producing  heat  without  light;  the  chemical 
change  is  of  the  same  nature  in  both  cases ;  the 
only  difference  is  in  its  rapidity  and  energy* 

9.  The  later  investigations  on  light,  teach  US 
that  there  is  still  much  to  learn  with  respect  to 
the  affections  and  motions  of  radiant  matter  ; 
snd  this  subject,  when  fully  understood,  pro* 


mises  to  connect  together  cbemical  and  meclia- 
nical  science,  and  to  offer  new  and  more  com- 
prehensive views  of  the  corpuscular  arrange- 
ments of  matter. 

In  radiant  matter,  the  particles  act  almost 
independently  of  the  common  laws  of  attraction ; 
and  by  prismatic  refraction,  the  difference  of 
their  actions  is  determined,  and  it  seems  pro- 
bable that  the  relations  of  the  different  particles 
to  the  crystalline  arrangements  of  matter,  will 
be  found  connected  with  those  powers  which 
they  possess  analogous  to  electrical  qualities. 

If  that  sublime  idea  of  the  ancient  Philoso- 
phers which  has  been  sanctioned  by  the  appro- 
bation of  Newton,  should  be  true,  namely,  that 
there  is  only  one  species^f  matter,  the  different 
chemical,  as  well  as  mechanical  forms  of  which 
are  owing  to  the  different  arrangement  of  its 
particles,  then  a  method  of  analysing  those  forms 
may  probably  be  found  in  their  relations  to 
radiant  matter.  Newton  supposed  that  the  lumi* 
nous  particles  at  the  violet  end  of  the  spectrum 
w^ere  smallest  in  size,  and  those  at  the  red  end, 
largest  in  size,  and  those  producing  the  inter- 
mediate colours,  intermediate.  On  this  idea, 
the  calorific  invisible  particles  would  be  the 
largest  in  the  solar  beam,  and  the  calorific 
particles  emitted  by  terrestrial  bodies,  may 
be  imagined  of  still  greater  size,  so  as  to  be 


[  224  1 

iacapable  of  passing'"tIirough  the  pores  of  dense 
transparent  media.  The  rays  at  the  red  end  of 
the  spectrum  in  their  chemical  powers,  tend  to 
burn  bodies,  or  to  combine  them  with  oxygene  ; 
those  at  the  opposite  end  tend  to  restore  in- 
ftamraabih'ty  to  bodies  ;  and  negative  electricity 
which  exercises  the  same  function,  produces 
hydrogene  gas  from  water;  and  this  is  the 
lightest  chemical  element  in  nature,  and  may 
be  conceived  to  be  composedj  on  the  corpuscular 
hypothesis,  of  the  smallest  particles. 

10.  The  idea  that  light  is  not  a  specIHc  fluid, 
is  confirmed  by  some  practical  results  relating 
to  the  oeconomy  of  light.  Count  Rumford  has 
lately  shewn  that  the  quantity  of  light  emitted 
by  a  given  portion  of  inflammable  matter 
in  combustion,  is  proportional  in  some  high 
ratio  to  the  elevation  of  temperature  ;  and  that 
a  lamp  having  many  wicks  very  near  each  other, 
so  to  communicate  heat,  burns  with  infinitely 
more  brilliancy  than  the  Argand's  lamps  in 
common  use. 


[  SS5  ] 


DIVISION  III. 

OF  EMPYREAL  UNDECOMPODNDED  SUB- 
STANCES, OR  UNDECOMPOUNDED  SUB- 
STANCES THAT  SUPPORT  COMBUSTION, 
AND  THEIR  COMBINATION  WITH  EACH 
OTHER. 

I.  General  Observations, 

1.  It  has  been  mentioned  that  almost  all  cases 
of  vivid  chemical  action  are  connected  with  the 
increase  of  temperature  of  the  acting  bodies, 
and  a  irreater  radiation  of  heat  from  them  ;  and 
in  a  number  of  instances,  light  is  also  produced, 

see  p.  92,  and  164- 

The  strength  of  the  attraction  of  the  acting 
bodies  determines  the  rapidity  of  combination, 
and  in  proportion  as  this  is  greater,  so  likewise 
is  there  more  intensity  of  heat  and  light.  In  the 
phlogistic  doctrine  of  chemistry,  all  changes  in 
which  heat  and  light  are  manifested,  were  ex- 
plained by  supposing  that  the  acting  bodies  con- 
tained the  principle  of  inflammability ;  in  the  an-^ 
tiphiogistic  doctrine,  most  of  them  have  beea 
accounted  for  by  imagining  the  position  or  trans- 
fer of  oxygene  :  but  all  the  later  researches  seem 
to  shew  that  no  peculiar  substance,  or  form  of 
YQl,.  I. 


[  526  ] 

matter  is  necessary  for  the  effect ;  that  it  is  a 
general  result  of  the  actions  of  any  substances 
possessed  of  stroqg  chemical  attractions,  or  dif- 
ferent electrical  relations,  and  that  it  takes  place 
in  all  cases  in  which  an  intense  and  violent 
motion  can  be  conceived  to  be  communicated 
to  the  corpuscles  of  bodies. 

2.  Many  bodies  which  have  not  yet  been 
decompounded,  and  which  cannot  well  be  con- 
ceived to  contain  oxygene,  produce  heat  and 
light  by  their  mutual  chemical  action- — such  are 
somemetaUicsubstaoces,  potassium,  forinstance, 
in  combining  with  arsenic  and  tellurium  ;  and 
sulphur   and  certain  metals  become  ignited 
during  their  union.  In  naming  a  class  of  bodies 
by  their  relations  to  combustion,  or  to  their  effi- 
cacy in  producing  the  phenomena  of  fire,  it  is 
only  intended  to  signify  that  the  production  of 
Jieat  and  light  is  more  characteristic  of  their  ac- 
tions, than  of  those  ofany  other  substances  ;  and 
ihey  are  likewise  opposed  to  all  other  undecom- 
pounded  substances  by  their  electrical  relations, 
being  always  in  voltaic  combinations  attracted 
to,  or   elicited  from    the    positive  surface ; 
>vhereas  all  other  known  undecompoundecj 
substances  are  separated  at  the  negative  surface. 
Only  two  undecompounded  empyreal  substan- 
ces have  been  as  yet  discovered.  They  wii|  b% 


I  227  i 

described,  and  tlieir  actions  on  each  other  dis- 
cussed in  the  two  followins:  sections. 

n.  Of  ox/gene  Gas. 

1.  Oxygene  gas  v^^as  discovered  by  Dr.  Priest- 
ley,in  August,  1774.  To  procure  it,  a  quantity  of 
manganese  (a  mineral  substance  found  in  abun- 
dance near  Exeter,  and  in  many  other  places) 
is  introduced  into  a  glass  retort  furnished  with 
a  ground  stopper,  a  quantity  of  oil  of  vitriol 
{sulphuric  acid)  sufficient  to  moisten  the 
manganese,  is  added,  and  they  are  mixed  toge- 
ther by  means  of  a  glass  rod  ;  the  bottom  of  the 
retort  is  then  gently  heated  by  means  ofa  lamp, 
and  the  extremity  of  its  neck  introduced  under 
an  inverted  cylinder  filled  with  water  in  the  hy- 
dro-pneumatic apparatus,*  Globules  of  gas  will 
soon  rise  through  the  water  ;  the  first  portions 
collected  must  be  thrown  away,  being  princi- 
pally the  common  air  contained  in  the  retort ; 
when  a  quantity  equal  to  the  capacity  of  the 
retort  has  been  thus  disposed  of,  the  remainder 
may  be  preserved  for  use. 

There  are  many  other  modes  of  obtaining 
oxygene  gas  ;  the  same  manganese  heated  to 
redness  in  andiron  tube,  such  as  a  gun-bar- 
rel, the  touch-hole  of  which  is  closed,  will 
afibrd  a  considerable  quantity  of  the  sub- 
•  See  Plate.  IV.  Fig.  23, 


f  f28  ] 

stance,  which  may  be  collected  by  means  of  a 
tube  fastened  into  the  neck  of  the  barrel,  and 
having  its  extremity  in  the  hydro-pneumatic 

fipparatos.* 

Nitre  heated  strongly  in  a  porcelain  retort, 
gives  off  oxygene  gas :  puee-coloured,  or  red 
oxide  of  lead  offers  a  similar  result ;  and  from 
any  of  the  salts  called  hyperoxymurlates, 
oxygene  is  procured  by  a  dull  red  heat ;  a  re- 
tort of  glass  may  be  employed  in  the  process  ; 
^nd  a  charcoal  fire  in  a  small  chaffin2;-dish. 

100  grains  of  the  hyperoxymuriate  ofpotassa, 
alford  about  II4  cubical  inches  of  oxygene 
gas,  under  common  circumstances. 

Tiie  oxygene  gas  procured  from  nitre  and  ihe 
snetallic  substances  above  mentioned,  is  mixed 
with  larger  or  smaller  quantities  of  other  per- 
manent gaseous  matter;  the  gas  from  hyperoxy- 
muriate of  potassa  is  iree  from  such  adulterationj 
and  when  collected  over  mercury,  contains  no- 
thing but  aqueous  vapour,  from  which  it  may 
be  purified  by  means  of  the  salt  called  dry  mu- 
riate of  lime,  or  by  sticks  of  common  potash. 
The  elastic  fluid  from  nitre  contains  more  foreign 
gaseous  matter  than  that  from  the  metallic  oxides, 
The  gas  from  manganese  and  sulphuric  acid, 
when  collected  in  the  mercurial  apparatus, 
seldom  affords  more  than  -3^  of  adulteratior?, 
*  See  Plate  IV.  2^ 


t  229  ] 

when  collected  over  water,  it  is  mixed  ■witfi 
from  -Jq-  to  -3^!  consequence  of  mixture  with 
the  common  air  expelled  from  the  water. 

The  degree  of  purity  of  oxygene  gas  pro- 
cured in  these  modes,  is  easily  ascertained  by 
fillina;  a  small  curved  tube  closed  at  one  end, 
with  mercury,  and  passing  into  it  some  of  the 
dry  gas,  so  as  to  occupy  about  ^  of  its  capacity, 
■Which  is  measured  ;  a  bit  of  phosphorus  in  the 
proportion  of  half  a  grain  to  a  cubical  inch  of 
gas,  is  introduced  and  made  to  pass  into  the 
curved  part  of  the  tube  ;  the  phosphorus  is  in- 
flamed by  the  application  of  the  heat  of  a  spirit 
lamp  ;  at  the  moment  of  the  expansion  of  the 
gas,  the  open  extremity  of  the  tube  is  closed 
under  the  mercury  by  the  finger,  and  heat  is 
applied  till  no  light  can  be  perceived  in  the 
tube ;  when  the  tube  is  cool,  the  finger  is  taken 
off.  The  mercury  will  instantly  rise  into  the 
lube ;  all  the  oxygene  will  have  been  absorbed, 
and  the  gas  remaining,  when  measured  and 
compared  with  the  original  quantity,  will  in* 
dicate  the  impurity. 

2.  Oxygene  gas  is  distinguished  from  all 
other  gaseous  matter  by  several  important  pro- 
J)erties. 

Inflammable  substances  turn  iti  it  tiiider  the 
same  circumstances  as  in  corarnon  air,  but  with 
infinitely  greater  vividness* 


[  230  3 

If  a  taper,  the  flame  of  which  has  been  ex- 
tinguished, the  wick  only  remaining  ignited, 
be  plunged  into  a  bottle  filled  with  it,  the  flames 
will  be  instantly  rekindled,  and  will  be  very 
brilliant,  and  accompanied  by  a  crackling 
noise. 

If  a  steel  wire,  or  thin  file,  having  a  sharp 
point,  armed  with  a  bit  of  vfood  in  inBamma- 
tion,  be  introduced  into  a  jar  filled  with  the 
gas,  the  steel  will  take  fire,  and  its  combustion 
will  continue  producing  a  most  brilliant  phe- 
nomenon. 

The  specific  gravity  of  oxygene  gas  has  been 
already  referred  to,  page  112,  it  is  to  that  of 
hydrogene  gas,  as  15  to  1  ;  100  cubical  inches 
under  an  atmospherical  pressure  equal  to  that 
of  30  inches  of  mercury,  and  at  the  temper- 
rtcure  of  60''  Fahrenheit,  weigh  about  34 
grains.  Its  power  of  refracting  light,  is  stated 
by  Biot  and  Arago  to  be  to  that  of  hydro- 
gene,  nearly  as  195  8  to  1000.  Its  capacity  for 
heat,  according  to  Br.  Crawford,  is  nearly  a« 
4.7  to  21.4. 

Oxygene  gas  is  slightly  absorbable  by  water. 
From  Dr.  Henry's  experiments,  it  appears  that 
this  fluid  takes  up  _V  of  its  bulk  at  60°  Fah- 
renheit, whatever  be  the  density  of  the  gas. 

Oxygene  gas  is  respirable ;  a  small  animal 
confined  in  a  jar  filled  with  this  gas,  lives  four 


[  £31  ] 

01'  five  times  as  long  as  in  an  equal  quantity  of 
common  air      hence  it  has  been  called  vital 

air. 

3.  The  proportion  in  which  oxygene  gas 
unites  to  bodies,  has  been  referred  to,  page  113, 
and  the  number  representing  it  may  be  consi- 
dered as  15;  various  elucidations  of  the  cor- 
rectness of  this  conclusion,  will  be  found  in 
the  following  pages. 

4.  Oxygene  gas  forms  the  most  important 
part  of  our  atmosphere.  It  is  easy  to  prove  this 
by  many  very  simple  experiments. 

If  phosphorus  be  inflamed  in  a  tube  half 
filled  with  atmospherical  air,  in  the  same  man- 
ner as  in  the  experiment  for  ascertaining  the 
purity  of  oxygene,  a  quantity  of  elastic  matter 
will  be  absorbed  equal  to  about  one  fifth  of  the 
volume  of  the  confined  air,  and  the  same  sub- 
stance will  be  produced  as  that  formed  by 
burning  phosphorus  in  oxygene:  the  remain- 
ing elastic  fluid  will  not  support  flame,  and 
animals  will  not  live  in  it ;  it  is  called  azote  or 
iiitrogene  gas  ;  and  if  four  parts  of  it  be  mixed 
wiih  about  one  part  of  pure  oxygene  gas,  they 
constitute  a  mixture  resembling  exactly  atmos- 
pheric air.  Tiiat  the  oxygene  obtained  artifi- 
cially is  the  same  chemical  substance  as  that  ^ 
found  in  the  air,  is  proved  by  the  phsenomena  of 
the  calcination  of  mercury.  If  running  mercury 


[  ] 

he  preserved  in  a  heat  at  which  it  boils  slowly^ 
in  a  retort,  the  beak  of  which  is  plunged  in 
mercury,  and  the  process  be  continued  for  some 
days,  there  will  be  a  gradual  diminution  of  the 
air,  and  after  a  certain  time,  the  remainder  will 
not  support  flame,  and  a  part  of  the  mercury 
will  be  found  converted  into  a  red  powder.  It 
will  have  gained  in  weight,  as  much  as  the  air 
has  lost;  and  the  red  powder,  if  heated  to  ig- 
nition, will  give  off  a  quantity  of  oxygene,  that, 
added  to  the  residual  elastic  substance,  will  re- 
constitute common  air  and  it  will  be  restored  to 
the  state  of  mercury.  And  this  oxygene,  if  a 
•part  of  it  be  compared  with  the  oxygene  procured 
in  other  modes  from  mineral  substances,  or  ar- 
tificial compounds,  is  found  in  no  respect  differ- 
ent ;  its  specific  gravity,  refractive  power,  and 
t:hemical  properties,  are  precisely  identical. 

There  have  been  several  substances  proposed 
for  ascertaining  with  facility  the  quantity  of 
oxygene  in  air ;  they  have  been  called  eudio- 
metrical  substances  ;  and  the  instruments  in 
which  they  have  been  employed,  are  named 
eudiometers.  The  solution  obtained  by  water 
from  sulphur  and  pearl  ashes,  or  sulphur  and 
lime  that  have  been  fused  together,  slowly  ab- 
sorbs oxygene  ;  a  solution  of  tin  in  muriatic 
acid,  has  a  similar  property  ;  and  likewise  so- 
lotions  of  iron,  into  which  nitrous  gaa  has  beeii 


t  $^S3  ] 

passed  till  they  become  coloured.  A  tube 
of  glass  graduated  to  1 00  parts,  forms  a  good 
eudiometer ;  and  when  filled  with  air,  it  is 
plunged  into  any  solution  that  will  absorb  oxy* 
gene,  and  suffered  to  remain  there,  till  the 
process  is  complete. 

It  was  formerly  supposed  that  there  are  great 
differences  in  the  quantity  of  oxy  gene  in  air, 
in  different  places,  and  at  different  times  ;  but 
all  late  researches  shew  that  .this  opinion  is 
erroneous. 

Air,  analysed  in  different  quarters  of  the 
globe,  in  cities,  and  in  the  country,  on  sea  and 
land,  has  been  found  not  perceptibly  different 
in  composition;  the  accurate  proportions  of 
oxygene  and  azote  are  21  and  79. 

It  has  been  shewn  by  the  experiments  of  Dr, 
Priestley,  Mr.  Dal  ton,  and  M.  Berthollet,  that 
different  elastic  fluids  have  a  tendency  to  rapid 
equable  mixture,  even  when  at  rest,  and  exposed 
to  each  other  on  small  surfaces  only  ;  and  the 
mixture  of  the  parts  of  the  atmosphere  is  con- 
stantly assisted  by  winds,  by  currents  of  air, 
and  by  all  the  motions  taking  place  on  the 
surface  of  the  earth4 

5.  In  all  processes  of  combustion  in  the  at- 
mosphere, oxygene  is  either  fixed  in  the  com- 
-bustible  body,  or  it  dissolves  it,  or  forms  a  new 
compound  with  it,   Jn  respiration,  as  will  be 


[  ] 


ftiore  folly  explained  in  the  last  part  of  tlik'. 
work,  the  volume  of  air  is  not  changed  :  but  a 
part  of  its  oxygene  disappears,  and  an  equal 
bulk  of  carbonic  acid  gas  is  found  in  its  place. 

As  the  constitution  of  the  atmosphere  con- 
stantly remains  the  same,  it  is  evident  that  there 
must  be  some  processes  in  nature,  by  which  a 
quantity  of  oxygene  is  produced  equal  to  that 
consumed.  One  principal  cause  of  the  renova- 
tion of  oxygene  appears  to  be  in  the  process  of 
vegetation  ;  healthy  plants  exposed  in  the  sun- 
shine, to  air  containing  small  quantities  of  car- 
bonic acid  gas,  destroy  that  elastic  fluid  and 
evolve  oxygene  gas  ;  so  that  the  two  great  classes 
of  organized  beings  are  dependent  upon  each 
other.  Carbonic  acid  gas,  which  is  formed  in 
many  processes  of  combustion,  as  well  as  irt 
respiration,  if  not  removed  from  air,  by  its 
excess  would  be  deleterious  to  animals,  but  it 
IS  a  healthy  food  of  vegetables  ;  and  vegetables 
produce  oxygene,  which  is  necessary  to  the 
existence  of  animals,  and  thus  this  part  of  the 
teconomy  of  nature  is  preserved,  by  the  very 
functions  to  which  it  is  subservient ;  and  the 
order  displayed  in  the  arrangement,  demon- 
states  the  intelligence  by  which  it  was  designed* 

6.  No  other  forms  of  matter  have  been  pro- 
duced from  oxygene  by  any  processes  to  which 
it  has  been  subiiiitted  ;  but  it  readily  eatei» 


[235] 

into  combination,  and  no  substance  is  mora 
active  as  a  chemical  agent.  It  is  known  to  be  a 
constituent  part  of  most  of  tlie  acids  and  earths, 
and  of  ail  the  alkalies  except  one,  and-the  his- 
tory of  its  compounds,  forms  the  most  extensive 
and  important  part  of  modern  chemistry. 

Its  operations,  as  w'lli  be  seen  hereafter,  are 
Connected  with  many  of  the  Arts  ;  with  the 
processes  of  bleaching,  dyeing,  colour-making, 
and  metallurgy  ;  and  in  its  various  applications 
to  the  production  of  fire,  it  is  absolutely  essen- 
tial to  culdvation,  and  to  the  comforts  and  ea- 
joyments  of  social  life. 

In  the  phsenomena  of  nature,  it  occasions  a 
wonderful  diversity  of  effects.  It  is  active  in 
most  of  the  changes  taking  place  on  the  surface 
of  the  globe,  and  its  constant  tendency  is  to 
unite  different  substances  in  forms  adapted  for 
the  purposes  of  organized  life. 

n.  Chlorine,  or  oxjmuriatic  Gas. 

\.  This  elastic  substance  was  discovered  by 
Scheele  in  1774.  It  maybe  procured  in  the 
hydro- pneumatic  apparatus,  by  a  process  very 
similar  to  that  first  described  in  the  last  section 
for  procuring  oxygene  gas,  but  the  manganese 
is  to  be  mixed  with  common  salt,  and  the  oil  of 
vitriol  diluted  with  an  equal  quantity  of  watei% 
The  best  proportions  are  three  parts  of  common 


E  .^36  ] 

salt  in  weight,  one  part  of  manganese  finely' 
powdered,  and  two  parts  of  oil  of  vitriol ; 
Instead  of  manganese,  red  oxide  of  mercury,  or 
puce-coloured  oxide  of  lead  may  be  used,  and 
instead  of  the  common  salt,  and  oil  of  vitriol, 
a  solution  of  muriatic  acid  in  water  (spirits  of 
salt.  C.) 

S.  Chlorine  is  of  a  yellowish  green  colour^ 
and  it  is  this  property  which  suggested  its 
name.*  Its  odour  is  extremely  disagreeable.  It 
is  not  capable  of  being  respired,  and  even  when 
mixed  in  very  small  quantities,  with  common  air, 
renders  the  air  extremely  pernicious  to  the  lungs^ 

Its  specific  gravity  is  to  that  of  hydrogene^ 
nearly  as  S3.5  to  1,  and  100  cubical  inches  of  it 
weigh  at  mean  temperature  and  pressure  between 
76  and  77  grains. 

It  is  absorbable  to  a  certain  extent  by  water: 
at  the  temperature  of  60°  Fahrenheit,  water 
dissolves  about  double  its  volume,  and  acquires 
a  strong  acrid  taste,  and  a  disagreeable  smell. 

When  an  inflamed  taper  is  introduced  into 
a  phial  filled  with  it,  the  light  continues,  but 
of  a  dull  red  colour,  and  a  dark  carbonaceous 
smoke  rises  from  the  flame. 

Many  of  the  metals  introduced  into  it  in, 
thin  filaments,  or  leaves,  or  powder,  take  fire, 
and  burn  spontaneously  at  common  tempera- 


1 


[  237  3 

tares  ;  such  are  copper,  tin,  arsenic,  zinc,  anti- 
mony, and  the  alkaline  metals. 

Phosphorus  burns  in  it  spontaneously,  with 
a  pale  white  light,  producing  a  white  volatile 
powder. 

Sulphur  melted  or  sublimed  in  it,  does  not 
burn,  but  forms  with  it  a  volatile  red  liquor. 

The  gas  does  not  change  by  any  action  of 
heat  or  cold;  but  its  aqueous  solution  freezes 
more  readily  than  water,  n^^-ifiely  at  about  40"^ 
Fahrenheit.  i 
When  freed  from  vapour  by  muriate  of  lime, 
the  gas  does  not  act  upon  perfectly  dry  sub- 
stances tinged  with  vegetable  colours  ;  but  when 
moiskire  is  present  in  the  gas  or  the  coloured 
bodies,  their  colours  are  speedily  destroyed, 
they  are  rendered  white,  or  brought  to  a  dull 
yellow ;  and  this  last  tint  is  almost  the  only 
one  not  changed  by  the  combined  action  of 
water  and  chlorine. 

3.  Chlorine  and  oxygene  are  capable  of 
existing  in  combination,  and  they  form  a  pe- 
culiar gaseous  matter.  They  do  not  unite,  whea 
mixed  together,  but  when  existing  in  certain 
solids,  they  may  be  detached  in  union. 

To  make  the  compound  of  chlorine  and  oxy- 
gene, hyperoxymuriate  of  potassais  introduced 
into  a  small  retort  of  glass  ;  and  twice  as  much 
muriatic  acid  as  will  cove^-  it,  diluted  with  an 


I  m  ] 

equal  volume  of  water.  By  the  application  of 
a  gentle  heat,  the  gas  is  evolved,  and  it  must  be 
collected  over  mercury, 

I  discovered  this  elastic  substance  in  its  pure 
form  in  January  1811,  and  gave  to  it  the  name 
of  EuchJorine,*  from  its  bright  yeiiow-green. 
colour. 

Its  tint  is  much  more  lively  than  that  of 
chlorine,  and  more  inclined  to  yellow. 

Its  smell  is  very?>dilFcrentj  being  not  unlike 
that  of  burnt  siio-ar. 

It  is  not  respirable. 

It  is  soluble  in  water,  to  which  it  sives  a 
lemon  colour,  water  takes  up  8  or  10  times  its 
volume. 

Its  specific  gravity  is  to  that  of  hydrogene, 
nearly  as  33  to  1.  100  cubical  inches  weigh  at 
mean  temperature  and  pressure  between  74  and 
75  grains. 

It  must  be  collected  and  examined  with  ereat 

O 

care,  and  only  in  small  quantities  at  a  time  ;  a 
very  gentle  heat  causes  it  to  explode,  sometimes 
even  the  heat  of  the  hand  ;  and  its  elements 
separate  from  each  other  with  great  violence, 
producing  light. 

From  the  facility  with  which  euclorine  de- 
composes, it  is  not  easy  to  ascertain  the  action 
of  combijstible  bodies  upon  it.  None  of  the 


C  239  ] 

inetals  that  burn  in  chlorine,  act  upon  this  ga? 
at  common  temperatures  ;  but  when  the  oxy- 
gene  is  separated,  they  then   inflame  in  the 
chlorine.  It  is  easy  to  witness  this.  Let  a  little 
Dutch  foil  be  introduced  into  a  bottle  filled  with, 
euchlorine,  it  will  undergo  no  change,  and 
will  not  even  tarnish.    Let  a  heated  glass  tube 
be  applied  to  the  gas  in  the  neck  of  the  bottle 
a  decomposition  will  take  place,  and  the  oxy- 
gene  and  chlorine  will  be  detached  from  each 
other,  and  at  the  same  moment  the  foil  will 
inflame,  and  burn  with  great  brilliancy. 

Chlorine  is  rapidly  absorbed  by  mercury  ; 
JEuchlorine  has  no  action  upon  it,  and  chlorine 
may  be  separated  from  euchlorine,  by  agitation 
over  mercury,  and  the  last  obtained  pure. 

When  phosphorus  is  introduced  into  euchlo- 
rine, it  is  instiintly  decomposed,  and  the  phos- 
phorus burns  as  it  would  do  in  a  mixture  of  Q, 
parts  in  volume  of  chlorine,  and  1  part  of 
oxygene. 

The  inflamed  taper,  and  inflamed  sulphur, 
instantly  decompose  it,  and  exhibit  the  same 
phsenomena  as  in  a  mixture  of  2  parts  of  chlo- 
rine, and  1  part  of  oxygene. 

That  the  gas  is  actually  composed  of  these 
elements,  is  shewn  by  causing  it  to  detonate  in 
a  glass  tube  over  pure  mercury.  It  looses  its 
bnlliant  colour,  and  becomes  chlorine  and 


[  240  3 


oxygene.  50  parts  treated  in  this  way,  expmcl 
so  as  to  become  about  60  parts,  which  consist 
of  40  parts  of  chlorine,  and  20  parts  of  oxygene. 
When  euchlorine  freed  from  water,  is  made 
to  act  upon  dry  vegetable  colours,  it  gradually 
destroys  them,  but  first  gives  to  the  blues,  a 
tint  of  red;  from  which,  and  its  absorbability 
by  water,  and  the  taste  of  its  solution,  which  is 
strongly  acrid  approaching  to  sour,  it  may  be  con- 
sidered as  approximating  to  an  acid  in  its  nature. 

4'  The  proportion  in  which  chlorine  combines 
with  bodies,  may  be  learnt  from  the  decompo- 
sition of  euchlorine  ;  the  oxygene  in  which 
is  to  the  chlorine,  as  15  to  67  in  weight.  If  eu- 
chlorine be  considered  as  consisting  of  one 
proportion  of  oxygene  to  one  of  chlorine,  then 
67  will  be  the  number  representing  chlorine, 
which  is  most  convenient,  as  beins:  a  whole 
number.  If  euchlorine  be  supposed  to  contain 
two  proportions  of  chlorine  and  one  of  oxy- 
gene, then  the  number  representing  chlorine, 
will  be  S3  5.    It  will  hereafter  be  shewn  that 
whichever  of  these  data  be  assumed,  the  rela- 
tions of  the  number  will  harmonize  with  those 
gained  from  various  other  combinations. 

5.  Scheele  considered  chlorine  as  an  element 
of  the  muriatic  acid,  and  hence  called  it  de- 
phlogisticatqd  marine  acid.  By  that  chemist, 
it  was  regarded  as  an  undecompoiinded  body. 


[  241  ] 


Lavoisier  and  Berthollet  asserted  that  it  was 
a  compound  of  muriatic  acid  gas,  and  oxygene. 
This  idea  is  now  universally  given  up  ;  but 
some  Chemists  in  France  and  Scotland,  con- 
ceive that  it  is  a  compound  of  oxygene,  and  an 
unknown  body,  which  they  call  dry  muriatic 
acid.  The  weight  of  chlorine,  its  absorbability 
by  water,  its  colour,  and  the  analogy  of  some 
of  its  combinations  to  bodies,  known  to  contain 
oxygene,  are  arguments  in  favour  of  its  being 
a  compound ;  and  it  is  possible  that  oxygene 
may  be  one  of  its  elements,  or  that  oxygene 
and   chlorine    are  similarly  constituted.  I 
have  made  a  number  of  experiments  with  the 
hopes  of  detecting  oxygene  in  it,  but  without 
success ;  none  of  its  compounds  with  inflam- 
mable bodies  or  metals  will  afford  this  prin- 
ciple ;    charcoal  intensely  ignited  in  it,  un- 
dergoes no  change,  nor  is  it  altered  by  the 
strongest  powers  of  electricity.  Should  oxygene 
ever  be  procured  from  it,  some  other  form  of 
matter,  possibly  a  new  one,  will  at  the  same 
time,  be  discovered,  as  entering  into  its  consti- 
tution, and  till  it  is  decompounded,  it  must  be 
regarded,  according  to  the  just  logic  of  che- 
mistry, as  an  elementary  substance.* 

*  M.  M.  Gay  Lussac,  Thenard,  [and  Curaudau,  since 
1808,  have  laid  claim  to  the  ideas  of  oxymuriatic  gas  being 
a,  simple  body,  and  of  muriatic  acid  gas  being  composed  of 

VOL.1.  R 


6.  Chlorine  has  never  been  found  pure  in 
nature ;  but  exists  in  many  compounds,  par- 
ticularly in  common  salt,  as  is  evident  from  the 
mode  of  its  production  from  that  substance.  It 
is  a  substance  of  considerable  importance  in  its 
relation  to  the  art  of  bleaching,  an  application 
first  made  by  the  sagacity  of  M.  BerthoUet. 

In  the  ancient  process  of  bleaching,  the  cloths 
of  linen  and  cotton,  after  beina;  treated  with  al- 
kaline  lixivia,  to  free  them  from  resinous  and 
oily  matters,  and  in  some  cases  with  very  di- 
luted oil  of  vitriol,  to  cleanse  them  from  stains 
produced  by  iron,  were  exposed  upon  grass  to 
dew  and  air,  and  some  weeks,  or  even  months, 
were  required  to  give  them  their  perfect 
whiteness. 

By  a  warm  solution  of  chlorine  in  water, 
they  are  bleached  in  a  very  short  period  ;  but 
their  texture  is  injured  ;  for  at  the  same  time 
that  oxygene  is  added  to  the  colouring  matters, 
muriatic  acid  gas  is  formed  and  dissolved  in  the 
water,  which  corrodes  the  vegetable  fibres. 

The  gas  has  been  condensed  in  alkaline 
lixivia,  and  in  lime  water.  The  substance  called 

this  substance  and  hydrogene.  But  these  opinions  were  started 
by  the  illustrious  Discoverer  of  the  gas,  in  1774.  In  th« 
papers  in  the  Philosophical  Transactions  in  which  I  have  en- 
deavoured to  shew  that  ii  is  a  peculiar  acidifying  and  solvent 
principle,  I  have  merely  followed  and  extended  his  views,  and 
I  referred  to  thpra  in  the  first  paper  I  published  on  the  subject. 


[  m  ] 

tj§iymutiate  of  lime  is  commonly  used  for 
bleaching  ;  but  though  the  solution  of  this  suhi- 
stance  does  not  injure  so  rtiuch  as  that  of  the  gaSj 
yet  it  tends  to  weaken  the  texture  of  linen. 

I  have  found  that  the  fluid  produced  by  the 
condensation  of  the  gas  in  water  containing 
liiagnesia  diffused  through  itj  bleaches  without 
injuring  the  vegetable  fibre.  It  acts  much  more 
slowly  and  gradually,  than  any  of  the  other  com- 
pounds employed  for  the  same  purpose,  and  has 
been  applied  at  my  suggestion  in  Ireland,  within 
the  last  few  months,*  with  success,  in  whitening 
printed  calicos,  and  when  properly  used,  it  does 
not  destroy  even  reds  or  yellows  fixed  by  mor- 
dants. Magnesia  may  be  easily  procured  from 
sea-water,  or  from  the  residual  liquor  of  salt 
works  ;  and  there  is  a  probability  that  this  new 
bleaching  fluid  may,  at  no  very  distant  period, 
come  into  common  use. 

M.  Berthollet  supposed  that  chlorine  de- 
stroyed colours  by  parting  with  its  oxygene  ;  the 
new  experiments  shew  that  the  Oxygene  is  de- 
rived from  the  water,  which  is  decomposed  by 
double  affinity;  that  of  hydrogene  for  chlorine, 
and  of  the;  colouring  matters  for  oxygene. 

The  salts  which  are  called  hyperoxymuriates, 
and  oxymuriates,  are  coirspounds  of  metallic 

*  By  Mr.  D%ffy  of  Dublin,  a  very  enlightened  calia®" 
priiHer. 


[  244  ] 


bodies  with  chlorine  and  oxygene ;  and  the 
oxygene  is  held  in  them  by  a  very  weak  at- 
traction, and  therefore  is  easily  given  off  to 
colouring  or  inflammable  matters. 

The  great  circumstance,  in  bleaching  with 
these  compounds,  is  that  the  salt  remaining 
after  the  abstraction  of  oxygene,  should  not 
act  upon  the  linen ;  linen  boiled  in  a  strong 
solution  of  the  salt  called  muriate  of  lime,  the 
substance  remaining  in  the  solution,  when  oxy 
muriate  of  lime  is  used,  I  have  found  is  consi- 
derably weakened.  Solution  of  muriate  of 
magnesia  has  no  action  of  this  kind,  and  there- 
fore the  new  bleaching  liquor  can  hardly  be 
injurious  to  the  manufacture. 

These  general  views  respecting  chlorine, 
and  the  uses  and  mode  of  agency  of  the 
combinations  of  chlorine  and  oxygene,  will  be 
found  to  be  confirmed  by  a  number  of  state- 
ments, to  be  given  In  the  progress  of  this  work. 
Certain  conclusions  have  been  anticipated, — but 
the  most  important  application  of  chlorine 
could  not  with  propriety  be  separated  from 
its  history;  as  an  undecompounded  body, 
though  depending  upon  its  power  of  detaching 
oxygene,  which  appears  to  be  the  true  bleaching 
principle  from  compounds. 


[  245  ] 


DIVISION  IV. 

OF  UNDECOMPOUNDED  INFLAMMABLE  OR 
ACIDIFEROUS  SUBSTANCES  NOT  METAL- 
LIC, AND  THEIR  BINARY  COMBINATIONS 
WITH  OXYGENE  AND  CHLORINE,  OR 
WITH  EACH  OTHER. 

I,  Preliminary  Observations, 

The  bodies  to  be  considered  in  this  division, 
are  six,  hydrogene,  azote,  sulphur,  phosphorus, 
carbon,  and  boracium  or  boron.  Amongst 
these,  hydrogene  is  distinguished  from  all  the 
rest  by  very  singular  properties.  Sulphur  and 
phosphorus  are  the  most  analogous  to  each 
other.  All  these  substances  are  capable  of  com- 
bining with  oxygene,  and  all  except  azote  and 
charcoal,  with  chlorine.  They  are  separated 
in  Voltaic  combinations,  at  the  negative  surface, 
and  in  their  electrical  relations,  as  well  as  che- 
mical powers,  are  opposed  to  oxygene  and 
chlorine. 


[  24Q  ] 


II.  Hfdrogene  Gas,  or  injlammable  Air. 

1 .  This  elastic  substance  was  first  examined 
jn  its  pure  form,  by  Mr.  Cavendish,  in  17 66. 

It  may  be  procured  in  the  hydropneumatic 
apparatus  from  zinc  or  iron  filings,  by  means 
of  oil  of  vitriol  diluted  with  8  times  its  weight 
of  water ;  a  retort,  or  a  bottle  furnished  with 
a  tube  may  be  used  ;  no  artificial  heat  is  required 
in  the  process.  It  may  like\vise  be  produced 
by  passing  steam  over  turnings  of  iron  heate4 
to  redness  in  a  guiu-barrel, 

2.  Hydrogene  is  distinguished  from  all  other 
gaseous  bodies,  by  its  extreme  lightness.  The 
relation  of  its  weight  to  that  of  oxygene  and 
air,  has  been  already  stated.  1 09  cubical  inches 
of  it  at  mean  temperature,  and  pressure,  weigh 
about  two  grains  and  a  quarter. 

It  is  very  slightly  absorbable  by  water  ;  that 
fluid  takes  up      only  of  its  volume. 

Hydrogene  gas  has  no  taste,  a  slight  but  dis- 
agreeable smell.  It  is  capable  of  being  taken 
into  the  lungs,  but  cannot  be  breathed  by  man, 
for  more  than  a  minute.  Small  animals  die  in 
it  in  a  much  shorter  time. 

When  an  inflamed  taper  is  plunged  into  a 
long  narrow  jar  filled  with  hydrogene,  and 
opened  in  the  atmosphere,  it  is  extinguished  ; 


I  247  ] 

but  the  gas  takes  fire,  and  burns  in  contact 
with  the  atmosphere. 

One  part  mixed  with  two  or  three  parts  of 
air  explodes  violently  by  the  action  of  an  in- 
flamed body,  or  an  electrical  spark. 

3'  Hydrogene  gas,  as  has  been  stated,  com- 
bines with  oxygene  gas,  and  to  this  circum- 
stance its  inflammation  in  the  air  is  owrng.  If 
the  two  gasses  be  pure,  ivaier  is  the  only  result, 
and  the  proportions  are  2  of  hydrogene  to  15 
of  pxygene  in  weight,  or  2  to  1  in  volume. 
The  union  may  be  effected  by  the  electric 
spark  as  described  in  page  104,  over  mercury, 
or  the  hydrogene  may  be  introduced  into  a  ves- 
sel full  of  oxygene  through  a  narrow  tube,  by 
means  of  pressure,  and  inflamed  by  electricity, 
or  the  oxygene  may  be  made  to  burn  in  the 
hydrogene  in  a  similar  manner,*  When  a 
stream  of  oxygene  is  thrown  into  a  stream  of 
inflamed  hydrogene,  tlie  heat  produced  is  very 
intense,  and  far  exceeds  the  highest  heat  of  our 
furnaces,  and  may  be  used  to  fuce  bodies, 
intractable  by  any  other  fire  raised  by  com- 
bustion. 

The  nature  of  water  may  be  shewn  synthe- 
tically as  well  as  analytically. 

It  is  separated  into  2  of  hydrogene  in  volume 
p^d  1  of  oxygene  in  the  voltaic  circuit;  the 
#  See  Plate  V.  fig.  25. 


[  248  ] 


oxygene  appears  at  the  positive,  the  hydrogene 
at  the  negative  metallic  surfaces  ;  and  by  means 
of  platina  wires,  hermetically  sealed  into  glass 
tubes,  the  products  are  collected. 

When  10  grains  of  the  metal  called  potas- 
sium are  added  to  about  2  grains  of  water  in 
a  glass  tube,  there  is  a  violent  action,  much 
hydrogene  is  disengaged,  and  by  heating  the 
results,  the  operation  is  completed.  The  same 
effect  is  produced  upon  the  potassium,  as 
would  be  produced  by  heating  it  strongly  in 
contact  with  a  small  quantity  of  oxygene,  it 
becomes  united  to  oxygene,  and  its  increase 
of  weight  is  in  proportion  to  the  weight  of  the 
hydrogene,  as  15  to  S. 

It  will  be  needless  to  dwell  upon  the  proper- 
ties of  water  ;  it  is  scarcely  ever  found  in  nature 
pure,  usually  holding  saline  or  gaseous  matters 
in  solution.  It  becomes  solid  at  32°  Fahrenheit 
and  elastic  at  2 1 2°,  and  in  the  state  of  steam 
has  been  applied  for  the  production  of  the 
most  important  mechanical  effects  in  the  steam 
engine. 

To  describe  the  uses  of  water  in  the  opera- 
lions  of  nature,  or  to  point  out  its  applications 
to  the  purposes  of  the  arts,  and  common  life, 
v/ould  demand  a  volume.  Animals  and  vege- 
tables depend  upon  it  for  their  existence. 
Water  occupies  nearly  two-thirds  of  the  sur- 


[  249  ] 

face  of  the  globe  ;  and  whether  existing  in  the 
pcean  united  to  salts,  or  in  the  atmosphere  as 
vapour,  or  poured  down  upon  the  surface  as 
rain,  dew,  hail  or  snow,  or|  collected  in  lakes, 
rivers,  and  springs,  its  effects  are  constantly 
connected  with  the  order  of  the  ceconomy  of 
our  system. 

4'  Hydrogene  and  chlorine  unite  with  still 
more  readiness  than  hydrogene  and  oxygene. 
To  make  the  combination,  as  has  been  stated 
page'  111,  it  is  only  necessary  to  expose  a  mix- 
ture of  equal  parts  of  the  two  gasses  to  common 
day  light,  over  dry  mercury,  or  in  a  vessel 
furnished  with  a  stop  cock  previously  exhausted. 
In  a  certain  time,  the  chlorine  will  have  lost  its 
colour,  and  have  combined  with  the  hydrogene. 
If  the  gasses  have  been  freed  from  aqueous 
vapour,  there  will  be  no  notable  condensation, 
and  the  result  is  a  peculiar  elastic  fluid,  mwiatic 
acid  gas.  By  exposure  to  direct  solar  light  as 
has  been  stated  before,  they  explode  ;  they 
likewise  explode  by  the  electrical  spark ;  the 
results  in  this  case,  as  I  have  found,  are  the  same, 
1  in  volume  of  hydrogene  unites  to  1  in  volume 
of  chlorine,  or  1  in  weight  to  33.5. 

The  nature  of  muriatic  acid  gas  maybe  proved 
by  analysis,  as  well  as  synthesis.  If  some  pure 
grain  tin  be  kept  melted  for  some  time,  in  a 
little  curved  tube  containing  muriatic  acid  gas 


[  250  ] 

over  dry  mercury,  the  tin  v^ili  be  converted 
into  the  same  substance  as  that  produced  by  its 
direct  action  upon  chlorine,  Llbavius's  liquor, 
and  the  hydrogene  gas,  when  accurately  mea- 
sured, will  be  found  to  be  eciual  to  one  half  the 
volume  of  the  muriatic  acid  gas. 

Those  persons  who  suppose  chlorine  to  be  a 
compound  of  an  unknoM^n  body,  and  oxygene, 
conceive  muriatic  acid  gas  to  be  a  compound  of 
^  of  its  weight  of  water,  and  the  same  hypothe- 
tical substance  ;  but  as  no  oxygene  has  yet 
been  shewn  to  exist  in  chlorine,  so  no  such 
combined  moisture  has  been  proved  to  exist  in 
muriatic  acid  gas.  It  contains  minute  quantities 
in  the  vapour  of  liydrated  muriatic  acid  ;  but 
no  water  except  this  can  be  procured  from  it, 
unless  by  substances  that  contain  oxygene  ;  and 
the  quantity  produced,  is  exactly  proportional 
(o  the  oxygene  contained  in  the  substance,  and 
the  hydrogene  in  the  muriatic  acid  gas,  and  the 
other  result  is  the  same  as  the  substance  combined 
with  the  oxygene  would  produce  direclly' by  lis. 
action  upon  chlorine. 

Five  grains  of  red  oxide  of  mercury,  heated 
to  rednegSj  gave  oW  a  cubical  inch,  and  i  of 
pxygene  gas.  Five  grains  of  the  same  sub- 
stance were  made  to  act  on  muriatic  acid  gas 
by  a  spirit  lamp  in  a  curved  tube  over  mercury  ; 
pprrosiyq  sublimate  was  forn^ed;  and  w<iter  which 


t  251  1 

absorbed  muriatic  acid  gas,  and  5  cubical  inches 
pf  muriatic  acid  gas  discjppeared  ;  and  of  thesQ 
4  cubical  inches,  and  ^  at  least,  must  have  been 
decomposed  by  the  oxide  of  mercury,  their 
phlorine  united  to  the  metal,  and  their  hydro- 
gene  to  the  oxygene  ;  and  the  additional  half 
a  cubic  inch,  as  wjil  appear  from  the  facts  about 
to  be  staled,  is  nearly  the  quantity  that  ought 
to  be  absorbed  by  tjie  water;  the  barometer  ii> 
this  experiment  gtpod  at  SO. 3  ;  the  thermometer 
^t  54°  Fahrenheit;  Corrosive  sublimate  is  pro* 
(duced  by  the  direct  combination  of  mercury 
and  chlorine  ;  and  the  results  of  this  experiment 
can  only  be  logically  explained,  on  the  idea 
of  muriatic  acid  gas  being  composed  of  hydroT 
geiie  and  chlorine. 

For  the  purposes  of  experiments,  niuriatis:; 
acid  gas  is  procured  by  the  action  of  oil  of  vi- 
triol on  certain  salts,  such  as  common  salt,  or 
sal  ammoniac.  It  rises  without  the  application 
of  heat,  when  the  substances  are  mixed  toge- 
ther ;  a  glass  retort  should  be  used  with  a  ground 
stopper,  the  salt  should  be  in  large  pieces,  no{; 
in  powder,  and  some  bibulous  paper  should  be 
introduced  irito  the  neck  of  the  retort,  to  pre- 
vent any  fluiid  acid  from  soiling  the  mercury, 
pver  which  it  must  be  collected- 
Muriatic  acid  gas,  instantly  extinguishes 
liamg.    |t  reddens  dry  litmus  paper.  Vyhei^ 


[  252  ] 


suffered  to  pass  into  the  atmosphere,  it  pro- 
duces a  white  smoke  by  uniting  to  the  aqueous 
vapour  in  the  air.  Its  taste  is  intensely  acid.  Its 
smell,  pungent  and  disagreeable. 

The  specific  gravity  of  muriatic  acid  gas  is 
to  that  of  hydrogene,  nearly  as  17  to  1  ;  100 
cubical  inches  of  it  weigh  at  mean  temperature 
and  pressure,  between  39  and  40  grains.  Mu- 
riatic acid  gas  is  rapidly  absorbed  by  water ; 
at  the  temperature  of  40°  Fahrenheit,  water 
absorbs  about  480  times  its  bulk  of  gas,  and 
forms  solution  of  muriatic  acid  gas  in  water, 
the  specific  gravity  of  which  is  1,2109. 

The  table  which  follows,  exhibits  the  quan- 
tity of  muriatic  acid  gas  in  solutions  of  different 
specific  gravities  constructed  after  experiments 
made  at  my  request  by  Mr.  E.  Davy,  in  the 
Laboratory  of  the  Royal  Institution,*  the  re- 
sults of  which  I  witnessed. 

*  47.25  grains  of  water  at  43°  Fahrenheit,  barometer 
being  at  30.2,  absorbed  34.8  grains  of  gas,  and  formed  a  so- 
Jution  of  specific  gravity,  1.21,  and  the  whole  precipitated  by 
nitrate  of  silver,  afforded  about  132  grains  of  dry  horn  silver. 

Again,  57.5  grains  of  water  at  44°,  barometer  being  30.1, 
gained  nearly  38  grains  by  absorbing  acid  gas,  and  formed  a 
solutioH  of  specific  gravity,  1.2. 

Thermometer,  49°  Fahrenheit ;  barometer  29 ;  46.5  grains 
of  water  by  absorbing  13.4  grains  of  gas  gained  a  specific 
gravity  of  1.114.  The  two  last  results,  which  are  marked  in 
the  table,  agree  with  those  gained  by  calculation  from  the 
first  experiment.  When  about  150  grains  of  the  strongest 
solution  of  muriatic  acid  in  water,  were  mixed  with  distilled 


[  253  ] 


At  temperature  45." 
Fahrenheit. 


Barometer  30. 


100  parts  of  solu- 
tion of  muriatic 
acid  gas  in  water  of 
specific  gravity. 


Of  Muriatic  acid 
gas,  parts. 


1  1 

1.21 

il  AO 

42.43 

1.20* 

40.80 

1.19 

3a. 38 

l.lb 

3d.3o 

1.17 

if*  i  a  4 

1.  lo 

32.i»2 

1.15 

o 

o 

30.30 

1.14 

28.28 

1.13 

C3 

26.26 

1.12 

ain. 

24.24 

1. 11* 

22.3 

1.10 

20.20 

1.09 

18.18 

1.08 

16.16 

1.07 

14.14 

1.06 

12.12 

1.05 

10.10 

1.04 

8.08 

l.OS 

6.06 

1.03 

4.04 

1.01 

2.02 

water,  both  being  at  63°,  the  temperature  rose  to  75"  |  so  that 
the  real  specific  gravity  ef  solutions  mixed  with  water,  is 
probably  a  little  greater  than  the  mean,  though  to  no  amount 
that  can  interfere  with  the  use  of  the  table.  To  find  the  com- 
position of  an  acid  of  specific  gravity  not  marked  in  the  table, 
find  the  difference  between  the  two  specific  gravities  nearest 
to  it  in  the  table  d,  and  the  difference  between  their  quantities 
of  gas  likewise  the  difference  between  the  given  specific 
gravity,  and  that  nearest  to  it,  c,  then  d  is  to  b:'.c:x  which 
added  to  the  quantity  of  the  lower  specific  gravity,  is  the 
quantity  of  acid  gas  sought. 


[  2Bi  ] 

The  compound  of  water,  and  muriatic  adid 
gas  existing  in  vapour  in  muriatic  acid  gas, 
alluded  to  page  189,  is  probably  of  the  same 
Constitution  as  the  most  saturated  solution  at 
the  same  temperature,  and  at  45°  must  contain 
57.57  per  cent,  of  water  ;  but  in  common  cases 
the  quantity  of  this  vapour  is  too  small  to  in- 
fluence to  any  extent  the  results  of  experiments 
on  muriatic  acid  gas;  fori  found  that  200  cubical 
inches  of  gas  at  75°  passed  slowly  through  a  thin 
tube  of  glass  cooled  to  10°  below  0  of  Fahrenheit; 
did  not  increase  its  weight  ^  %^^^^)  but 

the  deposition  of  fluid  was  verydistinct. 

4.  The  number  representing  hydrogene,  as 
is  evident  from  the  details  given  page  112,  and 
those  just  stated,  and  as  will  appear  from  a 
number  of  other  evidences,  may  be  considered 
as  unity. 

5.  Of  all  gaseous  substances,  hydrogene  is 
most  distinctly  characterized  as  an  element;  and 
in  its  relations  it  is  opposed  to  oxygene. 

Its  extreme  lightness,  and  the  small  quanti- 
ties in  which  it  enters  into  combination,  render 
it  unhkely  that  it  should  be  resolved  into  other 
forms  of  ponderable  matter,  by  any  instruments 
or  processes  at  present  within  our  power.  Some 
extraordinary  phaenomena  which  have  been 
explained  in  the  idea  of  its  being  a  compound, 
and  which  will  be  referred  to  towards  the  endk 


[  255  ] 


of  this  volume,  are  more  satisractorlly  accounted 
for  on  the  idea  of  its  being  simple,  or  at  least 
a  form  of  elementary  matter. 

Hydrogene  gas  is  employed  for  filling 
balloons,  and  its  low  specific  gravity  renders 
it  well  fitted  for  aerostatic  purposes.  It 
is  an  important  principle  in  animal  and 
vegetable  bodies ;  and  exists  in  larger  or 
smaller  quantities  in  all  organized  compounds. 
It  is  the  body  which  gives  the  power  of 
burning  with  flame  to  all  the  substances  used 
for  the  oeconomical  production  of  heat  and 
light. 

III.  Of  Azote,  or  nitrogene  Gas. 

1.  Azote  was  discovered  by  Dr.  Rutherford 
in  1772.  It  may  be  procured  by  extractino- 
oxygene  from  common  air,  in  the  manner  de- 
scribed page  231.  It  is  formed  directly  by 
dissolving  animal  matters,  such  as  glue  or  mus- 
cular fibre,  in  diluted  aquafortis,  or  fuming 
nitrous  acid  mixed  with  ten  or  twelve  times  its 
weight  of  water.  It  may  be  collected  over 
water. 

Azote  extinguishes  flame.  It  is  very  slightly 
absorbable  by  water  ;  that  fluid,  according  to 
Dr.  Henry's  experiments,  takes  up  only 
part  of  its  volume.    Its  specific  gravity,  as  was 
mentioned  in  page  113,  is  to  that  of  hydrogene 


[  256  ] 


as  13  to  1.  100  cubical  inches  of  it,  at  mean 
temperature  and  pressure,  weigh  between  29 
and  30  grains.  According  to  Biot  and  Arrago, 
its  refractive  power  is  58976. 

Its  capacity  for  heat,  according  to  Dr.  Craw- 
ford, is  .7936. 

2.  There  are  several  compounds  containing 
azote  and  oxygene  in  dijBPerent  proportions; 
three  of  which  have  been  already  referred  to, 
page  113.  Their  nature  is  more  easily  demon- 
strated by  analysis  than  synthesis  ;  though  the 
most  important  of  them,  nitrous  acid  in  its  union 
with  water,  may  be  made  by  the  direct  combi- 
nation of  azote  and  oxygene  with  that  fluid. 

Dr.  Priestley  ascertained  that  acid  matter 
was  formed  by  passing  electrical  sparks  through 
a  mixture  of  azote  and  oxygene  over  water,  and 
Mr,  Cavendish  by  a  series  of  beautiful  experi- 
ments, proved  that  the  two  gasses  combined  with 
the  water  and  formed  the  same  acid  as  that  pro- 
cured from  nitre  by  oil  of  vitriol.  The  other  com-^ 
pounds  of  azote  and  oxygene  are  alway  s  formed 
from  the  decomposition  of  this  acid,  or  some  of 
its  compounds ;  but  as  nitrous  acid  exists  in  dif- 
ferent states,  its  properties  will  be  best  under- 
stood after  the  more  simple  combinations  of 
azote  and  oxygene  have  been  describjed. 

3.  JVitrous  oxide,  the  compound  containing  the 
smallest  quantity  of  oxygene,  was  discovered  by 


[  ] 

t)r.  Priestley  in  1772,  and  named  by  him  de* 
phlogisticated  nitrous  air. 

It  is  a  gaseous  body,  which,  as  has  been 
stated^  page  106,  may  be  produced  by  heating; 
nitrate  of  ammonia;  a  glass  retort  is  employed 
to  contain  the  salt ;  the  flame  of  an  Argand 
lamp  is  sufficient  to  produce  the  gas.  It  may 
likewise  be  obtained  durin2;  the  solution  of 
zinc  in  very  weak  nitric  acid,  but  in  this  case  it 
is  not  pure. 

Nitrous  oxide  may  be  preserved  over  water  ; 
but  it  is  absorbed  by  this  fluid,  which  takes  up, 
-/o  of  its  volume  nearly,  and  for  accurate  ex- 
periments, it  should  be  collected  in  the  mer- 
curial apparatus. 

Its  degree  of  purity  may  be  learnt  from  the 
quantity  absorbed  by  water. 

Nitrous  oxide  exhibits  the  following  proper- 
ties. A  taper,  plunged  into  it,  burns  with 
<rreat  brilliancy,  and  the  flame  gradually  be- 
comes surrounded  with  a  blueish  halo.  Phos- 
phorus may  be  melted  and  sublimed  in  it  with- 
out inflaming  ;  but  when  introduced  into  it  in 
a  state  of  vivid  combustion,  the  brilliancy  of 
the  flame  is  greatly  increased.  Sulphur  and 
most  other  combustible  bodies,  require  a  higher 
decree  of  heat  for  their  combustion  in  it  than 
they  require  in  oxygene,  or  in  the  atmosphere. 

Its  specific  gravity,  according  to  my  experi- 

VOL.  I.  S 


[  2-58  ] 

ments,  is  to  tbat  of  hydrogene,  nearly  as  21  to 
1.  100  cubical  inches  of  it  at  mean  temperature 
and  pressure,  weigh  between  48  and  49  grains. 
Its  taste  is  sweeiish,  iis  odour  slight  but 
agreeable. 

It  is  respirable,  but  not  fitted  to  support 
life.  I  ascertained  in  1799,  that  when  it  was 
respired,  it  produced  effects  analogous  to  those 
produced  by  drinking  fermented  liquors, — 
usually  a  transient  intoxication,  or  violent  exhi- 
laration. Individuals  that  differ  iti  temperament 
are  however,  as  might  be  expected,  differently 
affected. 

The  nature  of  nitrous  oxide  is  shewn  by  the 
experiment  referred  to,  page  I06.  One  in  vo- 
lume of  this  gas  is  decomposed  by  one  volume 
of  hydrogene,  water  is  formed,  and  one  in 
volume  of  azote  remains. 

Or  if  well- burnt  charcoal  be  inflamed  in  a 
volume  of  it  by  a  burning  glass,  1  in  volume 
of  it  affords  as  much  carbonic  acid  as  half  a 
volume  of  oxygene,  and  when  this  carbonic 
acid  is  absorbed,  a  volume  of  azote  remains  ; 
so  that  it  consists  of  26  in  weight  of  azote,  and 
15  of  oxygene. 

4.  JYitrous  gas  was  noticed  by  Dr.  Hales, 
but  its  properties  as  a  specific  elastic  fluid  were 
first  described  by  Dr.  Priestley  in  1772  ;  it  is 
procured  during  the  solution  of  various  bodies, 


C  ^^59  ] 

in  nitric  acid;  sugar,  silver,  mercury,  copper, 
bismuth,  afford  it  very  readily.  Filings  of  cop- 
per are  usually  employed  ;  and  a  retort,  or  a 
bottle  having  a  tube,  inserted  into  it  is  used  ;  the 
acid  (if  the  common  acid  of  commerce)  should 
be  diluted  with  6  or  8  times  its  weight  of  water  : 
the  production  of  the  gas  may  be  assisted  by  a 
gentle  heat. 

It  may  be  collected  over  water,  which  absorbs 
only  about  of  its  volume  ;  but  for  accurate 
purposes  mercury  should  be  employed. 

The  degree  of  purity  of  nitrous  gas  may  be 
known  by  agitating  it  in  contact  with  sin  aqueous 
solution  of  green  sulphate  of  iron.  Nitrous  gas 
is  quickly  absorbed  by  this  substance. 

When  a  jar  of  nitrous  gas  is  opened  in  the 
atmosphere,  red  fumes  appear.  When  an  in- 
flamed taper  is  plunged  into  it,  the  light  is 
instantly  extinguished. 

Inflamed  sulphur  is  extinguished  by  it;  but 
inflamed  phosphorus  burns  in  it  with  great 
brilliancy.  It  cannot  be  made  to  detonate  when 
mixed  with  hydrogene,  by  the  electric  spark. 

Its  specific  gravity  is  to  that  of  hydrogene. 
as  14  to  1.  100  cubical  inches  of  it  weigh  about 
32  grains. 

Whether  it  is  respirable,  or  has  taste  or 
smell,  cannot  be  ascertained,  as  it  instantly 


[  260  ] 

unites  vviili  the  oxygene  in  air,  producing  red 
fumes,  which  are  nitrous  acid  gas. 

The  composition  of  nitrous  gas  has.  been 
already  referred  to,  page  107* 

It  is  decomposable  by  several  of  the  metals 
when  they  are  heated  in  it^  such  as  arsenic, 
zinc,  potassium  in  excess  ;  it  oxidates  them, 
and  aHbrds  iialf  its  vohjme  of  azote.  In  an  ex- 
periment in  which  I  decomposed  a  small  quan- 
tity by  igiiiimg  charcoal  in  it  by  a  burning 
glass,  I  found  that  it  afforded  about  half  a 
volume  of  carbonic  acid,*  and  half  a  volume  of 
azote  ;  so  that  it  consists  of  26  of  azote  to  30 
of  oxygene. 

Whe;n  it  is  exposed  to  certain  bodies,  such 
as  the  salts  called  sulphites,  solution  of  tin  in 
muriatic  acid,  or  solutions  of  alkaline  sulphurets, 
it  is  converted  into  nitrous  oxide  ;  I  have  found 
that  in  accurate  experiments  of  this  kind,  two 
in  volume  of  nitrous  gas  become  one  in  volume 
of  nitrous  oxide  ;  a  circumstance  harmonizing 
precisely  with  their  relative  proportions  of 
oxygene  and  nitrogene. 

5.  It  has  been  mentioned  that  the  red  fumes 
produced  by  the  action  of  oxygene  and  nitrous 
gas,  are  owing  to  the  production  oi  nitrous  acid 
gas. 

It  i^j  not  easy  to  ascertain  the  exact  nature  of 

*  See  page  105» 


C  S61  ] 

this  change,  as  the  substance  formed  acts  both 
upon  mercury  and  upon  water ;  and  over  water 
very  different  proportions  of  the  gasses  may  be 
made  to  condense  each  other.  When  large 
quantities  of  nitrous  gas  are  added  to  small 
quantities  of  oxygene,  in  vessels  of  large  dia- 
meter, from  two  to  three  in  volume  of  nitrous 
gas,  disappear  for  one  of  oxygene.  When  large 
quantities  of  oxygene  are  added  to  small  quanti- 
ties of  nitrous  gas  in  narrow  tubes,  the  absorption 
is  from  I  to  1.5  of  oxygene  in  volume,  and  2 
of  nitrous  gas.  From  a  series  of  experiments 
on  the  decomposition  of  nitre,  and  others  on 
the  mixture  of  nitrous  gas  and  oxygene,  exe- 
cuted with  great  care  in  exhausted  vessels  fur- 
nished with  glass  stop-cocks,  I  am  incbned  to 
believe  that  the  acid  obtained  over  water  by  the 
condensation  of  mixtures  of  nitrous  gas  and 
oxygene  is  never  fully  saturated  with  oxygene, 
and  that  the  pale  fluid  called  nitric  acid  consists 
of  water  united  to  two  in  volume  of  nitrous 
gas,  and  one  and  a  half  of  oxygene  ;  and  this 
acid,  according  to  its  different  degrees  of  diUi* 
tion,  may  be  made  to  absorb  different  quantities 
of  nitrous  gas,  when  it  becomes  yellow,  orange, 
blue,  or  biueish  green  ;  and  in  this  last  state  it 
it  saturated  with  nitrous  gas. 

When  two  of  nitrous  gas,  and  one  of  oxy- 
gene freed  from  moisture,  are  mixed  together  in 


[  262  ] 

%  vessel  previously  exhausted  of  air,  they  be- 
come condensed  to  about  3^  of  their  volume,  and 
form  a  deep  orange  coloured  elastic  fluid,  which 
may  be  called  nitrous  acid  gas. 

This  substance  has  the  following  properties : 
a  taper  burns  in  it  with  considerable  brilliancy. 
Sulphur  inflamed,  does  not  burn  in  it ;  but  the 
combustion  of  phosphorus  continues  with  great 
vividness. 

Tin,  copper,  and  mercury,  act  upon  it  slowly; 
iron  ignited  to  whiteness  is  rapidly  cooled  in  it. 

Charcoal  inflamed,  continues  to  burn  in  it 
with  a  dull  red  light. 

When  a  portion  of  water  is  exposed  to  it, 
there  is  a  rapid  absorption,  and  the  water  gains 
a  tint  of  green. 

Its  smell  is  very  disagreeable,  its  taste  sour ; 
when  applied  to  animal  substances,  it  renders 
them  yellow  ;  it  reddens  litmus  paper* 

Calculating  from  the  condensation,  the  spe- 
cific gravity  of  nitrous  acid  gas  is  to  that  of 
hydrogene  as  about  S8  to  1:  and  100  cubical 
inches  of  it  weigh  65.3  grains,  at  mean  tempe- 
rature and  pressure. 

6.  I  have  attempted  to  procure  a  permanent 
elastic  fluid,  consisting  of  two  parts  in  volume 
of  nitrous  gas,  and  I.5  oxygene,  by  mixing 
oxygene  in  excess  with  nitrous  gas  ;  but  the 
condensation  was  always  such  as  to  indicate  the 
formation  of  nitrous  acid  gas,  and  the  colour 


[  263  ] 

was  deep  orange;  so  that  the  existence  oFnitnc 
acid  as^  pure  &oi/j"  consisting  of  1.5  of  oxygene 
and  9,  of  nitrous  gas  is  problematical ;  the 
gaseous  combination  of  nitrous  gas  and  oxvgene 
probably  always  contains  2  of  nitrous  gas,  and 
1  of  oxygene  ;  and  some  basis  seems  necessary 
for  the  union  of  two  of  nitrous  gas,  and  I.5  of 
oxygene  ;  such  as  water,  alkalies,  or  oxides. 

M.  Gay  Lussac  supposes  that  there  is  a 
compound  of  three  of  nitrous  gas,*  and  one  of 
oxygene,  capable  of  combining  with  water  and 
alkalies  without  decomposition.  I  have  tried 
many  experiments  on  this  subject,  but  have 
never  been  able  to  make  a  strong  coloured  aqua- 
fortis containing  more  than  2  of  nitrous  gas  to  1 
of  oxygene  in  volume ;  when  nitrous  acid  gas 
is  passed  into  alkaline  solutions,  a  portion  of 
nitrous  gas  is  always  evolved  ;  and  when  onp 
in  volume  of  oxygene  is  added  to  two  of 
nitrous  gas,  and  dry  azote  introduced  to  mark 
the  condensation,  no  change  takes  place  on 
the  mixture  of  the  gas  with  fresh  portions  of 
dry  nitrous  gas. 

Aquafortis  or  nitric  add.  is  piocured  for 

*  It  is  stated  that  this  combination  can  only  be  made  over 
a  large  surface  of  water,  which  shews  either  that  the  air  in 
the  water  is  concerned  in  the  condensation,  or  that  the  water 
itself  absorbs  nitrous  gas  ;  the  size  of  the  vessel  can  have  no 
influence  on  the  compound  formed,  and  it  is  supposed  by 
M.  Gay  Lussac,  readily  absorbable  by  water,  Mem.  D'Arcueil , 
T.  II,  page  2il, 


[  264  ] 

the  purposes  of  chemistry  by  the  distillatioa 
of  nitre  and  oil  of  vitriol ;  about  2  parts  of 
nitie  should  be  used  to  1  part  of  oil  of  vitriol, 
and  the  retort  heated  in  a  sand  bath  connecteci 
with  a  receiver  kept  cool  by  moistened  cloths. 
The  acid  thus  obtained  is  usually  coloured, 
but  becomes  pale  by  exposure  to  air.  If  the 
nitre  is  dry,  its  specific  gravity  is  from  1,520 
to  1  55  This  substance  acts  with  great  violence 
on  all  the  metals  anciently  known^  except  orold 
and  platina,  and  causes  volatile  oils  to  inflame. 
When  it  is  passed  through  a  porcelain  tube 
heated  to  redness,  oxygene  is  given  off  from  it, 
and  nitrous  acid  gas  ;  and  the  same  effect  is 
produced  upon  the  residual  acid,  as  if  it  had  been 
mixed  with  water  ;  so  that  it  is  proved  by  this 
experiment  to  be  composed  of  nitrous  acid  gas, 
oxygene,  and  water;  and  4  in  volume  of  nitrous 
gas,  and  2  of  oxygene  gas  condensed  in  water,  I 
find,  absorb  1  in  volume  of  oxygene  to  become 
nitric  acid. 

7.  To  enter  upon  a  description  of  all  the  ex- 
periments that  have  been  made  to  ascertain  the 
quantities  of  water  in  acids  of  differentstrengths, 
would  be  unfitted  to  the  nature  of  an  elemen- 
tary treatise. 

From  my  own  experiments  compared  with 
those  of  Kirwan,  Wenzel,  and  Berthollet,  I  am 
inclined  to  believe  that  the  strongest  acids  con- 
^ain  from  14  to  15  per  cent,  of  water,  and  accorc^^ 


[265  ] 

insr  fo  tKe  principles  of  the  French  nomencla!- 
ture,  they  ought  to  be  called  hydro-nitric  acids. 

Aqoafortis,  or  hydro  nitric  acid,  when  its  spe- 
cific gravity  is  below  I.4,  strengthens  by  being 
boiled;  when  stronger  than  I.45,  it  becomes 
weaker  by  boiling.  According  to  Mr.  Dalton, 
the  acid  of  distills  unaltered  at  24H°  Fah- 
renheit. It  is  probable  that  the  acid  of  1. 55 
consists  of  one  proportion  of  water  and  one  of 
acid,  and  ihat  which  rises  unaltered  at  24S° 
of  one  proportion  of  acid  and  two  of  water. 

if  nitrous  gas  be  considered  as  represented 
by  56,  that  is,  by  one  proportion  of  azote,  and 
two  of  oxygene,  26  and  30,  then  nitrous  acid 
gas  will  be  represented  by  86,  or  one  of  azote, 
S6,  and  four  of  oxygene,  60  ;  and  101  will  be 
the  number  for  the  acid  contained  in  the  pale 
acids,  and  in  the  salts  called  nitrates,  and  it  will 
consist  of  one  of  azote  and  five  of  oxygsne. 

And  the  strongest  acid  will  contain  1 7 
-water  and  10 1  acid,  and  the  acid  of  I.42  34 
water  and  iOl  acid. 

Hydro-nitric  acid  is  of  great  use  in  many  of 
the  common  arts.  It  is  employed  in  medicine, 
for  dissolving  metals,  for  etching,  for  making 
compounds  used  in  dyeing,  and  it  is  one  of  the 
constituent  parts  of  nitre,  a  substance  essential 
in  the  munuiacture  of  gun-powder. 

6.  Azote  and  chlorine  have  no  cl]emical  action 


[  266  ] 


on  each  other  in  any  circumstances  to  which 
they  have  been  hitherto  exposed. 

I  caused  the  Voltaic  flame  from  1000  double 
plates  to  pass  through  a  mixture  of  them  in  a 
close  vessel  for  some  minutes  ;  but  the  azote 
underwent  no  change,  nor  was  any  combination 
effected. 

S.  Azote  and  hydrogene  exist  in  combination 
in  ammonia  or  the  volatile  alkali.    It  is  not 
easy  to  produce  their  union,  yet  when  azote  is 
exposed  to  moist  substances  giving  off  hydro- 
gene,  a  little  ammonia  is  found  after  some  time 
in  the  water ; — for  instance,  when  azote  is 
placed  in  contact  with  moist  iron  filings  above 
mercury.  Priestley  first  procured  ammonia  in 
its  pure  form  ;  and  his  experiments,  and  those 
of  Scheele,  repeated  and  illustrated  in  an  ela- 
borate  manner   by  Berthollet,   led    to  the 
knowledge  of  its  elements ;    indeed  the  last 
chemist  must  be  considered  as  the  true  disco- 
verer of  the  composition  of  ammonia. 

To  procure  ammonia,  equal  parts  of  well 
burnt  dry  lime  and  dr^  salammoniac  or  muriate 
of  ammonia,  are  heated  in  a  retort  of  glass, 
the  beak  of  which  is  plunged  under  dry  mer- 
cury. Gaseous  matter  comes  over,  which  when 
the  common  air  of  the  retort  has  been  all  ex- 
pelled, must  be  collected  in  inverted  jars  filled 
with  mercury. 


.[  ] 

Ammonia  at  commoti  temperatures  is  a  per- 
manent gas;  according  to  Guyton  de  Morveau 
it  becomes  a  liquid  at  about  70  below  0  of  Fah- 
renheit's scale :  but  his  experiments  were  made 
in  glass  balloons,  and  the  conclusions  drawn 
from  the  appearance  of  fluid  ;  so  that  the  evi- 
dence, though  strong,  cannot  be  regarded  as 
perfectly  satisfactory,  as  ammonia  contains  va- 
pour which  must  be  condensed  to  a  great  extent 
by  so  intense  a  cold. 

The  specific  gravity  of  ammonia  is  to  that  of 
hydrogene,  nearly  as  8  to  1.  100  cubical  inches 
of  it  weigh  at  mean  temperature  and  pressure 
about  18  grains. 

When  an  inflamed  taper  is  plunged  into  a 
jar  of  ammonia  the  light  is  extinguished ;  but 
a  slight  inflammation  of  the  gas  occurs  where 
it  is  in  contact  with  air. 

Its  taste  is  extremely  acrid  :  it  cannot  in- 
deed be  safely  applied  to  the  organs  of  taste  or 
smell  except  when  mixed  with  much  common 
air.  It  is  the  principle  which  gives  pungency 
to  the  common  concrete  volatile  alkali. 

It  instantly  reddens  paper  tinged  with  tur- 
meric, and  gives  a  green  colour  to  most  vege- 
table blues  and  reds;  and  this  property,  and 
its  other  properties,  characterise  it  as  an  alka- 
line body. 

It  is  rapidly  absorbed  by  water.  At  the  tem- 
*  Annales  de  Chimie  XXIX.  page  292. 


[  268  ] 

perature  of  50®  under  a  pressure  equal  to 
inches,  water,  I  find,  absorbs  about  670  times  its 
volume  of  gaSj  and  becomes  of  specific  gravity, 
.S75. 

Tbe  following  table  containing  approxima» 
tions  to  the  quantities  of  ammoniacal  pras  in 
aqueous  solutions  of  diiferent  specific  gravities, 
was  constructed  after  experiments  made  with 
great  care  for  the  purpose^ 


100  1  arts 
of  specific 
gravity. 

Of  Ammo- 
nia. 

*8750 

3-2.5 

8875 

29-25 

9000 

26.00. 

;  §054* 

525.37 

S16V) 

r: 

22.07 

5/255 

19.54 

17  52 

9385 

15M 

94-35 

14.53 

947  & 

13  46 

9513 

12.40 

904.5 

11.56 

9573 

10.82 

9m 

10.17 

S619 

9-6o 

5-50 

The  censtitution  of  ammonia  may  be  easiljr 
demonstrated  by  analytical  experiments,  it  is 
decomposed  by  electrical  sparks,  or  by  being 
passed  through  a  tube  heated  to  redness;  its 

*  The  three  results  marked  by  the  asterisk,  were  gained  bj 
expeiimentsj  the  other  numbers  by  calculationit 


[  m  ] 

"volume  is  increased,  and  it  becomes  bydrogene 
and  azote. 

M.  Berthoilet  jun.  conceives  that  its  volume 
is  doubled  when  it  is  decomposed  over  mercury 
by  eie<:trical  sparks.  In  Dr.  Henry's  experi- 
ments and  those  that  I  have  made,  the  expan- 
sion is  a  little  less  ;  but  this  is  probably  owing 
to  the  unavoidable  imperfection  of  the  process. 
I  once  thought  that  a  small  quantity  of  water 
was  formed  in  the  operation,  but  verv  delicate 
experiments  have  conviuced  me  that  this  is  not 
the  case.  I  decomposed  a  quantity  of  ammonia 
by  electric  sparks  in  a  close  vessel,  in  which  its 
elements  could  not  expand,  and  yet  no  moisture 
was  deposited. 

In  the  most  accurate  experiments  in  which, 
the  hydrogene  lias  been  separated  from  the 
azote  by  successive  detonations  with  small 
quantities  ofoxygene;  the  volumes  have  been 
S  of  hydrogene  to  I  of  nitrogene,  so  that  am- 
monia consists  in  weight  of  3  of  hydrogene  and 
13  of  nitrogene,  and  supposing  the  number  re- 
presenting hydrogene  unity,  the  same  number 
is  gained  to  represent  azote  as  from  the  pro- 
portions of  the  elements  in  its  compounds  with 
oxygene  ;  and  ammonia  consists  of  one  propor- 
tion of  azote  and  six  of  hydrogene,  and  is 
represented  by  32.  That  all  these  conclusions 
are  correct  is  shewn  by  the  decomposition  of  the 
compound  made  from  nitric  acid  and  ammonia 


[  210  ] 

When  this  salt,  which  is  called  nitrate  of 
ammonia,  is  exposed  to  a  heat  gradually  raised, 
it  is  decomposed  into  water  and  nitrous  oxide  ; 
and  this  could  not  happen  unless  it  were  con- 
stituted by  definite  proportions,  which  must  be 
101  of  acid  and  32  of  alkaline  matter;  for  6 
of  hydrogene  require  45  of  oxygene  to  pro- 
duce water,  and  52  of  azote  i.e. 26  in  the  acid, 
and  26  in  the  alkali  require  30  of  oxygene  to 
produce  nitrous  oxide. 

Ammonia  is  employed  in  medicine,  and  its 
compounds  are  used  in  processes  of  dyeing,  and 
in  some  of  the  metallurgical  arts. 

8.  Azote  has  not  as  yet  been  resolved  into 
any  other  forms  of  matter.  I  volatilized  the 
highly  combustible  metal  potassium  in  azote 
over  mercury,  and  passed  the  Voltaic  flame  of 
2000  double  plates  through  the  vapour  ;  but 
the  azote  underwent  no  change^  I  have  made 
many  other  attempts  to  decompose  it,  but  they 
have  been  unsuccessful. 

The  strongest  arguments  for  the  compound 
nature  of  azote  are  derived  from  its  slight  ten- 
dency to  combination  ;  and  from  its  being  found 
abundantly  in  the  organs  of  animals  which  feed 
on  substances  that  do  not  contain  it. 

Its  uses  in  the  oeconomy  of  the  globe  are 
little  understood  ;  this  likewise  is  favourable  to 
the  idea  that  its  real  chemical  nature  is  as  yet 


C  271  ] 


unknown,  and  that  it  is  not  actually  an  unde- 
composable  substance. 

It  would  appear  that  azote  and  oxygene 
combine  slowly  under  certain  circumstances 
in  natural  operations,  when  lime  or  alkaline 
substances  are  present ;  thus  nitrous  salts  ,are 
produced  in  nitre  beds  in  warm  climates,  and 
the  process  is  assisted  by,  or  the  combination 
formed  during  the  fermentation  of  animal  and 
vegetable  substances. 

Ill,  Of  Sulphur. 

1.  Sulphur  is  a  well  known  substance,  found 
native  in  many  parts  of  the  world,  and  it  may 
be  procured  by  the  distillation  of  the  mineral, 
called  pyrites. 

It  is  brittle,  moderately  hard,  and  of  a  yellow- 
ish colour,  and  has  a  peculiar  taste  and  smell. 
It  is  a  nonconductor  of  electricity.  Its  specific 
gravity  is  1990.  It  is  often  found  in  regular 
solid  forms,  usually  octohedral,  when  it  is  more 
or  less  transparent.  Its  power  of  refracting  light 
according  to  Dr.  Wollaston,  is  to  that  of  water 
as  .204  to  .1336:  its  capacity  for  heat  is 
stated  to  be  as  1.9  to  1,  It  fuses  at  about  220° 
Fahrenheit,  and  volatizes  slowly  even  before  it 
fuses ;  at  the  temperature  of  560°  it  becomes  an 
elastic  fluid,  and  in  this  state  inflames  if  in  con- 
r»     tact  with  air,  and  burns  with  a  pale  blue  flame. 

2.  If  sulphur  be  heated  above  300° Fahrenheit, 


t  J 

It  graduallly  becomes  thick  and  viscid,  when  if 
it  be  poured  into  a  bason  of  water,  it  will  be 
found  of  a  red  colour,  and  ductile  like  wax.  In 
this  state  it  is  used  for  receiving  impressions  of 
seals  or  medals.  Its  specific  gravity  is  increased 
according  to  Dr.  Thomson,  to  2325  during  this 
process  ;  from  which  it  seems  probable  that  its 
parts  undergo  a  new  arrangement,  and  approach 
nearer,  than  in  its  common  crystalline  form.  It 
has  been  supposed  that  the  change  depends  upon 
its  combining  with  oxygene  ;  but  in  some  expe- 
riments made  expressly  to  ascertain  this  pointy 
it  was  not  found  that  any  oxygene  was  absorbed 
when  sulphur  was  long  kept  heated  in  ecntact 
with  it  in  close  vessels,  and  1  have  observed 
after  Dr.  Irvine,  jun.  that  the  change  of  colour 
takes  place  independent  of  the  presence  of  air. 

3.  The  only  well  known  compound  consisting 
of  sulphur  and  oxygene  alone,  is  a  gaseous  sub^ 
stance,  called  in  the  modern  nomenclature^  *u/- 
phureous  acid  gas.  It  may  be  procured  by  heating 
sulphur  in  oxygene  gas  ;  the  experiment  may 
be  performed  in  a  glass  retort,  and  the  sulphur 
inflamed  by  a  spirit  lamp  ;  it  burns  with  a  beau- 
tiful violet  flame,  and  if  the  oxygene  gas  has 
been  carefully  freed  from  water,  sulphureous 
acid  gas  will  be  the  product.  It  may  be  formed 
likewise  by  heating  mercury  or  copper  filings^ 
in  oil  of  vitriol,  and  collected  over  mercury. 

Sulphureous  acid  gas  has  a  very  disagreeable 


[  273  ] 

<!mell.  it  is  the  smell  of  taurning  sulphur*  It 
reddens  vegetable  blues,  and  gradually  destroys 
most  of  them.  It  whitens  many  animal  and  ve- 
getable substances,  silk  atld  straw  for  instance  , 
and  hence  the  vapours  of  burning  sulphur  are 
iemployed  in  bleaching. 

Its  specific  gravity  is  to  that  of  hydrogene 
as  30  to  I.,  and  100  cubical  inches  ofitatmeaii 
temperature  and  pressure,  weigh  about  §B 
grains. 

It  is  absorbed  by  water  ;  this  fluid  takes  up 
about  30  times  its  bulk,  gains  a  nauseous  sub- 
acid taste,  and  according  to  Dr.  Thomson,  be- 
comes of  specific  gravity  1.05 13. 

That  sulphureous  acid  gas  consists  of  sulphur 
and  oxygene,  iS  evident  from  the  phsenomena 
of  its  production  by  combustion. 

In  several  experiments  in  which  I  burnt  sul- 
phur, procured  from  iron  pyrites  out  of  the 
contact  of  air  or  moisture,  in  dry  oxygene  gas 
over  mercury,  I  found  that  the  volume  of  the 
Oxygene  was  very  little  altered  ;  the  condensa^ 
tion  was  never  more  than  ^V?  z*nd  seldom  so 
thuch  as  and  I  am  inclined  to  attribute  the 
loss  to  the  formation  of  a  little  oxide  of  sul- 
phur, or  to  a  little  hydrogene  loosely  combined 
with  the  sulphur,  so  that  there  is  every  reason 
to  believe  that  sulphureous  acid  is  constituted 
by  sulphur  dissolved  in  a  volume  of  oxygene. 

VOL.  I.  T 


[  274  J 

Tills  conclusion  is  confirmed  by  some  ex- 
periments on  the  action  of  cinnabar,  wliich 
consists  of  mercury  united  to  sulphur,  and  sul- 
phur itself,  on  metallic  oxides. 

Two  ecjual  quantities  of  red  oxide  of  mercury 
each  weighing  10  grains,  were  heated  one 
alone,  the  other  mixed  with  sulphur.  They 
afforded  nearly  equal  volumes  of  gas.  One, 
which  equalled  2  cubical  inches  and  — •,  was 
oxygene,  the  other,  which  equalled  2  cubical 
inches  and  was  pure  sulphureous  acid  gas. 
Similar  experiments  were  made,  cinnabar  being 
ubstituted  for  sulphur,  with  like  results. 

If  the  specific  gravities  of  sulphureous  acid 
gas  and  oxygene  be  compared,  and  the  last 
subtracted  from  the  first,  it  will  appear  that 
sulphureous  acid  consists  nearly  of  equal  parts 
of  oxygene  and  sulphur  by  weight. 

4  If  a  solution  of  sulphureous  acid  gas  in  water 
be  exposed  to  .the  air,  it  looses  its  peculiar 
flavour,  and  becomes  strongly  sour ;  and  ex- 
periments on  the  action  of  the  solution  on  air, 
shew  that  oxygene  is  absorbed. 

Sulphureous  acid  gas  is  easily  driven  off  from 
water  in  the  recent  solution,  but  after  it  has 
been  changed  by  exposure  to  air,  water  only 
rises  when  it  is  heated  ;  and  if  the  evaporation, 
is  carried  on  till  the  temperature  is  546°  the  resi- 
duum is  found  to  be  the  same  substance  as  oil 


[  275  ] 


of  vitriol;  nothing  but  water  will  have  been 
given  off;  and  therefore  oil  of  vitriol  contains 
sulphur  combined  vi'ith  more  oxygene  than  in 
sulphureous  acid.  That  it  likewise  contains 
water,  is  shewn  by  another  experiment,  which, 
if  made  with  accuracy,  affords  perfect  evidence 
of  its  nature  and  composition.  Let  a  porcelain 
tube  be  heated  red,  and  the  strongest  oil  of* 
vitriol  passed  through  it  in  vapour,  a  part  of 
it  will  be  decompounded,  the  gaseous  products 
wiJl  be  two  parts  of  sulphureous  acid  gas,  and 
one  part  of  oxygene  gas ;  and  the  fluid  product 
will  be  a  weaker  acid,  such  as  would  be  pro- 
duced by  diluting  the  acid  which  is  the  subject 
of  experiment. 

The  compounds  made  by  adding  oil  of  vitriol 
to  the  alkaline  earths,  free,  as  far  as  our  know- 
ledge extends,  from  water,  give  off  moisture 
when  they  are  heated  to  redness,  and  if  the 
quantity  of  water  in  the  strongest  oil  of  vitriol, 
be  estimated  from  experiments  of  this  kind,  it 
may  be  concluded  that  it  contains  about  19  per 
cent,  of  water ;  and  its  composition  may  be  thus 
expressed,  SO  of  sulphur,  45  of  oxygene,  and  17 
of  water. 

In  the  common  process  of  manufacture,  oil  of 
vitriol  is  made  by  burning  sulphur  mixed  with 
about  -i-  of  its  weight  of  nitre  in  pans  of  iron  op 
lead  communicatiBg  with  a  chamber  of  lead, 

T2 


[  276  J 


the  bottom  of  which  is  covered  to  the  depth  of 
several  inches  with  water.  The  true  theory  of 
this  process  is  not  given  in  any  chemical  book. 

The  sulphur  by  burning,  forms  sulphureous 
acid  gas,  and  the  acid  in  the  nitre  is  decom- 
posed, giving  off  nitrous  gas  ;  this  coming  in  con- 
tact with  the  oxj^gene  of  the  atmosphere,  pro- 
duces nitrous  acid  gas,  which  has  no  action  upon 
sulphureous  acid,  to  convert  it  to  sulphuric  acid, 
unless  water  be  present,  and  if  this  substance  be" 
only  in  a  certain  proportion,  the  water,  the  ni- 
trous acid  gas,  and  the  sulphureous  acid  gas 
combine,  and  form  a  white  crystalline  solid.  By 
the  large  quantity  of  water  usually  employed, 
this  compound  is  instantly  decomposed,  oil  of 
vitriol  formed,  and  nitrous  gas  given  off,  which 
in  the  air  J  again  becomes  nitrous  acid  gas,  and 
the  process  continues  according  to  the  same  prin- 
ciple of  combination  and  decomposition,  till  the 
water  at  the  bottom  of  the  chamber  is  become 
strongly  acid.    It  is  easy  to  prove  the  truth  of 
these  reasonings ;  let  dry  sulphureous  acid  gas, 
and  nitrous  acid  gas  be  mixed  together,  by  suf- , 
fering  the  sulphureous  gas  to  pass  into  a  glass , 
globe  partially  exhausted,  and  containing  nitrous 
acid  gas.    There  will  be  no  action  between  the 
gases.    But  if  a  drop  of  water  be  introduced, 
there  will  be  an  immediate  condensation,  and 
a  beautiful  white  crystalline  solid  will  line  the 


.  t  277  ] 

iftterior  of  the  vessel.  Whereas  if  the  globe  con- 
tain plenty  of  water,  nitrous  gas  will  be  given  off 
with  great  violence,  and  the  water  will  be  found 
to  be  a  solution  of  oil  of  vitriol. 

In  the  solid  crystalline  compound,  it  is  evi- 
dent, from  the  products  of  its  decomposition  by 
water,  there  must  be  four  volumes  of  sulphureous 
acid  gas,  and  three  of  nitrous  acid  gas,  probably 
in  two  or  three  proportions  with  a  single  propor- 
tion of  water ;  for  nitrous  acid  gas  contains  -f  of 
its  volume  of  loosely  combined  oxygene,  and  sul- 
phureous acid  gas  requires  half  its  volume  of 
oxygene  to  become,  when  condensed  in  water, 
solution  of  oil  of  vitriol. 

Mr.  Dalton,  who  has  adopted  M.  M.  Clement's 
and  Desormes'  idea  of  nitrous  acid  gas  being,  de- 
composable by  sulphureous  acid  gas,  which  is  not 
correct,  supposes  that  there  is  a  solid  sulphuric 
acid,  the  oxygene  in  which  is  to  that  in  sulphu- 
reous acid,  as  3  to  2;  but  the  body  which  he 
supposes  to  be  sulphuric  acid  is  the  crystalline 
substance,  the  nature  of  which  is  demonstrated 
above :  and  no  substance  to  which  the  name  of 
pure  sulphuric  acid  ought  to  be  given,  i.  e.  a  sub- 
stance consisting  of  30  of  sulphur  and  4.5  of  oxy- 
gene, has  yet  been  discovered  in  an  insulated 
state. 

The  term  sulphuric  acid,  is  improperly  ap- 
plied to  the  strongest  oil  of  vitriol;  this  sub- 
stance, according  to  the  principles  of  the  French 


[  278  ] 

nomenclature,  ought  to  be  called  hydrosiilpkiiric 
acid. 

The  oil  of  vitriol  of  commerce,  which  is  of 
specific  gravity  1.85,  rises  in  vapour  at  about 
550°  Fahrenheit,  and  distils  unaltered ;  whereas 
weaker  acids,  by  being  boiled,  lose  water,  and 
are  brought  to  this  state  of  concentration.  There 
is  a  diluted  acid  of  specific  gravity  1.78,  which; 
congeals  at  any  temperature  below  46°  Fahren- 
heit. It  is  very  curious,  as  Mr.  Dalton  has 
stated,  that  this  acid  contains  exactly  twice  as 
much  water  as  the  acid  of  1.85.  It  is  composed, 
according  to  my  experiments,  of  30  of  sulphur, 
45  of  oxygene,  and  34  of  water. 

Pure  oil  of  vitriol  is  a  corrosive  substance. 
It  acts  with  great  energy  upon  animal  and  ve- 
getable matter.  It  rapidly  attracts  moisture 
fro^  the  air,  and  produces  much  heat  whea 
mixed  with  \vater.  It  reddens  vegetable  blues  j 
and  acts  with  great  violence  upon  alkaline  sub- 
stances, and  upon  certain  earths  and  metallic 
oxides ;  and  neutral  salts  are  produced  by  the 
union  of  its  sulphur  and  oxygene  with  these 
bodies. 

The  number  representing  sulphur,  as  learnt 
from  the  constitution  of  sulphureous  acid  gas, 
is  nearly  SOj  and  as  this  gas  contains  two  pro- 
portions of  oxygene  twice  15,  it  would  seem 
probable  that  an  oxide  of  sulphur  may  exist, 
consisting  of  30  of  sulphur,  and  15  of  oxygene. 


[  279  ] 

I  have  examined  some  highly  coloured  spe- 
cimens of  Sicilian  sulphur,  which  seemed  to 
contain  a  little  oxygene,  and  as  has  been  just 
stated,,  it'  is  possible  that  a  little  oxygene  may 
be  condensed  in  the  combustion  of  sulphur  in 
the  residuum ;  but  as  yet  no  body  is  known 
that  can  with  propriety  be  called  oxide  of  sul- 
phut\ 

5.  Sulphur  and  chlorine  are  possessed  of  a 
chemical  attraction  for  each  other.  The  first 
combination  of  them  was  made  by  Dr.  Thom- 
son in  1804,  by  passing  chlorine  over  flowers 
of  sulphur.  It  may  be  made  more  expeditiously 
by  heating  sulphur  in  a  retort  filled  with  chlo- 
rine. The  sulphur  and  the  chlorine  unite  and 
form  a  fluid  substance,  which  is  volatile  below 
200°  Fahrenheit,  and  distills  into  the  cold  part 
of  the  retort.  This  substance  seen  by  reflected 
light,  appears  of  a  red  colour,  but  is  yellowish 
green,  when  seen  by  transmiited  light.  It 
smokes  when  exposed  to  air,  and  has  an  odour 
somewhat  resembling  that  of  sea  weed,  but 
much  stronger ;  it  affects  the  eyes  like  the  smoke 
of  peat.  Its  specific  gravity,  according  to  Dr. 
Thomson,  is  1.6. 

It  does  not  redden  perfectly  dry  paper 
tinged  with  litmus ;  when  it  is  agitated  in 
contact  with  water,  the  water  becomes  cloudy 


[  280  ] 


from  the  appearance  of  sulphur,  and  strongly- 
acid,  and  it  is  found  to  contain  oil  of  vitriol. 

According  to  my  experiments,  10  grains  of 
pure  sulphur  absorb  nearly  30  cubical  inches 
of  chlorine;  so  that  the  compound  contains 
about  30  of  sulphur  to  68.4  of  chlorine  ;  30  of 
sulphur  to  67  of  chlorine,  would  give  one  pro- 
portion of  sulphur  to  two  of  chlorine  ;  which, 
there  is  every  reason  to  believe,  must  be  the 
just  estimation  ;  for  my  experiments  were  made 
in  retorts  furnished  with  metallic  stop-cocks, 
by  which  a  little  chlorine  must  have  beer?, 
absorbed. 

The  compound  formed  in  the  manner  above 
described  cannot  be  made  to  unite  to  more 
chlorine  ;  but  J  find  it  dissolves  a  considerable 
portion  of  sulphur  by  heat,  and  becomes  of  a 
tawney  yellow  colour. 

Dr.  Thomson  called  this  substance  sulphu- 
retted muriatic  acid,  but  there  is  no  proof  that 
it  contains  muriatic  acid.  According  to  an 
idea  which  I  ventured  to  propose  in  the  Phi- 
losophical Transactions  for  1811,  that  of  calling 
the  compounds  of  chlorine  by  the  rjameof  their 
bases,  with  a  termination  in  "  ane"  its  name 
>vould  be  sulphurane. 

6,  Sulphur  and  hydrogene  combine.  Their 
unioji  inay  be  effected  by  causing  sulphur  to 


[  SSI  ] 

sublime  in  dry  liydrogene  in  a  retort.  There  is 
no  change  of  voluirxe :  but  only  a  part  of  the 
hydrogene  can  be  combined  with  sulphur  in 
this  mode  of  operating. 

The  gaseous  compound  of  sulphur  and  hy- 
drogene was  discovered  by  Scheeie,  in  177  7. 
It  is  usually  made  by  the  action  of  diluted 
sulphuric  acid  upon  a  mixture  of  three  parts  of 
iron  filings,  and  two  parts  of  sulphur  that  have 
been  ignited  together  ;  for  the  purposes  of  ac- 
curate experiments,  it  should  be  collected  over 
mercury. 

Sulphuretted  hjdrogene  inflames  when  a 
lighted  taper  is  brought  in  contact  with  it,  ex- 
posed to  the  air  :  it  burns  with,  a  pale  blue 
flame,  depositing  sulphur.  Its  smell  is  ex- 
tremely fetid,  resembling  that  of  rotten  eggs. 
Its  taste  is  sour.  It  reddens  vegetable  blues. 
It  is  absorbable  by  water  ;  that  fluid  takes 
up  more  than  an  equal  volume  of  the  gas.  Its 
specific  gravity,  according  to  M.  M.  Gay  Lussac 
and  Thenard,  is  to  that  of  air  as  1,1912  to  I. 
Frorn  my  experiments  it  would  appear  to  be 
a  little  less  ;  hut  I  am  inclined  to  adopt  the 
results  of  the  French  chemists  rather  th^n  my 
own,  as  their  gas  was  weighed  in  larger  quan- 
tity, and  dried.  Its  weight  to  that  of  hydrogene 
may  be  considered  as  16  to  1,  and  IQO  cubical 


E  283  ] 

inches  of  it,  at  mean  temperature  and  pressure, 
weigh  between  36  and  37  grains. 

The  composition  of  sulphuretted  hydrogene 
is  demonstrated  by  the  change  produced  in  it 
by  electricity ;  if  platina  wires  be  ignited  in 
it  by  the  voltaic  apparatus,  it  is  rapidly  de- 
composed. Sulphur  is  deposited,  and  an 
equal  volume  of  hydrogene  remains;  the 
same  change  is  effected  more  slowly  by  elec- 
trical sparks. 

The  proportion  of  its  elements  are  shewn  to 
be  the  same,  both  by  the  analytical  and  synthe- 
tical experiments.  They  must  be  15  of  sulphur  - 
to  1  of  hydrogene  ;  and  the  results  give  as 
nearly  as  possible  the  same  number  represent- 
ing sulphur,  as  its  compounds  with  oxygene 
and  chlorine :  and  sulphuretted  hydrogene  may 
be  considered  as  consisting  of  two  proportions 
of  hydrogene  2,  and  1  of  sulphur,  30. 

This  body  combines  with  an  equal  volume 
of  ammonia  ;  and  unites  to  alkalies  and  oxides, 
so  that  it  has  all  the  characters  of  an  acid. 

7.  There  is  another  compound  of  hydrogene 
and  sulphur,  the  proportions  of  the  elements 
of  which  have  not  yet  been  accurately  ascer- 
tained ;  but  it  probably  will  be  found  to  con-, 
tain  at  least  one  proportion  more  of  sulphur. 
Xt  may  be  formed  by  passing  sulphur  over 


[  283  ] 


charcoal  ignited  in  a  porcelain  tube,  the  expe- 
riment must  be  made  with  the  excliision  of  air. 
It  is  a  fluid  body,  and  was  discovered  by 
Lampadius,  in  1796,  and  called  by  him  ak0h'Oi 
€>f  sulphur.  Its  colour  is  greenish  yellow. 
Its  taste  pungent,  its  smell  peculiar,  its  specific 
gravity  is  1.3.  It  is  very  volatile.  It  does  not 
mix  with  water.  It  burns  with  the  same  FaGility 
as  spirits  of  wine.  It  dissolves  sulphur  with 
great  facility  by  the  assistance  of  heat  ;  andif 
when  the  saturated  solution  of  sulphur  in  this 
substance  is  exposed  to  air,  as  the  alcohol  c£ 
sulphur  evaporates,  chrystals  of  sulphur  are  de- 
posited. When  it  is  exposed  to  platinum  ignited 
by  the  agency  of  Voltaic  electricity,  it  gives  off 
sulphuretted  hydrogene.  This,  and  the  phas- 
tiomena  of  its  combustion,  demonstrate  its 
nature,  for  when  it  burns  in  contact  with  oxy^- 
gen€,  the  products  are  sulphureous  acid  and 
oil  of  vitriol. 

When  quicksilver  is  heated  in  the  vapour  of 
alcohol  of  sulphur,  a  compound  of  sulphur  and 
quicksilver  is  formed,  and  sulphuretted  hydro- 
gene  disengaged. 

8.  Sulphur  has  no  chemical  attraction  foP 
azote,  at  least  no  compound  of  these  bodies  has 
as  yet  been  formed. 

9.  Sulphur  has  been  placed  amongst  the  urs- 
tlecompounded  bodies,  because  as  yet  nothiu2; 


[  m  ] 

eertain  is  known  respecting  its  elements.  Wheii 
Sicilian  sulphur  was  fused  and  exposed  to  the 
action  of  platina  points  intensely  ignited  by 
Voltaic  electricity,  excited  by  1000  double 
plates,  permanent  gas  was  given  off  from  it, 
which  proved  to  be  sulphureted  hydrogene 
a  small  quantity  of  sulphuretted  hydrogene  is 
given  off  likewise  during  the  action  of  copper 
tilings  upon  sulphur  ;  and  the  mode  of  the  for- 
mation of  alcohol  of  sulphur,  proves  that  sul- 
phur or  charcoal,  or  both,  contain  hydrogene. 
It  may  however  be  questioned  whether  hydro*- 
gene  is  essential  to  the  constitution  of  sulphur. 
Sulphur  may  possibly  contain  in  its  common 
forms  a  little  moisture,  or  a  little  of  a  solid 
compound  of  hydrogene  and  sulphur ;  and 
till  the  gas  can  be  separated  from  it  in  definite 
proportion,  and  be  proved  to  be  combined  with 
some  other  matter,  no  accurate  conclusions  can 
be  formed  upon  the  subject. 

Sulphur  is  employed  in  medicine,  particularly 
as  an  external  application  in  cutaneons  com- 
plaints. Its  use  in  bleaching  has  been  already 
referred  to.  Its  most  important  application  is  in 
oil  of  vitriol,  and  the  compounds  formed  from 
it,  which  are  used  in  various  processes  of  dyeing 
and  calico-printing. 


[  2S5  ] 


IV.  Of  Phosphorus. 

1.  Phosphorus  was  discovered  by  Brandt  iri 
I669.  It  may  be  made  by  the  following 
process. 

A  hundred  parts  of  burnt  bones  in  powderj 
are  to  be  mixed  with  40  parts  of  oil  of  vitriol, 
and  they  are  to  be  suffered  to  remain  in  con- 
tact for  a  couple  of  days,  the  mixture  being 
frequently  stirred.    The  whole  is  then  to  be 
poured  upon  a  filtre  of  cloth,  and  the  liquor 
that  passes  through  is  to  be  added  to  a  nitrous 
solution  of  lead ;  a  white  powder  will  be  formed ; . 
this  must  be  mixed  with  about  -f  of  its  weight 
of  charcoal  powder,  and  exposed  to  a  strong 
red  heat  in  a  porcelain  retort,  the  beak  of  which 
is  plunged  in  Water;  much  gaseous  matter  will 
come  overj  some  of  which  will  inflame  sponta- 
neously, and  at  length  a  substance  will  drop 
out  of  the  neck  of  the  retort,  and  congeal 
under  the  water,  which  is  phosphorus.  It  may 
be  purified  by  melting  it  in  water,  and  passing 
it  under  water  through  sharaois  leather. 

2.  Phosphorus  is  semi-transparent,  and  of  a 
yellowish  colour.  It  is  as  soft  as  and  more  ductile 
than  wax.  It  is  insoluble  in  water.  Its  specific 
gravity  is  about  1.7  7-  It  melts  at  the  tempera- 
ture of  90°,  and  boils  at  about  550°. 

When  phosphorus  is  exposed  £0  air  at  com- 


[  ] 

mon  temperaturesjit  emits  a  white  smoke,  which 
appears  luminous  in  the  dark.  This  depends 
upon  its  combining  with  oxygene,  and  forming 
an  acid  which  unites  to  the  aqueous  vapour  in 
the  atmosphere,  and  they  fall  down  in  the  fluid 
form.  Phosphorus,  I  find,  does  not  smoke  in 
air  perfectly  dry  ;  and  in  this  case  the  acid  ad- 
heres to  it,  and  in  a  short  time  prevents  it  from 
being  luminous. 

When  phosphorus  is  heated  to  about  148°, 
it  takes  fire,  and  burns  with  intense  brilliancy, 
throwing  off  dense  white  smoke,  which  is  a 
strong  solid  acid  that  soon  becomes  liquid  by 
attracting  moisture  from  the  air ;  and  a  red 
substance  usually  remains. 

3.  The  manner  in  which  phosphorus  acts 
upon  air,  as  has  been  shewn,  page  231,  proves 
that  it  is  capable  of  combining  with  oxygene  ; 
and  there  is  every  reason  to  believe  in  at  least 
'   three  proportions. 

When  phosphorus  is  inflamed  in  oxygene 
gas  over  mercury,  and  the  white  substance  pro- 
duced strongly  heated,  the  oxygene  being  in 
excess,  for  every  grain  of  phosphorus  burnt 
four  cubical  inches  and  a  half  of  oxygene  gas 
are  absorbed.  The  substance  so  procured  is  called 
phosphoric  acid.  It  becomes  fluid  at  a  red  keat ; 
it  is  not  volatile  even  at  a  white  heat.  It  has  no 
smell;  its^tasteis  intensely,  but  not  disagreeably 


[  287  ] 

iscid.  It  dissolves  in  water,  producing  great 
heat;  and  its  saturated  solution  is  of  the  con- 
sistence of  syrup.  It  acts  upon,  and  corrodes 
glass,  and  unites  to  alkalies  and  oxides. 

4.  When  phosphorus  is  heated  in  highly 
rarefied  air,  three  products  are  formed  from  it ; 
one  is  phosphoric  acid  ;  one  is  easily  volatile, 
and  appearing  as  a  white  powder ;  and  the 
other  is  a  red  solid,  comparatively  fixed,  and 
requiring  a  heat  above  that  of  boiling  water 
for  its  fusion.  The  volaiile  substance  is  soluble 
in  water;  and  gives  it  acid  properties.  It  con- 
tains less  oxygene  than  phosphoric  acid  ;  for  it 
burns  and  becomes  fixed  when  heated  strongly 
in  the  air.  Its  taste  is  sour,  with  a  peculiar  pun- 
gency, and  it  emits  a  smell  not  unlike  that  of 
garlic.  It  is  mixed  with  phosphorus,  but  is  prin- 
cipally the  substance  which,  according  to  the 
French  nomenclature,  should  be  called  phos" 
phorous  acid,  and  which  in  chemical  works,  is 
inaccurately  described  as  a  fluid  body.  The 
red  substance   requires    less    oxygene  than 
phosphorus   to  convert  it  into  phosphoric 
acid,  and  must  be  considered  as  an  oxide,  of 
phosphorus. 

I  have  never  been  able  to  procure  phospho- 
rous acid  by  combustion  free  from  admixture  or 
combination  with  other  substances.  In  the  com- 
mon mode  in  which  it  is  said  to  be  obtained, 


[  ^88  1 

tiamely  by  exposing  phosphorus  to  free  dir ; 
there  is  always  a  large  quantity  of  phosphoric 
aeid  formed* 

A  pure  solid  kydro-phosphorous  acid,  that  is  a 
Combination  of  it  with  water,  may,  I  find,  be 
produced  by  the  following  process. 

Phosphorus  is  sublimed  through  corrosive 
Sublimate  in  powder  in  a  glass  tube  ;  a  limpid 
fluid  comes  over,  which  must  be  mixed  with 
water,  and  thei  solution  heated  till  it  is  of  the 
thickness  of  syrup.  It  is  a  combination  of 
water  and  pure  phosphorous  aeid.  It  reddens 
vegetable  blues,  and  combines  with  alkalies, 
and  has  all  the  characters  of  a  strona:  acid.  It 
forms  a  white  crystalline  solid  on  cooling. 

It  becomes  Solution  of  phosphoric  acid  slowly 
when  exposed  to  air,  absorbing  oxygene.  When 
it  is  gently  heated,  it  takes  fire  and  burns  with 
great  brilliancy,  emitting  globules  of  gas  that 
inflatne  in  contact  with  air  ;  a  red  oxide  of 
phosphorus  is  deposited  in  the  bottom  of  the 
tessel,  and  solid  phosphoric  aeid  is  formed. 

The  substance  produced  by  passing  phos- 
phorus through  corrosive  sublimate,  as  will  be 
immediately  shewn,  is  a  compound  of  phos° 
phoruS  and  chlorine  ;  and  when  it  acts  upon 
water,  hydrogene  is  afforded  to  the  chlorine, 
and  oxygene  to  the  phosphorus;  there  are  no* 
products,  but  muriatic  acid  gas  and  phosphorous 


htid,  and  the  qoantity  of  hydrogene  in  the 
miiriaUcacid  gas  formed,  being  known,  the  quan* 
tity  of  oxygene  in  the  phosphorous  acid  is 
likewise  known.  By  two  experiments  made 
with  great  care,  in  which  the  quantity  of  chlo- 
rine in  the  liquor  from  the  phosphorus  and 
Corrosive  sublimate,  was  estimated  by  its  com- 
bination with  silver,  I  ascertained  that  ten 
grains  of  phosphorus  required  for  their  con- 
version into  phosphorous  acid,  such  as  ex:ists 
in  the  hydrat  jost  described,  7.7  grains  of 
oxygene  ;  and  it  is  evident  from  this  result, 
compared  with  that  on  the  combustion  of 
phosphorus,  in  which  phosphoric  acid  is  formed, 
that  the  quantity  of  phosphorus  being  the 
same,  it  requires  twice  as  much  oxygene  to 
become  phosphoric  acid,  as  it  requires  to  form 
phosphorous  acid ;  and  from  these  data, 
the  number  representing  phosphorus,  must 
be  regarded  as  about  20,  and  phosphoro  .?s 
acid  will  consist  of  ^0  phosphorus,  and  1 5 
oxygene,  or  S5;  and  phosphoric  acid  of  ^0 
phospi^orus  and  30  oxygene,  or  50. 

That  the  hydro-phosphorous  acid  is  a  com- 
pound of  phosphorus,  oxygene,  and  water,  is 
shewn  by  heating  it  in  contact  with  ammonia 
over  mercury  ;  the  ammonia  unites  to  the  pure 
acid,  and  water  is  expelled,  1  find  by  experi- 
ments on  the  quantity  of  water  it  affords,  that 

VOL.  I.  U 


[  290  ] 

it  consists  of  four  proportions  of  phosphorous 
^cid,  and  two  of  water. 

I  have  made  no  experiments  on  tlie  propor- 
tion of  oxygene  in  the  red  oxide.  It  possibly 
will  be  found  to  consist  oF  two  proportions  of 
phospliorus,  and  one  of  oxygene. 

5.  Phosphorus  and  chioiine  combine  with 
great  facility  when  brought  in  contact  with  each 
other  at  common  temperatures;  and  compounds 
may  be  formed  from  their  union,  containinar 
different  proportions  of  the  two  elements. 

Wlien  chlorine  is  introduced  into  a  receiver 
exhausted  of  air,  and  containing  phosphorus, 
the  phosphorus  takes  fire  and  burns  with  a  pale 
flame  throwhig  off  sparks,  and  a  white  substance 
rises  and  condenses  on  the  sides  of  the  retort. 

If  the  chlorine  be  in  considerable  quantity,  as 
much  as  twelve  cubical  inches  to  a  grain  of 
phosphorus,  the  phosphorus  will  entirely  dis- 
appear, and  nothing  but  the  white  powder  will 
be  formed  ;  and  about  9  cubical  inches  of  the 
chlorine  will  be  found  to  be  absorbed  ;  and  no 
new  gasecus  matter  will  be  produced. 

The  powder  is  a  compound  of  phospho- 
rus and  chlorine.  I  first  described  it  as  a 
peculiar  body  in  1810,  and  various  analytical 
and  synthetical  experiments  which  I  have  made, 
prove  that  it  is  composed  of  about  1  of  phos- 
phorus and  6.8  of  chlorine  in  weight. 


[  291  ] 

Its  properties  are  very  peculiar.  It  is  a  snow 
white  substance.  It  is  very  volatile,  and  rises 
in  a  gaseous  form  at  a  temperature  much  below 
that  of  boiling  water ;  under  pressure  it  may 
be  fused,  and  then  it  crystallizes  in  prisms 
which  are  transparent. 

It  acts  violently  upon  water,  which  it  decom- 
poses. Its  phosphorus  combines  with  the  oxy- 
gene,  producing  phosphoric  acid,  and  its  chlo- 
rine with  hydrogen e  forms  muriatic  acid. 

It  produces  flame  when  exposed  to  a  lighted 
taper ;  and  when  passed  through  a  glass  tube 
heated  red,  with  oxygene,  is  decomposed;  the 
oxygene  forms  phosphoric  acid  with  the 
phosphorus,  and  the  chlorine  is  disengaged. 
Dry  litmus  paper  exposed  to  its  vapour  in  a 
vessel  exhausted  of  air  is  reddened.  It  com- 
bines with  ammonia  when  it  is  introduced  into 
a  vessel  containing  it,  with  much  heat ;  and  they 
form  together  a  compound  insoluble  in  water, 
indecomposable  by  acid  or  alkaline  solutions, 
and  havincr  characters  analogous  to  an  earth. 

It  is  evident  from  the  analysis,  that  it  consists 
of  two  proportions  of  chlorine,  supposing  the 
number  representing  chlorine,  67,  or  of  four, 
supposing  it  33.5,  134  to  one  of  phosphorus 
20,  and  the  number  representing  it  is  154'  It 
is  analogous  to  an  acid  in  many  ol  it&  properties. 
According  to  the  princjpJes  of  nomenclature 


[  292  ] 

which  I  have  ventured  to  propose,  its  name  will 
be  phosphorana. 

6.  I  have  already  referred  to  the  substance 
produced  by  passing  phosphorus  through  cor- 
rosive sublimate.  It  is  a  fluid  as  clear  as  water  ; 
its  specific  gravity  is  to  that  of  water  as  1.45 
to  I.  It  may  be  called  phosphorane.  I  first 
obtained  it  in  a  pure  form,  in  1809.  It  ap- 
pears from  the  circumstances  already  detailed, 
that  it  consists  of  one  proportion  of  phosphorus 
20,  and  one  of  chlorine  67,  and  the  number  re- 
presenting it  is  87.*  It  emits  acid  fumes  when 
exposed  to  air,  decomposing  the  vapour  in  the 
air,  and  if  made  to  moisten  paper,  it  is  converted 
into  acid  in  the  air,  without  any  inflammation. 
It  does  not  redden  dry  litmus  paper  plunged 
into  it;  the  vapour  from  it  burns  in  the 
flame  of  a  candle  ;  its  action  upon  water  has 
been  already  referred  to.  When  it  is  intro- 
duced into  a  vessel  containing  chlorine,  it  is 
converted  into  phosphorana:  if  made  to  act 
upon  ammonia,  phosphorus  is  produced,  and 
the  same  compound  as  that  formed  by  phos- 
phorana and  ammonia. 

7.  When  phosphorus  is  gently  heated  in 
phosphorane,  a  part  of  it  dissolves,  and  the 

*  13.2  grains  of  it  decomposed  by  nitrate  of  silver,  afforded 
43  grains  of  hornsilver,  and  100  grains  of  silver  absorb  32.i> 
of  chlorin«  to  become  hornsilver. 


C  293  ] 

fluid,  when  exposed  to  the  air  gives  off  acid 
fumes  from  its  action  upon  the  vapour  it  con- 
tains, and  a  thin  film  oF  phosphorus  is  left 
behind,  which  usually  inBames  by  the  heat  gene- 
rated from  the  decomposition  of  the  vapour. 
The  first  compound  of  this  kind  was  obtained  by 
M.  M.  Gay  Lussac,  and  Thenard,  by  distil- 
ling phosphorus  and  calomel  together  in  I808, 
and  they  imagined  it  to  be  a  peculiar  combination 
of  phosphorus,  oxygene,  and  muriatic  acid. 

No  experiments  have  been  as  yet  made  to 
determine  the  quantity  of  phosphorus  which 
phosphorane  will  dissolve  ;  probably  a  defi- 
nite combination  may  be  obtained^  in  which  the 
proportions  of  chlorine  will  correspond  to  the 
proportions  of  oxygene  in  the  oxide  of  phos-  ^ 
phorus. 

8,  An  elastic  fluid,  which  has  the  peculiar 
property  of  inflaming  in  contact  with  the  atmo- 
spherCj  may  be  procured  by  heatipg  together 
slacked  lime,  or  strong  solution  of  potassa  or 
soda,  and  phosphorus.  It  is  expedient  to  de- 
prive the  air  contained  in  the  vessel  in  which 
it  is  generated  of  oxygene,  by  burning  phos- 
phorus or  a  taper  in  it ;  the  gas  should  be  pre- 
served over  mercury  ;  it  soon  becomes  adulte- 
rated by  exposure  to  water  containing  air. 

This  gas  differs  in  properties  according  to 
the  manner  in  which  it  is  made ;  I  have  ob- 


[  294  ] 

famed  it  from  phosphorus  and  alkaline  lixivsa, 
of  specific  gravities  varying  from  4  to  7,  1  h-ing 
the  standard  ofhydrogene:  its  smell  is  very 
disagreeable  :  water  absorbs  about  •—-  of  its  vo- 
lume of  the  gas.    It  detonates  when  brought 
into  contact  . with  chlorinej  producing  a  brilliant 
green  light ;  but  the  results  of  the  detonation 
have  never  been  minutely  examined.    It  ex- 
plodes with  a  most  intense  white  liaht  in  oxy- 
gene  gas  ;  the  heaviest  spontaneously  inflam- 
mable gas  that  I  have  ever  made,  absorbed  ra- 
ther less  than  an  equal  volume  of  oxygene. 

When  electrical  sparks  are  passed  through 
gasses  of  this  kind  for  a  long  time,  a  reddish 
film  which  burns  like  phosphorus  is  deposited  ; 
usually  there  is  lio  change  of  volume,  and  the 
remaining  gas  is  hydrogene.  When  a  gas,  the 
speciiic  gravity  of  which  was  6,  was  heated  for 
some  time  over  mercury  in  contact  with  zinc 
filings,  there  Mas  an  expansion  of  volume  to 
more  than  -§- ;  a  substance  was  formed  superfi- 
cially on  the  zinc,  which  had  the  characters  of 
a  cofiipound  of  phosphorus  and  zinc.  There 
was  an  expansion  when  finely  divided  platina 
was  heated  in  a  portion  of  the  same  gas.  Pot- 
assium in  excess  made  to  act  upon  it  by  a  spirit 
lamp  produced  a  rapid  increase  of  its  volume  ; 
2  parts  became  rather  more  than  The 
potassium  was  aliected  as  it  would  have  been 


[  295  ] 

by  a  union  with  pliospborns,  and  the  gas  was 
found  to  be  pure  hydrogene. 

This  substance,  which  was  discovered  by 
M.  Gengembre  in  1783  has  been  called  phos- 
phoretted  hydrogene, 

9.  When  solid  hydrat  ofphosphorous  acid  is 
heated  in  a  retort  out  of  the  contact  of  air,  solid 
phosphoric  acid  is  formed,  and  a  large  quantity 
of  elastic  fluid  is  generated,  which  has  very  pecu- 
h'ar  properties  ;  I  discovered  it  at  the  same  time 
as  the  solid  hydrat  of  phosphorous  acid,  namely, 
in  February  18i2.  This  gas  has  a  disagreeable 
smell,  but  not  nearly  so  fetid  as  that  of  phos-  ' 
phoretted  hydrogene :  it  does  not  explode 
spontaneously,  but  detonates  violently  when 
heated  in  contact  with  oxygene  to  about  30O 
Fahrenheit.  It  explodes  in  chlorine  with  a  whice 
flame.  Water  absorbs  -f  of  its  volume  of  this 
gas.  In  an  experiment  in  which  a  small  quan- 
tity only  was  weighed,  its  specific  gravity 
appeared  to  be  to  that  of  hydrogene  as  about 
12  to  U 

When  potassium  is  heated  in  it,  its  volume 
is  doubled,  and  the  gas  produced  is  pure 
hydrogene.  When  sulphur  is  sublimed  in  one 
volume  of  it,  a  sul  phuret  of  phosphorus  is  formed,* 
and  nearly  2  volumes  of  sulphuretted  hydrogene 

•  See  page  297. 


I 


[  296  ] 

produced.  M^hen  detonated  with  oxygene  m 
excess,  three  in  volume  of  it  absorb  more  than 
five  in  volume  of  oxygene,  and  a  little  phos- 
phorusis  always  thrown  down  ;  when  8  of  it  in 
volume  are  detonated  by  an  electrical  spark  with 
2  of  oxygene,  there  is  a  considerable  deposition 
of  phosphorus,  and  9  of  gas,  which  has  the 
odour  of  common  phosphoretted  hydrogene 
lemain  ;  one  volume  of  it  absorbed  nearly  four 
volumes  of  chlorine. 

I  venture  to  propose  the  name  of /t/-drophaspho ^ 
lie  gas  for  this  elastic  fluid.  It  appears  to  be 
composed  of  1  proportions  of  phosphorus  and  4 
of  hydrogene,  two  volumes  of  hydrogene  being 
compressed  in  the  space  of  one,  and  the  nam-* 
ber  representing  it  is  24. 

It  is  probable  that  the  gas  called  phosphiw 
reted  hydrogene  sometimes  contains  this  gas, 
mixed  with  common  hydrogene,  and  perhaps  a 
peculiar  elastic  fluid,  consisting  of  one  propor- 
tion of  phosphorus,  and  two  of  hydrogene, 
which  has  the  property  of  spontaneous  inflam- 
mation. Hydrophosphoric  gas  I  find  does  not 
become  spontaneously  explosive  by  .mixture 
with  hydrogene. 

There  is  not,  perhaps,  in  the  whole  series  of 
chemical  phsenomena  a  more  beautiful  illus->. 
Ration  of  the  theory  of  definite  proportions^ 


[  291  ] 

than  that  offered  in  the  decomposition  ofhy- 
drophosphorous  acid  into  phosphoric  acid  and  . 
hydrophosphoric  gas. 

Four  proportions  of  the  acid  contain  four 
proportions  of  phosphorus,  and  four  of  oxy- 
gene ;  two  proportions  of  water  contain  four 
proportions  of  hydrogene^  and  two  of  oxygene. 
The  six  proportions  of  oxygene  unite  to  three 
proportions  of  phosphorus  to  form  three  of 
phosphoric  acid,  and  the  four  proportions  of 
hydrogene  combine  with  one  of  phosphorus  to 
form  one  proportion  of  hydrophosphoric  gas  ; 
and  there  are  no  other  products. 

10,  Phosphorus  and  sulphur  are  capable  of 
combining  ;  they  may  be  united  by  fusing  them 
too-ether  in  a  tube  exhausted  of  air,  or  under 
water;  but  in  the  last  case  they  must  be  used 
only  in  small  quantities ;  as  at  the  moment  of 
their  action  water  is  decomposed,  sometimes 
with  explosions.   This  compound,  which  has 
been  called  sulphuret  of  phosphorus,  was  de- 
scribed by  Margraaf  in  1762.    He  formed  it  of 
equal  parts  of  the  two  substances,  but  phos- 
phorus and  sulphur  may  be  united  into  ©ne 
mass  in  a  variety  of  proportions  ;  and  these 
mixtures  are  more  fusible  than  either  of  their 
constituents.    The  most  fusible  compound  I 
have  found,  is  that  formed  by  the  two  bodies 
united  in  the  proportion  of  one  and  a  half  of 


I 


[  m  ] 

sulphur,  to  two  of  phosphorus.  This  remains 
liquid  at  40"  of  Fahrenheit ;  and  would  appear 
to  be  composed  of  one  proportion  of  sulphur 
SO,  and  two  of  phosphorus  40.  When  s(;lid  its 
colour  is  yellowish-white.  It  is  more  combus- 
tible than  phosphorus,  and  rises  undecoraposed 
by  a  strong  heat. 

The  points  of  fusion  and  evaporation  of  phos- 
phorus and  sulphur,  are  so  near  each  other,  that 
it  is  not  easy  to  ascertain  the  difference  between 
true  chemical  combinations  of  these  bodies  in  dif- 
ferent proportions,  and  mixtures  of  the  chemical 
compounds,  with  the  bodies  themselves ;  8  parts 
of  phosphorus  in  weight  united  to  one  of  sul- 
phur, remain  fluid  at  68^  of  Fahrenheit;  and 
1  of  phosphorua  with  3  of  sulphur,  congeal  at 
about  IOC. 

11.  When  phosphorus  is  fused  and  exposed 
to  the  action  of  the  Voltaic  spark,  taken  by 
means  of  platina  wires,  phosphuretted  hydro- 
gene  in  small  quantities  is  produced  from  it ; 
but  there  are  no  proofs  that  hydrogene  is  essen- 
tial to  its  existence ;  and  phosphorus  in  its 
common  state,  may  contain  a  minute  portion  of 
the  hydruret  of  phosphorus  mixed  with  it; 
it  would  be  very  difficult  to  detect  in  phospho- 
ric acid,  the  small  quantity  of  water  that  this 
hydrogene  would  produce;  and  the  red  colour 
■which  phosphprus  sometimes  possesses,  seem* 


to  be  owing  to  an  admixture  of  small  quantities 
cf  oxide  of  phosphorus.  There  are  some  ana- 
losies  that  favour  the  idea  of  the  compound 
nature  of  phosphorus,  which  will  be  discussed 
in  the  progress  of  this  work  ;  but  in  the  arrange- 
ments of  the  facts  oF  the  science,  it  must  be  still 
regarded  as  an  undecompounded  body. 

12.  Phosphorus  has  not  as  yet  been  applied 
to  any  of  the  purposes  of  the  common  arts  ; 
but  various  preparations  of  it  are  employed  for 
producing  quick  inflammation.  One  of  the 
best,  is  a  sulphuret  of  phosphorus,  containing 
two  of  phosphorus  to  one  of  sulphur  ;  a  little 
of  it  applied  to  a  common  brimstone  match,  in- 
flames when  gently  rubbed. 

V.  Of  Carbon  or  Charcoal,  and  the  Diamond. 

I.  The  name  carbon,  signifies  the  pure  in- 
flammable part  of  charcoaL  lamp-black,  and 
other  similar  substances.  The  purest  known 
form  in  which  it  can  be  obtained,  is  by  passing 
oils  or  spirits  of  wine  through  ignited  tubes. 
It  then  appears  as  an  impalpable  black  powder ; 
it  has  no  tasle  nor  smell  ;  it  is  a  conductor  of 
electricity ;  it  is  more  than  twice  as  heavy  as  water. 
For  the  common  purposes  of  experiments,  the 
charcoal  of  light  wood,  such  as  the  alder,  that 
has  been  exposed  to  boiling  water,  and  after- 
wards ignited  to  whiteness,  is  sufficiently  pure. 


.  [  300  ] 

Such  charcoal,  however,  rapidly  attracts  mois- 
ture from  the  atmosphere,  so  as  to  increase  in 
weight  from  12  to  14  per  cent.,  and  when  dry, 
absorbs  several  times  its  volume  of  any  gas  to 
which  it  may  be  exposed,  and  it  must  there- 
fore be  employed  immediately  after  ignition, 
and  whilst  yet  warm. 

Carbon,  whether  coherent  in  charcoal,  or  in 
powder,  is  infusible  by  any  heat  that  has  hi- 
therto been  applied.  I  have  exposed  it  to  the 
powers  of  intense  ignition  of  different  Voltaic 
batteries;  that  of  Mr.  Children,  mentioned  page 
151,  one  of  40  double  plates  of  18  inches 
square,  and  the  battery  of  2000  double  plates 
of  4  inches,  both  in  vacuo,  and  in  compressed 
gasses,  on  which  it  had  no  power  of  chemical 
action.  A  little  hydrogene  was  given  off  from 
it,  and  it  slowly  volatilized  in  these  experiments, 
and  the  part  remaining  was  much  harder  than 
before,  so  as  in  one  case  to  scratch  glass,  and 
the  lustre  was  greater  ;  but  its  other  properties 
were  unaltered,  and  there  was  no  appearance 
of  fusion.  Its  capacity  for  heat,  according  to 
Dr.  Crawford,  is  to  that  of  water  as  .2631  to  1. 

2.  There  are  two  distinct  combinations  of 
carbon  and  oxygene,  which  have  been  referred 
to  page  105. 

Carbonic  acid  is  formed  whenever  charcoal 
©r  carbonaceous  matter  is   burnt  in  air  or 


[  301  1 

oxygene,  and  it  is  evolved  during  fermentation^ 
by  the  decomposition  of  animal  or  vegetable 
substances  and  from  limestones  by  ignition,  or 
the  action  of  acids. 

The  most  expeditious  mode  procuring  it  for 
chemical  purposes,  is  by  the  action  of  weak  so- 
lution of  muriatic  acid  on  powdered  marble. 
It  may  be  collected  over  v/ater,  or,  for  accurate 
experiments,  over  mercury. 

Carbonic  acid  gas  was  the  first  elastic  fluid 
certainly  distinguished  from  air  ;  the  know- 
ledge of  its  acid  nature  is  owing  to  Dr.  Black, 
who  discovered  it  in  1755.  Mr.  Lavoisier, 
nearly  30  years  afterwards,  ascertained  its 
composition. 

Carbonic  acid  gas  extinguishes  flame,  has  a 
peculiar  sharp  taste,  and  a  faint  but  agreeable 
smell.  It  is  not  respirable.  Its  specific  gravity 
is  to  that  of  hydrogene  as  £0.7  to  I.  100  cubi- 
cal iaches  weigh  at  the  mean  temperature  and 
pressure,  47  grains, 

Carbonic  acid  gas  is  absorbed  by  water, 
which  unites  to  its  own  volume  of  the  gas  at 
41°.  By  heat  it  is  expelled  from  the  water. 

If  carbonic  acid  gas  be  poured  from  one 
vessel  into  another  vessel  containing  a  lighted 
taper,  the  flame  is  extinguished. 

It  reddens  litmus  paper,  and  combines  with 
alkalies,  alkaline  earths,  and  metallic  oxides. 


[  302  ] 

A  syntlietical  proof  of  the  composkion  of 
carbonic  acid  gas,  has  been  already  given, 
page  i05. 

Common  charcoal,  even  whe*i  very  well 
burnt,  contains  a  little  hydrogene,  and  affords 
a  minute  quantity  of  water  in  its  combustion  ; 
but  the  charcoal  from  the  decomposition  of 
oils  gives  carbonic  acid  gas  alone.  It  burns 
when  inflamed  in  dry  oxygene  with  brilliant 
scintillations  ;  there  is  no  perceptible  change 
in  the  volume  of  the  gas  ;  and  wiien  the  pro- 
cess is  complete,  the  oxygene  is  found  conver- 
ted into  carbonic  acid  g^as. 

The  proportions  of  the  elements  in  carbonic 
acid  gas  are  easily  learnt  by  the  difference  be- 
tween its  weight  and  that  of  oxygene.  This 
difference  proves,  as  has  been  stated  before, 
that  it  must  consist  of  13  of  charcoal  to  34  of 
oxygene. 

The  constitution  of  carbonic  acid  gas  is  proved 
analytically  by  its  action  upon  potassium.  If 
this  metal  is  strongly  heated  in  a  retort  con- 
taining the  gas,  it  takes  fire,  and  burns  with  a 
red  light.  Charcoal  in  fine  powder  is  deposited, 
the  gas  disappears,  and  oxygene  is  found  added 
to  the  potassium. 

3.  The  compound  of  carbon  and  oxygene, 
containing  less  oxygene  than  carbonic  acid  gas, 
may  be  formed  in  many  modes  besides  that 


described  in  page  105;  as  by  igniting  chalk  or-i 
any  substance  containing  carbonic  acid  with 
charcoal,  iron,  or  tin  ;  or  by  igniting  difficultly 
reducible  metallic  oxides  with  charcoal,  or  by 
passing  carbonic  acid  gas  over  charcoal  heated 
to  whiteness,  in  a  porcelain  tube.    In  this  last 
case,  the  composition  of  the  gas  is  shewn  by 
the  circumstances  of  the  experiment,  charcoal 
disappears,  and  the  carbonic  acid  becomes  car- 
bonic oxide  gas,  and  there  is  a  considerable 
expansion.  The  true  nature  of  this  elastic  fluid 
was  discovered  by  Mr.  Gruikshank  in  Marcbj 
1801. 

Carbonic  oxide  may  be  purified  from  the 
carbonic  acid  with  which  it  is  usually  mixed, 
by  washing  in  lime  water. 

It  is  corabustibie,  and  by  the  contact  of  an 
inflamed  or  ignited  body,  burns  in  the  atmos- 
phere with  a  lambent  blue  flame.  Its  specific 
gravity,  according  to  Gruikshank,  is  to  that  of 
hydrogene  as  1 3.2  to  1.  100  cubical  inches 
weigh  about  30  grains.  • 

Carbonic  oxide  may  be  taken  into  the  lungs^ 
but  is  fatal  to  animal  life.  I  once  took  three  in- 
spirations of  it  mixed  with  about  ^  of  common 
air ;  the  effect  was  a  temporary  loss  of  sensation, 
which  was  succeeded  by  giddiness,  iigkness, 
acute  pains  in  different  parts  of  theisody,  and 


[  304  ] 


eictreme  debility ;  some  days  elapsed  before! 
entirely  recovered. 

Water  absorbs  about  -^^  of  its  bulk  of  car- 
bonic oxide. 

Chlorine  has  no  immediate  action  on  carbonic 
oxide,  when  they  are  exposed  to  each  other  in 
common  day  light  over  dry  mercury ;  not  even 
when  the  electric  spark  is  passed  through  them* 
M.  M.  Gay  Lussac,  Thenard,  and  Murray, 
have  asserted  that  they  do  not  act  on  each 
other  even  when  long  exposed  to  the  direct 
solar  beams.  But  experiments  which  I  have 
seen  made  by  my  brother,  Mr.  John  Davy, 
prove  the  contrary ;  they  rapidly  combine 
under  this  circumstance,  and  when  in  equal 
volumes,  are  condensed  to  one  half ;  and  form 
a  peculiar  gas,  which  he  has  discovered  is  pos- 
sessed of  very  curious  properties,  approaching 
to  an  acid  in  its  nature. 

The  nature  of  carbonic  oxide,  and  the  pro- 
portions of  its  elements,  are  easily  demonstrated 
by  analytical  experiments.  When  two  in  vo- 
lume of  it  are  mixed  with  one  in  volume  of 
oxygene,  and  an  electrical  spark  passed  through 
the  mixture,  an  inflammation  takes  place,  and 
two  in  volume  of  pure  carbonic  acid  are  formed, 
and  there  is  no  other  product. 

When  potassium  is  strongly  heated  in  it, 


t  305  ] 


combustion  takes  place,  charcoal  is  depositee!, 
no  gas  is  disengaged,  and  oxygeiie  is  added  to 
the  potassium. 

From  the  experiments  on  carbonic  acid  and 
carbonic  oxide,  it  is  evident  that  the  number 
representing  carbon  is  about  1 1.4 ;  and  carbonic 
acid  is  represented  by  30  added  to  11.4,  or 
41.4  I  anti  carbonic  oxide  by  I5  added  to  11. 4, 
or  by  26.4. 

Some  chemists  have  been  perplexed  to  find 
a  .reason  why  carbonic  oxide,  which  contains 
more  carbon,  is  lighter  than  carbonic  acid;  but 
as  Mr.  Dalton  has  ingeniously  and  justly  ob- 
served, there  is  no  dsfEculty  in  this  circum- 
stance ;  carbon  in  the  gaseous  state,  is  probably 
considerably  lighter  than  oxygene.  The  specific 
gravity  of  gasses  bears  no  relation  to  the  den- 
sity of  the  fluids  or  solids,  from  which  they  are 
"formed ;  ether  is  lighter  than  water ;  but  the 
vapour  rising  from  it  is  much  heavier  than 
■steam.  If  carbonic  oxide  be  supposed  to  be. 
constituted  by  equal  volumes  of  gaseous  car- 
bon and  oxygene,  occupying  the  space  of  two 
In  volume,  then  the  specific  gravity  of  gaseous 
carbon  -will  be  to  that  of  oxygene  as  I3  to 
,17  ;  or  if  the  constitution  of  the  carbonic  oxide 
is  similar  to  that  of  tjie  nitrous  oxide,  it  will  be 
only  as  6.5  to  I7. 

4=.  No  compound  of  carbon  and  chlorine 

VOL,  I.  X 


[  S06  ] 

lias  been  as  yet  discovered.  They  have  no 
action  on  each  other  under  any  circunristances 
to  which  they  iiave  been  exposed. 

5.  There  are  two  compounds  of  carbon  and 
hydrogene,  which  are  perfectly  distinct  and  well 
characterized  bodies. 

One  of  ihem,  which  has  been  called  carbu' 
retted  kydrogene,  is  disengaged  in  certain  natural 
operations,  particularly  during  the  decomposi- 
tion of  vegetable  substances;  it  is  the  gas  evolved 
in  stagnant  waters.  It  maybe  procured  by  the 
distillation  of  coal  that  burns  with  flame,  and 
by  decomposing  the  salt  called  acetite  of  potash 
by  a  red  heat;  it  should  be  washed  with  lime 
Vk'ater  to  separate  it  from  carbonic  acid. 

It  burns  with  a  bright  yellowish  flame.  It 
has  no  taste,  but  a  disagreeable  empyreumatic 
smell.  Water  aborbs  about  -^^  of  its  volume. 
Its  specific  gravity,  in  its  purest  form,  is  to  that 
of  hydrogene  as  rather  less  than  8  to  1.  100  cu- 
bical inches  weigh  about  17  grains. 

When  one  of  this  gas  in  volume  is  mixed 
with  two  of  oxygene  gas,  and  an  electrical  spark 
passed  through  them  over  mercury  ;  water  and 
about  one  in  volume  of  carbonic  acid  are  the 
products.  Hence  one  in  volume  of  carburetted 
hydrogene  must  contain  two  in  volume  of  hy- 
drogene gas,  and  as  much  carbon  as  will  form 
a  volume  of  carbonic  acid.    This  likewise  is 


[  307  ] 


shewn  by  the  phasnomeiia  of  its  electrization. 
When  points  of  platina  are  electrically  ignited 
in  it,  or  sparks  passed  through  it,  charcoal  is 
deposited,  and  double  its  volume  of  hydrogene 
is  produced.  When  it  is  mixed  with  twice  its 
volume  of  chlorine  over  mercury,  and  acted  on 
by  the  electrical  spark,  an  inflammation  takes 
place,  charcoal  is  deposited,  there  is  a  consi- 
derable expansion,  and  about  four  volumes  of 
muriatic  acid  gas  are  produced; 

It  is  evident  from  these  different  results  that 
carburetted  hydrogene  may  be  considered  as 
composed  of  one  proportion  of  carbon  1 1.4,  and 
four  of  hydrogene  4,  and  the  number  represent- 
ing it  will  be  15«4. 

6i  When  a  mixture  of  four  parts  of  oil  of 
vitriol  and  one  part  of  strong  spirits  of  wine,  or 
alcohol  is  heated  in  a  retort,  a  gas  is  generated, 
which,  when  washed  by  water,  is  found  to  be 
a  peculiar  gaseous  compound  of  carbon  and 
hydrogene;  it  has  been  called  olefiani  gas,  and 
likewise  super  carburetted  hydrogene.  It  burns, 
when  kindled,  with  a  beautiful  white  flame  of 
intense  splendour.  According  to  Dalton,  water 
absorbs  |-  of  its  volume  of  the  gas.  Its  specific 
gravity  is  to  that  of  hydrogene  nearly  as  13  to 
1;  100  cubical  inches  of  it  w^igli  betv/een  29 
and  30  grains. 

When  it  is  mixed  with  an  equal  volume  of 


[  SOS  ] 

clilorinej  the  two  gasses  condense  each  other, 
and  a  peculiar  fluid  is  formed,  which  has  been 
supposed  to  be  an  oil;  but -which  is  a  peculiar 
compound,  not  soluble  in  water,  and  composed 
of  hydrogene,  carbon,  and  chlorine.  The  na- 
ture of  olefiant  gas  may  be  easily  demonstrated, 
and  likewise  the  proportion  of  its  elements.  If 
pure  sulphur  be  sublimed  in  the  gas  in  a  glass 
tube  over  mercury,  there  is  a  great  expansion  ; 
sulphuretted  hydrogene  is  formed,  and  char- 
coal deposited  ;  one  volume  of  gas  forms  about 
two  in  volume  of  sulphuretted  hydrogene:  the 
sulphur  must  not  be  used  in  much  larger  quan- 
tity than  is  sufficient  to  unite  to  the  hydro- 
gene; for  in  this  case,  by  the  long  application  of 
heat,  the  volume  is  more  than  doubled ;  two 
grains  of  sulphur  and  a  cubical  inch  of  gas  are 
proper  proportions. 

The  gas  is  decomposed  by  electrical  sparks ; 
one  volume  of  it  expands  to  about  two;  char- 
coal is  deposited,  and  the  expanded  gas  is  found 
to  be  hydrogene. 

It  detonates  with  great  violence  by  the  elec- 
trical spark,  when  mixed  with  three  times  its 
volume  of  oxygene;  water  and  nearly  two 
volumes  of  carbonic  acid  are  formed  in  this 
process. 

When  it  is  detonated  with  an  equal  volume  of 
oxygene,  it  expand^  greatly,  and  the  twQ  gasses 


[  309  ] 

together  become  more  than  three  volumes  and  a 
half.  In  this  case  only  the  -i  or  ^  of  a  volume 
of  carbonic  acid  gas  is  formed,  but  more  than  a 
volume  and  a  half  of  carbonic  oxide  5  a  little 
hydrogene  is  consumed,  but  the  greatest  part 
remains  untouched  and  mixed  with  the  carbonic 
oxide  ;  and  it  may  be  separated  by  combustion 
with  chlorine. 

If  an  experiment  of  this  kind  could  be  made 
without  the  production  of  any  carbonic  acid,  or 
the  consumption  of  any  hydrogenej  the  volume 
of  the  gasses  would  be  exactly  doubled,  and 
they  would  consist  of  equal  parts  of  carbonic 
oxide  and  hydrogene. 

It  is  evident  from  all  these  experiments  that 
olefiant  gas  may  be  considered  as  constituted 
by  two  proportions  of  carbon  22.8  and  4,  of 
hydrogene  4,  and  the  number  representing  it 
is  26.8:  and  supposing  a  double  volume  of 
gaseous  carbon  in  olefiant  gas,  its  specific  gra- 
vity will  be  found  to  be  the  same  as  from  the 
data  presented  by  carbonic  oxide. 

7.  Most  of  the  gasses  that  form  carbonic  acid 
in  burning  were  noticed  by  Dr.  Priestley,  who 
confounded  them  under  the  general  name  of 
heavy  inflammable  air.  Oie&ant  gas  was  first 
described  as  a  specific  sobstaoce,  in  11945  by 
BondtjDeiman  and  a  Society  of  Dutch  chemists^ 
Mr*  Berthollet  and  Mr.  Murray  suppose  that 


[  Slo  ] 

there  is  a  great  variety  of  gasses  which  consist 
of  oxygene,  hydrogene,  and  carbon,  in  different 
proportions ;  but  the  experiments  of  Mr.  Dal- 
ton,  Dr.  Henry,  and  Dr.  Thomson,  are  entirely 
opposed  to  these  views ;  and  the  researches 
which  1  have  made  in  conjunction  with  my 
brother,  Mr.  John  Davy,  have  convinced  me  of 
the  correctness  of  Dr.  Henry's  opinion,  that 
what  iiave  been  called  different  oxicarburetted 
Ji/drogene  gasses  are  merely  mixtures  of  olefiant 
gas,  carburetted  hydrogene,  carbonic  oxide,  and 
hydrogene  gasses.  We  used  chlorine  for  separat- 
ing olefiant  gas  at  common  temperatures,  and  the 
same  substance  for  separating  hydrogene  by  ex- 
plosion, or  the  action  of  light;  and  sulphur  for 
decomposing  the  carburetted  hydrogene;  and  in 
these  modes  of  analysis  our  results  were  une- 
quivocal. 

8.  Carbon  and  azote  have  no  known  action 
on  each  other. 

9-  I  have  already  referred  to  the  alcohol  of 
sulphur.  This  substance  was  supposed  by 
M.  M.  Clement  and  Desormes  to  be  a  compound 
of  carbon  and  sulphur ;  there  can  be  no  doubt 
from  what  has  been  stated,  that  this  idea  of  its 
composition  is  incorrect :  I  have  found  it,  how- 
ever, sometimes  to  contain  a  minute  quantity  of 
charcoal ;  and  there  may  possibly  be  a  triple 
compound  of  carbon,  sulphur,  and  hydrogene. 


[311] 

Sulphur  is  very  soluble  in  oils  and  other  com- 
pounds which  consist  principally  ofhydrogene 
and  carbon.  The  charcoal  used  for  making 
the  alcohol  of  sulphur  always  produces  sulphu- 
reous acid  by  burning,  though  previously  ex- 
posed to  a  strong  red  heat,  and  affords  sulphur 
to  a  strong  solution  of  alkali ;  but  the  quantity  is 
very  minute,  and  it  may  be  questioned  whether 
the  sulphur  is  not  in  combination  with  the 
earthy  or  alkaline  matter  the  charcoal  contains; 
and  no  certain  deiinite  compound  of  sulphur 
and  carbon  can  be  as  yet  admitted  in  the  arrange- 
ments of  the  science. 

10-  Phosphorus  has  been  supposed  capable 
of  uniting;  to  carbon ;  but  in  cases  when  speci- 
mens of  phosphorus  afford  charcoal  it  is  most 
probably  mixed  with  the  substance,  or  in  triple 
combination  with  oxygene  and  hydrogene;  and 
no  distinct  action  of  the  two  bodies,  and  no 
definite  compound  of  them  has  as  yet  been 
described.  . 

11.  A  number  of  forms  of  carbon  are  found 
in  nature  :  one  of  the  most  interesting:  of  them 
is  the  diamond;  the  properties  of  this  stone  are 
well  known,  it  is  the  hardest  of  the  gems,  and 
is  usually  crystallized,  often  in  the  form  of  a 
six-sided  prism  terminated  by  a  six  sided  pyra- 
mid: its  specific  gravity  is  about  3.5;  it  does 
not  conduct  electricity.    Of  all  known  bodies 


[  312  ] 

it  bas  the  greatest  power  of  refracting  light. 
When  the  diamond  is  strongly  heated  in  air,  it 
consumes  away :  and  if  it  be  exposed  to  oxy- 
gene  continuously  ignited  by  a  burning  glass, 
or  by  other  means,  it  acts  upon  the  oxygene 
nearly  in  the  same  manner  as  charcoal.  The 
volume  of  the  oxygene  is  not  perceptibly 
changedj  and  it  is  found  converted  into  car- 
bonic acid.  M.  Lavoisier  first  determined  that 
carbonic  acid  was  formed  from  diamond;  and 
Messrs.  Tennant,  Allen,  and  Pepys,  have  de» 
monstrated  by  some  refined  experiments  that  it 
produces  about  the  same  quantity  as  an  equal 
weight  of  charcoal.  Hence  it  has  been  concluded, 
that  the  diamond,  is  pure  carbon,  differing  from 
charcoal  merely  in  the  arrangement  of  its  parts. 
When  it  is  considered,  however,  that  charcoal 
as  a  conductor  and  diamond  a  nonconductor  of 
electricity,  and  that  their  physical  properties 
difier  entirely,  it  is  impossible  to  receive  this 
conclusion  without  doubt.  I  found  that  dia- 
mond powder  heated  strongly  with  potassium 
became  blackened;  and  an  effect  was  produced 
on  the  metal  similar  to  that  which  the  absorp- 
tion of  a  niioute  quantity  of  oxygene  would 
occasion ;  this  would  lead  to  the  suspicion  that 
there  may  be  a  little  oxygene  in  diamond  ;  but 
new  experiments  are  wanting  to  prove  this,  and 
the  quantity^  if  any,  must  be  very  minutCj  which 


[  313  ] 


does  not  harmonise  with  the  doctrine  of  definite 
proportions.  If  it  should  be  ultimately  found 
that  the  diamond  is  merely  pure  carbon,  it  will 
be  an  argument  in  favour  of  the  varieties  of 
elementary  forms  being  produced  by  different 
iiggregations  or  arrangements  of  particles  of  the 
same  matter ;  for  it  is  scarcely  possible  to  fix 
upon  bodies  less  analogous  than  lamp  black, 
and  the  most  perfect  and  beautiful  of  the  gems. 

12.  Plumbago  or  black  lead,  and  anthracite 
cr  stone  coal,  are  both  tolerably  pure  forms  of 
the  carbonaceous  element.  In  plumbago  the 
carbon  is  united  either  chemically  or  mechani- 
cally to  about  -^-j-  of  iron ;  in  anthracite  with 
small  quantities  of  earthy  matter.  In  the  an« 
thracite  of  Kilkenny  in  Irelandj  the  texture  is 
often  fibrous,  and  the  substance  has  all  the 
characters  of  well  burned  charcoal.  In  Hamino; 
coal  the  carbonaceous  element  is  united  to 
bitumen. 

1 3.  Few  substances  are  more  importantin  civi- 
lized life  than  the  different  forms  of  carbon  ;  in 
their  various  uses  they  are  essential  to  the  com- 
forts and  well  being  of  society,  and  are  neces- 
sary in  almost  all  the  useful  arts  and  manufac- 
tures. 

The  inflammable  gasses  produced  by  the 
distillation  of  pit^coal  have  already  been  si3c=- 
cessfully  used  in  manufactories  for  the  purpose 


[  314  ] 

©f  affording  light,  and  the  application  is  at  once 
safe  and  ceconomical. 

In  nature  the  carbonaceous  element  is  con- 
stantly active  in  an  important  series  of  opera- 
tions; it  is  evolved  in  fermentation  and  com- 
bustion, in  carbonic  acid ;  it  is  separated  from 
oxygene  in  the  organs  of  plants,  is  a  principal 
element  in  animal  structures,  and  is  found  in 
different  forms  in  almost  all  the  products  of 
organized  beings, 

VL  Of  Boron*  or  the  Boracic  basis. 

I.  There  is  a  white  crystalline  substance  found 
native  in  volcanic  districts  called  boracic  acid.  It 
may  be  procured  artificially  from  borax  by  heat- 
ing it  in  oil  of  vitriol  diluted  with  eight  times 
its  weight  of  water;  it  is  difficultly  soluble  in 
water,  and  may  be  separated  by  a  fiitre  of  cloth 
or  paper.  When  this  substance,  slightly  mois- 
tened, is  exposed  between  two  surfaces  of  pla- 
tina,  electrified  by  a  Voltaic  battery  of  not  less 

*  In  my  first  paper  on  this  substance  I  named  it  boraciutHj 
for  I  supposed  that  in  its  pure  form  it  would  be  found  to  be 
metallic ;  subsequent  experiments  have  not  justified  this  conjec- 
ture. It  is  more  analogous  to  carbon  than  to  any  other  substance; 
and  I  venture  to  propose  Boron  as  a  more  unexceptionable 
name ;  the  termination  in  um  having  been  long  used  as  cha- 
racteiistic  of  a  metal.  M.  IM.  Gay  Lussac  and  Thenard  have 
proposed  to  call  it  Bore,  a  word  that  cannot  with  propriety  be 
adopted  in  our  language,  though  short  and  appropriate  in  the 
FresKh  nomenclature. 


I 


[  315  ] 

tlian  100  double  plates;  a  dark  coloured  sub- 
stance separates  on  the  plate  negatively  electri-j 
fied.  This  substance  is  boron,  or  the  basis  of 
the  boracic  acid.  In  this  way  it  can  be  pro- 
cured only  in  very  minute  quantities,  and  to 
obtain  it  for  the  purposes  of  experiment,  bo- 
racic acid  that  has  been  long  exposed  to  a  red 
heat,  is  powdered  and  strongly  ignited  with  an 
equal  weight  of  potassium,  in  a  tube  of  iron 
or  copper.  The  result  is  exposed  to  diluted 
muriatic  acid,  and  washed  with  it  till  nothing 
remains  but  a  dark  powder,  which,  when  dried 
at  a  red  heat,  is  the  substance  in  question. 

2.  I  first'procured  boron  in  October,  I  807,by 
the  electrical  decomposition  of  boracic  acid,  and 
by  potassium,  in  March,  1808  ;  but  not  in  suf- 
ficient quantities  to  examine  its  properties,  or 
to  ascertain  its  nature.  M.  M.  Gay  Lussac  and 
Thenard,  in  June,  180 8,  made  the  experiment 
of  heating  boracic  acid  and  potassium  together, 
but  they  did  not  describe  the  properties  of 
boron  till  the  middle  of  November;  and  in  the 
beginning  of  the  same  month  I  had  procured 
sufficient  quantities  of  the  substance  to  ascertain 
its  chemical  relations.  M.  M.  Gay  Lussac  and 
'  Thenard,  I  believe,  recomposed  the  boracic  acid 
before  me,  and  oUr  experiments  were  indepen- 
dent of  each  other;  but  in  my  first  paper  on 
potassium  and  sodium  read  at  the  Royal  Society, 


[  S16  ] 

in  Novemb£r,  1807,  at  a  time  when  tlie  Frencli 
cliemists  had  no  idea  of  the  existence  of  the  alica" 
line  metals,  I  pointed  out  the  probable  applica- 
tion of  these  bodies  to  the  decomposition  of  the 
acids  not  decompounded. 

3.  Boron  is  an  opaque,  dark  olive  coloured 
powder,  infusible,  and  not  volatile  at  any  tem- 
perature to  which  it  has  as  yet  been  exposed. 
When  heated  strongly  in  contact  with  air,  it 
burns,  and  forms  dry  boracic  acid.  In  oxygene 
gas  it  throws  off  bright  scintillations,  becooies 
coated  with  boracic  acid,  and  the  portion  nat 
converted  into  acid,  is  found  darker  coloured 
than  before.  When  gently  heated  in  chlorine 
it  emits  white  fumes,  but  has  no  energetic  action 
on  the  gas.  It  is  a  nonconductor  of  electricity, 
and  insoluble  in  water. 

4.  That  boron  combines  with  oxygene  is 
shewn  by  the  phcenomena  of  its  combustion. 
Boracic  acid  is  the  only  well  known  result  of 
their  combination :  the  preparation  of  boron 
proves  that  the  boracic  acid  consists  of  this 
body  united  to  oxygene,  for  oxygene  is  added 
to  the  potassium  in  the  process.  It  is  very 
difficult  to  ascertain  the  proportions  of  boron 
and  oxygene  in  boracic  acid,  for  the  boracic 
acid  formed  in  combustion  prevents  the  process 
from  going  on ;  and  the  black  substance^  which 
is  probably  an  oxide  of  boron^  is  burnt  only  with 


\ 


f  S17  ] 

great  difficulty.  From  comparing  the  quantity 
of  potassium  required  to  decompose  a  given 
quantity  of  boracic  acid,  witii  the  quantity  of 
oxygene  absorbed  in  the,  production  of  the 
acid,  I  am  inclined  to  believe  that  boracic 
acid  cannot  contain  much  less  than  of  its 
weight  of  oxygene :  I  have  made  a  number  of 
experiments  on  this  subject,  but  have  never 
gained  perfectly  satisfactory  results,  M.  M.  Gay 
Lussac  and  Thenard  conceive  that  boracic  acid 
contains  only  f  of  its  weight  of  oxygene ;  but 
their  conclusions  were  drawn  from  the  action, 
of  boron  on  solution  of  nitric  acid,  and  the  eva- 
poration of  the  products;  and  boracic  acid  forms 
volatile  compounds  both  with  water  and  nitric 
acid;  for  I  find  that  dry  nitre  and  boracic  acid 
afford  by  distillation  a  fluid  containing  a  con- 
siderable quantity  of  boracic  acid.  From  the 
quantity  of  ammonia  required  to  neutralize 
boracic  acid,  it  appears  that  the  number  repre- 
senting it  is  about  160  :  and  to  destroy  the  alka- 
line properties  of  90  parts  of  potassa  requires 
twice  160  of  boracic  acid,  so  that  its  acid  powers 
are  extremely  feeble. 

Boracic  acid  in  its  common  form  is  in  com- 
bination with  water ;  it  then  appears  as  a  series 
of  thin  white  hexagonal  scales  ;  its  taste  is  very 
slightly  acid,  it  reddens  vegetable  blues.  By  a 
long  continued  white  heat  the  water  is  drivea 


I 


[  318  1 

off  from  it,  and  a  part  of  the  acid  sublimes, 
the  remaining  acid  is  a  transparent  fixed  glass, 
which,  rapidly  attracts  moisture  from  the  air. 
The  compound  of  boracic  acid  and  water  ap- 
pears to  contain,  from  my  experiments,  about 
57  parts  of  acid  to  43  of  water.  The  specific 
gravity  of  the  hydrat  of  boracic  acid,  as  it  may 
be  called,  is  1.479,  that  of  the  dry  acid  1.803. 

Boracic  acid  is  very  little  soluble  in  water,  evea 
when  boiling  ihat  fluid  does  not  take  up  ^''^  of  its 
weight.  It  dissolves  in  alcohol,  and  gives  it 
the  power  of  burning  with  a  green  flame. 

5.  Much  still  remains  to  be  known  respecting 
the  nature  and  properties  of  boron,  and  its  com- 
binations. Probably  a  combination  of  it  with 
chlorine  may  be  formed.  It  seems  to  exert  no 
action  on  any  of  the  inflammable  bodies  except 
sulphur,  which  dissolves  a  little  of  it  by  a  long 
continued  heat,  and  gives  a  green  tint. 

It  has  hitherto  been  obtained  in  quantities 
too  small  to  ascertain  whether  it  will  have  any 
applications  to  the  arts. 


1 


[  S19  ] 


DIVISION  V. 


OF  METALS;  THEIR  PRIMARY  COMBINA- 
TIONS WITH  OTHER  UNDECOMPOUNDED 
BODIES,  AND  WITH  EACH  OTHER. 

I.  General  Observations, 

1.  The  metals  form  a  numerous  and  most 
important  class  of  natural  bodies ;  they  are  con- 
nected with  each  other  by  close  analogies,  and 
by  remote  analogies  to  the  inHammable  solids 
described  in  the  |)receding  pages;  the  number 
of  metals  known,  or  the  existence  of  which  may 
be  presumed,  amounts  to  S9.  The  characteristic 
properties  of  the  metals  are  a  high  degree  of 
lustre,  opacity,  combustibility,  and  the  power 
of  conducting  electricity.  A  considerable  de- 
gree of  specific  gravity  was  formerly  considered 
as  an  essential  character  of  metallic  substances  j 
but  I  have  discovered  bodies  lighter  even  than 
water,  which  agree  in  all  other  essential  quali- 
ties with  metals,  and  which  consequently  must 
be  arranged  with  them.  In  the  order  of  classi- 
fication to  be  adopted  in  the  following  pages, 


I  Si20  ] 

the  most  ioflaramable  metals  will  be  the  first 
considered:  though  of  recent  discovery  ihtf 
are  the  most  important  as  agents  of  analytical 
chemistry,  and  have  offered  the  means  of  re- 
ducing other  substances  to  the  metallic  form. 
The  most  inflammable  metais  produce  alkalies, 
alkaline  earths,  and  earths  in  combustion.  Other 
metals  afford  the  substances  called  oxides,  which 
are  analogous  to  earths ;  and  a  few  are  converted 
into  acids.    The  metals  that  produce  alkalies 
are  potassium  and  sodium :  the  alkaline  earths 
are  formed  from  metals,  which  have  been  called 
barium,  strontium,  calcium,  and  magnesium. 
The  metals  supposed  to  be  contained  in  com- 
mon earths  are  silicium,  alumium,  zirconium, 
ittrium,  and  gluciura.    The  metals  that  produce 
oxides  are  manganese,  zinc,  tin,  iron,  lead,  an* 
.  timony,  bismuth,  tellurium,  cobalt,  copper, 
nickel,  palladium,  uranium,  osmium,  tungsten, 
titanium,  columbium,  cerium,  palladium,  iri- 
dium, rhodium,  mercury,  silver,  gold,  and  pla- 
tina.  The  metals  that  produce  acids  are  arsenic, 
molybdenum,  and  chromium, 

2.  The  metals  differ  considerably  in  their 
mechanical  properties,  in  degrees  of  hardness, 
ductilityj  and  tenacity;  all  of  them  that  are 
fusible  by  common  means  assume  regular  crys- 
talline forms  by  slow  cooling,  and  these  forms 
are  usually  cubical  or  octoedral.    The  common 


[  321  ] 

metals  in  consequence  of  their  fusibility,  mallea- 
bility, hardness,  and  durability,  have  been  the 
most  important  instrument  of  the  arts;  the  uses 
of  them  have  been  essential  to  the  progress  of 
civilization ;  and  most  of  the  comforts,  and  many 
of  the  luxuries  and  refinements  of  social  life  are 
connected  with  their  applications, 

2'  Of  Potassium. 

1.  There  is  a  body  usually  called  potash  or  the 
vegetable  alkali,  which  may  be  thus  procured: 
quick  lime  is  mixed  with  solution  of  wood-ashes, 
and  boiled  for  some  time  with  it.  The  liquor 
so  obtained,  after  being  passed  through  bibulous 
paper,  is  evaporated  till  a  solid  matter  remains; 
this  solid  matter  is  heated  with  alcohol  or  pure 
spirit ;  the  spirit  is  separated  by  distillation 
in  a  vessel  of  silver ;  a  fusible  solid  mass  is 
produced,  which  is  the  substance  in  question. 

To  form  potassium,  this  substance  in  a  thin 
piece,  is  placed  between  two  discs  of  platina 
connected  with  the  extremities  of  a  Voltaic  ap- 
paratus of  200  double  plates  ;  it  wilHoon  under- 
go fusion,  oxygene  will  separate  at  the  positive 
surface,  and  small  metallic  globules  will  appear 
at  the  negative  surface,  which  consist  of  potas- 
sium. I  discovered  this  metal  in  the  beginning 
of  October  1807. 

2.  It  may  be  procured  by  chemical  means 

VOL.  I,  Y 


[  322  ] 

without  electricity.  If  iron  turnings  be  heated 
to  whiteness  in  a  curved  gun-barrel,  and  potash 
be  melted  and  made  slowly  to  come  in  contact 
with  the  turnings,  air  being  excluded,*  potas- 
sium will  be  formed,  and  may  be  collected  in  a 
cool  part  of  the  tube;  this  method  of  procuring 
it  was  discovered  by  M.  M.  Gay  Lussac  and 
Thenard,  in  I808.  It  may  likewise  be  pro- 
duced by  igniting  potash  with  charcoal,  as  M. 
Curaudau  shewed  in  the  same  year. 

3.  Potassium  is  possessed  of  very  extraor- 
dinary properties;  it  is  lighter  than  water,  its 
specific  gravity  is  between  8  and  9,  water  being 
10.  It  is  a  solid  at  common  temperatures  ;  it  is 
very  soft,  and  easily  moulded  by  the  fingers.  It 
fuses  at  about  150°  Fahrenheit,  and  rises  in 
vapour,  in  a  heat  a  little  below  that  of  redness. 
It  is  perfectly  opaque.  Its  colour  is  white,  like 
that  of  silver  when  it  is  newly  cut,  but  it  rapidly 
tarnishes  in  the  air ;  and  to  be  preserved  from 
change  must  be  kept  under  naphtha.  It  is  a 
conductor  of  electricity.  When  thrown  upon 
water  it  acts  with  great  violence,  swims  upon 
the  surface,  and  burns  with  a  beautiful  light, 
which  is  white  mixed  with  red  and  violet;  the 
water  in  which  it  burns  is  found  alkaline,  and 
contains  a  solution  of  potassa.  It  inflames 
when  gently  heated  in  the  air,  burns  with  a 

*  See  Plate  VI,  fig.  26. 


[  32S  ] 

t 

red  light,  and  throws  off  fumes,  which  are  alka- 
line. It  burns  spontaneously  in  chlorine  with 
intense  brilliancy. 

It  acts  upon  all  fluid  bodies  containing  water, 
or  much  oxygene,  or  chlorine  ;  and  in  »its  ge- 
neral powers  of  chemical  combination  may  be 
compared  to  the  alkahest,  or  universal  solvent 
imagined  by  the  alchemists. 

4.  Potassium  combines  with  oxygene  in  dif- 
ferent proportions.  When  potassium  is  gently 
heated  in  common  air  or  in  oxygene,  the  result 
of  its  combustion  is  an  orange-coloured  fusible 
substance ;  and  for  every  grain  of  potassium  con- 
sumed, about  a  cubical  inch  and  of  oxygene 
disappear.  To  make  the  experiment  accu- 
rately the  metal  should  be  burnt  in  a  tray  of 
platina  covered  with  a  coating  of  the  salt  called 
in  the  French  nomenclature,  muriate  of  potash, 
a  substance  immediately  to  be  described,  which 
may  be  easily  done  by  fusing  it  in  contact  with 
the  platina.  This  salt  is  one  of  the  few  substances 
that  has  no  action  on  potassium  or  its  oxides. 

The  substance  procured  by  the  combustion 
of  potassium  at  a  low  temperature,  I  had  ob- 
served in  October,  1807,  but  I  supposed  it  to 
be  the  oxide  of  potassium  containing  the  smallest 
quantity  of  oxygene,  for  it  effervesced  in  water ; 
M.  M.  Gay  Lussac  and  Thenard,  in  IS  10, 
first  demonstrated  its  real  nature,  md  shewed 


C  324  ] 

that  it  was  the  combination  of  oxygene  and 
potassium  containing  the  largest  quantity  of 
oxygene. 

The  gas  produced  by  its  effervescence  with 
water  is  oxygene.  When  it  is  fused  and  brought 
in  contact  with  combustible  bodies,  they  burn 
with  vividness.  When  it  is  heated  in  carbonic 
acid,  oxygene  gas  is  expelled,  and  it  is  con- 
verted into  the  compound  called  subcarbonate 
of  potash. 

When  it  is  heated  very  strongly  upon 
platlna,  oxygene  gas  is  expelled  from  it,  and 
there  remains  a  difficultly  fusible  substance  of 
a  gray  colour,  vitreous  in  its  fracture,  and 
which  dissolves  in  water  without  effervescence, 
but  with  much  heat,  and  renders  the  water 
alkaline.  This  substance  is  pure  potash  or 
poiassa,  which  was  unknown  in  its  uncombined 
state  till  I  discovered  potassium,  but  which  has 
long  been  familiar  to  chemists  combined  with 
water  in  the  substance  which  has  been  caUed 
pure  potash ;  but  which  ought  to  be  called  the 
hydrat  of  potatsa. 

.  That  the  potash  obtained  by  alcohol  in  the 
manner  described  in  the  beginning  of  this  sec- 
tion, is  a  compound  of  potassa  and  water,  is 
shewn  by  many  experiments.  If  it  be  made  to 
act  upon  iron  turnings  at  a  dull  red  heat,  the 
iron  becomes  combined  with  oxygene,  hydro- 


[  325  ] 

gene  is  given  ofF  in  abundance,  and  the  alkali 
loses  its  easy  fusibility,  becomes  harder,  more 
opaque,  and  of  greater  specific  gravity.  In 
producing  potassium  in  the  experiment  of  act- 
ing upon  white  hot  iron  turnings  by  common 
potash,  hydrogene  is  disengaged  in  abundance 
from  the  decomposition  of  the  water  in  the 
potash ;  and  I  have  procured  this  water  by 
heating  together  the  potash  prepared  by  alcohol 
and  boracic  acid ;  100  parts  of  potash  treated 
in  this  way  gave  between  17  and  18  parts  of 
pure  water. 

Potassa  entirely  free  from  water  may  be  pro- 
cured by  other  means  besides  the  decomposition 
of  the  orange  oxide  of  potassium,  or  the  action 
of  iron  on  common  potash  ;  fo'r  instance,  by 
acting  on  potassium  by  a  small  quantity  of 
water,  or  by  heating  potassium  with  common 
potash.  The  proportion  of  oxygene  in  potassa 
is  learned  by  the  action  of  potassium  upon 
water :  8  grains  of  potassium  produce  from 
water  about  9  cubical  inches  and  a  half  of  hy- 
drogene ;  and  for  these  there  must  be  added  to 
the  metal  four  cubical  inches  and  three  quarters 
of  oxygene, 

5.  It  has  been  mentioned,  page  114,  that  the 
number  representing  potassium  is  75:  and  it 
appears  from  the  experiments  that  the  orange 
oxide  of  potassium  must  consist  of  1  proportion 


[  326  ] 


of  potassium  75,  and  3  of  oxygene  45  ;  and  the 
number  representing  it  is  120.  Potassa  must 
consist  of  one  proportion  of  potassium  75,  and 
one  of  oxygene  15,  and  the  number  representing 
it  is  90.  Hydrat  of  potassa,  or  the  potash  pre- 
pared by  alcohol,  must  contain  one  proportion 
of  potassa  90,  and  one  of  water  1 7,* 

6.  When  potassium  is  heated  strongly  in  a 
small  quantity  of  common  air,  the  oxygene  of 
which  is  not  sufficient  for  its  conversion  into 
potassa,  a  substance  is  formed  of  a  grayish 
colour,  which,  when  thrown  into  water,  effer- 
vesces without  inflaming.  This  substance  is 
likewise  generated  in  experiments  on  the  pro- 
duction of  potassium  by  iron  and  hydrate  of 
potassa,  when  a  little  common  air  is  admitted 
into  the  barrel.  It  is  doubtful  whether  it  be  a 
mixture  of  potassa  and  potassium,  or  a  combina- 
tion of  potassium  with  a  smaller  quantity  of 
oxygene  than  exists  in  potassa,  that  is  a  prot- 
oxide of  potassium.  If  a  protoxide  of  potas- 
sium, it  probably  contains  two  proportions  of 
potassium  and  one  of  oxygene. 

*  In  the  few  experiments  that  I  have. made  on  hydrat  of 
potassa,  there  has  been  rather  more  water  indicated,  between 
17  and  19  psr  cent.;  but  the  potash  I  used  was,  I  doubt  not, 
aduherated  with  a  little  soda,  as  no  particular  care  was  taken 
to  purify  it,  and  hydrat  of  soda  contains  more  water  in  pro- 
portion: and  there  is  great,  reason  to  believe  that  90  and  17 
a;:e  the  true  estimation.  .  M.  M.  Gay  Lussac  and  Thenard 
allow  about  I  of  water  in  potash. 


[  327  ] 

7.  I  have  already  referred  to  the  action  of 
potassium  and  chlorine;  the  inflammation  pro- 
duced when  thin  pieces  of  potassium  are  intro- 
duced, into  chlorine  is  very  vivid:  potassium 
separates  chlorine  from  hydrogene  and  phos- 
phorus with  inflammation  ;  and  when  potassium 
is  made  to  act  upon  sulphurane  there  is  a  vio- 
lent explosion;  The  attraction  of  chlorine  for 
potassium  is  much  stronger  than  the  attraction 
of  oxygene  ;  potassa,  and  the  orange  oxide  of 
potassium,  are  immediately  decomposed  by 
chlorine,  the  chlorine  combines  with  the  metalj 
and  the  oxygene  is  set  free. 

The  combination  of  chlorine  and  potassium 
is  the  substance  which  has  been  improperly 
called  muriate  of  potash,  and  which,  in  common 
cases,  is  formed  by  causing  muriatic  acid  and 
solution  of  potassa  to  act  upon  each  other,  and 
by  heating  the  mixture  to  redness;  in  which 
case  the  hydrogene  of  the  acid,  and  the  oxy- 
2;ene  of  the  alkali  are  set  free  as  water ;  and  the 
metal  of  the  alkali  and  the  chlorine  of  the  acid 
combine.  From  various  analytical  experiments 
it  appears  that  muriate  of  potash,  which  may 
be  called  potassane,  consists  of  75  of  potassium 
and  67  of  chlorine,  and  the  number  represent 
ing  it  is  140.  Potassane  is  the  only  known 
combination  of  potassium  and  chlorine. 

8.  There  appears  to  be  a  gaseous  combination 
of  potassium  and  hydrogene ;  for  I  found  that 


t     ]  ' 

■when  potassium  is  heated  strongly  in  hydra-^ 
gene  the  gas  contracts  in  volume,  and  becomes 
spontaneously  inflammable,  and  gives  alkaline 
fumes  in  its  couibustion.  M.  M.  Gay  Lussac 
and  Thenard  state  that  there  is  a  solid  com- 
pound of  hydrogene  and  potassium,  which  may 
be  obtained  by  heating  the  metal  for  a  long 
while  in  the  gas,  at  a  temperature  just  below 
that  of  ignition.  They  describe  it  as  a  grayish 
solid,  and  state  that  it  gives  off  its  hydrogene 
by  the  action  of  mercury.  As  yet  no  experi- 
ments have  been  made  on  the  proportions  in 
which  hydrogene  and  potassium  combine. 

g.  Potassium  and  sulphur  combine  with 
great  energy  when  they  are  heated  together, 
producing  much  light  and  heat,  even  when  the 
experiment  is  made  out  of  the  contact  of  air. 
The  sulphuret  of  potassium  is  of  a  dark  gray 
colour ;  acts  with  great  energy  upon  water, 
producing  sulphuretted  hydrogene,  and  burns 
brilliantly  when  heated  in  the  air,  becoming 
the  salt  called  sulphate  of  potash.  From  my 
experiments  there  is  every  reason  to  believe 
that  this  compound  consists  of  one  proportion 
of  sulphur  30,  and  one  of  potassium  75,  and 
the  number  representing  it  will  be  105.  Potas- 
sium has  so  strong  an  attraction  for  sulphur 
that  it  rapidly  separates  it  from  hydrogene  j 
and  potassium  heated  in  sulphuretted  hydro- 
gene takes  fire  and  burns  with  great  brilliancy^ 


[  329  ] 


and  sulphuret  of  potassium  is  formed,  and  by- 
dro2:ene  set  free, 

10.  Potassium  and  phosphorus  enter  into 
union  produclnglight;  buttheyacton  each  other 
with  less  energy  than  potassium  and  sulphur. 
The  phosphurd  of  potassium  in  its  common  form 
is  a  substance  of  a  dark  chocolate  colour ;  but 
when  heated  with  potassium  in  great  excess  it 
becomes  of  a  deep  gray  colour,  and  of  consider- 
ablelustre,  so  that  it  is  likely  thatphosphorusand 
potassium  are  capable  of  combining  in  two  pro- 
portions; probably  the  chocolate-coloured  sub- 
stance contains  one  proportion  of  each,  and  the 
dark  gray  substance  two  proportions  of  the  metal. 

The  phosphuret  of  potassium  burns  with 
great  brilliancy  when  exposed  to  air,  and  when 
thrown  into  water  produces  an  explosion  in 
consequence  of  the  immediate  disengagement 
of  phosphuretted  hydrogene. 

11.  When  charcoal  is  present  during  the 
production  of  potassium,  it  usually  contains  a 
small  quantity  of  carbonaceous  matter ;  and 
charcoal  that  has  been  heated  strongly  in  con- 
tact with  potassium  effervesces  in  water,  and 
renders  it  alkaline,  though  previously  exposed 
to  a  temperature  at  which  potassium  rises  in 
vapour.  These  circumstances  shew  that  there  is 
an  attraction,  though  feeble,  between  potassium 
and  caibon;  but  as  yet  no  compound  of  the 


I 


[  330  ] 

two  bodies  of  which  the  proportions  can  be 
assigned  has  been  obtained. 

12.  Potassium  like  other  metals  has  resisted 
all  attempts  to  resolve  it  into  other  forms  of 
matter.  Since  I  first  discovered  it,  and  an- 
nounced it  as  an  undecorapounded  substance, 
there  has  been  much  discussion  respecting  its 
nature.  M.  M.  Gay  Lussac,  Thenard,  Ritter, 
and  Dalton,  supposed  that  it  was  a  compound 
of  hydrogene  and  potassa;  but  the  first  two 
chemists  have  allowed  that  the  phaenomena  are 
incompatible  with  such  an  hypothesis ;  in  this 
case  potassium  should  form  liydrat  of  polassa, 
or  substances  containing  water  in  combustion, 
which  is  not  the  case  ;  nor  has  hydrogene  been 
in  any  instance  obtained  in  experiments  on 
potassium  except  wlien  substances  known  to 
contain  hydrogene  were  present ;  and  it  would 
not  be  more  absurd  to  say  that  phosphorus  is  a 
compound  of  hydrogene  and  phosphoric  acid, 
than  to  say  that  potassium  is  a  compound  of 
hydrogene  and  potassa. 

13.  Potassium,  of  all  known  substances,  is  that 
which  has  the  strongest  attraction  for  oxygene ; 
and  it  produces  such  a  condensation  of  it 
that  the  oxides  of  potassium  are  heavier  than 
the  metal  itself.  Potassium  may  be  used  as  a 
general  agent  for  detecting  the  presence  of 
oxygene  in  bodies  ;  and  a  number  of  substances 


C  381  ] 


undecomposable  by  other  chemical  agents  are 
readily  decomposed  by  this  substance. 

The  compounds  of  potassium  are  of  great 
use  in  the  arts ;  potassa  enters  into  the  compo- 
sition of  soft  soap,  and  the  salts  having  a  basis 
of  potassa  are  many  of  them  used  in  medicine. 

3.  Sodium. 

1.  Sodium  may  be  procured  exactly  in  the 
same  manner  as  potassium,  by  electrical  or 
chemical  decomposition,  the  mineral  alkali, 
or  the  alkali  from  the  ashes  of  marine  plants 
being  used  instead  of  pearl  ashes.  Rather  a 
higher  degree  of  heat  is  necessary  for  its  pro- 
duction by  the  action  of  iron, 

I  discovered  sodium  a  few  days  after  I  dis- 
covered potassium,  in  the  year  1  SO 7. 

2.  In  many  of  its  characters  it  resembles 
potassium;  it  is  as  vi^hite  as  silver,  has  great 
lustre,  and  is  a  conductor  of  electricity.  It  enters 
into  fusion  at  about  200°  Fahrenheit,  and  rises 
in  vapour  at  a  strong  red  heat.  Its  specific  gra- 
vity is  between  9  and  10.  When  heated 
strongly  in  oxygene  or  chlorine,  it  burns  with 
great  brilliancy.  When  thrown  upon  water  it 
effervesces  violently,  but  does  not  inflame,  swims 
on  the  surface,  gradually  diminishes  with  great 
agitation,  and  rtnders  the  water  a  solution  of 
soda.    It  acts  upon  most  substances  in  a  manner 


[  332  ] 

similar  to  potassium,  but  with  less  energy.  I6 
tarnishes  in  the  air,  but  more  slowly,  and  like 
potassium  it  is  best  preserved  under  naphtha. 

3.  Sodium  forms  two  distinct  definite  com- 
binations with  oxygene :  one  is  pure  soda, 
which  has  long  been  known,  combined  with 
water,  in  the  substance  which  has  been  called 
by  chemists  Soda,  but  which  was  not  examined 
in  its  uncombined  state,  till  I  formed  it  from  the 
metal ;  the  other  is  the  orange  oxide  of  sodium, 
which  I  observed  in  180J  ;  but  of  which  the 
true  nature  was  pointed  out  in  1810  by 
M.  M.  Gay  Lussac  and  Thenard. 

Pure  soda  may  be  made  by  burning  sodium 
in  a  quantity  of  air  containing  no  more  oxy- 
gene than  is  sufficient  for  its  conversion  into 
the  alkali,  i.  e.  the  metal  must  be  in  excess :  a 
strong  degree  of  heat  must  be  applied. 

Pure  soda  is  of  a  gray  colour,  it  is  a  non- 
conductor of  electricity,  of  a  vitreous  fracture, 
and  requiring  a  strong  red  heat  for  its  fusion. 
When  a  iitde  water  is  added  to  it,  there  is  a 
violent  action  between  the  two  bodies ;  the 
soda  becomes  white,  crystalline  in  its  appear- 
ance, and  much  more  fusible  and  volatile,  and 
is  then  the  substance  which  has  been  long 
known  under  the  name  of  soda,  but  which  may, 
with  more  propriety,  be  called  hydiat  of  soda. 

The  oxide  of  sodium  may  be  formed  by 
burning  sodium  in  oxygene  gas  in  excess.  It 


[  333  3 


Is  of  a  deep  orange  colour,  very  fusible,  and  a 
non-conductor  of  electricity  ;  when  acted  upon 
by  water,  it  gives  off  oxygene  gas,  and  the 
water  becomes  a  solution  of  soda ;  it  deflagrates 
when  strongly  heated  with  combustible  bodies. 

The  proportions  of  oxygene  in  soda,  and 
the  orange  oxide  or  peroxide  of  sodium,  are 
easily  learnt  by  the  action  of  sodium  on  water, 
and  on  oxygene.  If  a  given  weight  of  sodium, 
in  a  little  glass  tube,  be  thrown  by  means  of 
the  finger,  under  a  graduated  inverted  jar  filled 
with  water,  the  quantity  of  hydrogene  evolved 
will  indicate  the  quantity  of  oxygene  combined 
with  the  metal,  to  form  soda  ;  and  when  sodium 
is  burnt  slowly  in  a  tray  of  platina,  lined  with 
dry  common  salt  in  oxygene  in  great  excess  ; 
from  the  quantity  of  oxygene  absorbed,  the 
composition  of  the  peroxide  may  be  learnt. 
From  experiments  that  I  have  made  on  this 
subject,  compared  with  those  made  by  M.  M. 
Gay  Lussac  and  Thenard,  it  appears  that  the 
number  representing  sodium  is  88,  and  that 
soda  consists  of  one  proportion  of  sodium,  and 
two  of  oxygene,  88  and  30:   the  oxide  of 
sodium,  of  one  proportion  of  sodium,  and  3  of 
oxygene,  88  and  43:   and  hydrate  of  soda 
(soda  prepared  by  alcohol)  contains  one  pro- 
portion of  sodium,  two  of  oxygene,  and  two  of 
water,  and  the  number  representing  it  is  1 5  2. 


[  334  ] 


When  sodium  is  kept  for  some  time  m  a 
small  quantity  of  moist  air,  or  when  sodium  in 
excess  is  heated  with  hydrat  of  soda,  a  dark 
grayish  substance  is  formed,  more  inflammable 
than  sodium,  and  which  affords  hydrogene  by 
its  action  upon  water.  It  is  probable  that  this 
is  sodium  in  its  first  degree  of  oxygenation,  or 
the  protoxide  of  sodium;  but  as  yet  no  expe- 
riments have  been  made  on  its  constitution.  If 
the  protoxide,  it  is  likely  that  it  consists  of  one 
proportion  of  sodium,  and  one  of  oxygene. 

4.  Only  one  combination  of  sodium  and 
chlorine  is  known:  it  is  the  important  sub- 
stance common  salt.  It  may  be  formed  directly 
by  combustion,  or  by  decomposing  any  com- 
pound of  chlorine  by  sodium.  Its  properties 
are:  well  known  ;  it  is  a  non-conductor  of  elec- 
tricity, is  fusible  at  a  strong  red  heat,  is  vola- 
tile at  a  white  heat,  and  crystallizes  in  cubes. 
Sodium  has  a  much  stronger  attraction  for 
chlorine  than  oxygene ;  and  soda  or  hydrate 
of  soda  is  decomposed  by  chlorine,  oxygene 
being  expelled  from  the  first,  and  oxygene  and 
water  from  the  second. 

Potassium  has  a  stronger  attraction  for 
chlorine  than  sodium  has ;  and  one  mode  of 
procuring  sodium  easily,  is  by  heating  together 
to  redness  common  salt  and  potassium.  The 
compound  of  sodium  and  chlorine  has  been 


I  335  ] 


called  muriate  of  soda,  in  the  French  nomen« 
clature;  for  it  was  falsely  supposed  to  be  com^ 
posed  of  muriatic  acid  gas,  and  soda  ;  and  it  is 
a  curious  circumstance,  that  the  progress  of 
discovery  should  have  shewn  that  it  is  a  less 
compounded  body  than  hydrate  of  soda,  which 
six  years  ago  was  considered  as  a  simple  sub- 
stance, and  one  of  its  elements.  According  to 
th^  nomenclature  which  I  have  ventured  to 
propose,  the  chemical  name  for  common  salt 
will  be  sodane. 

Common  salt  consists  of  one  proportion  of 
sodium,  88,  and  two  of  chlorine,  134  ;  and  the 
number  representing  it  is  222  :  when  the  proper 
corrections  are  made,  the  most  accurate  analyses, 
particularly  those  of  Dr.  Marcet,  are  found  to 
agree  with  this  number. 

5.  There  is  no  known  action  between  sodium 
and  hydrogene,  or  azote. 

6.  Sodium  combines  readily  with  sulphur^ 
and  with  phosphorus,  presenting  similar  phac- 
nomena  to  those  presented  by  potassium.  The 
sulphurets  and  phosphurets  of  sodium  agree  in 
their  general  properties  with  thoseof  potassium, 
except  that  they  are  rather  less  inflammable. 
They  form  by  burning,  compounds  of  sul- 
phuric and  phosphoric  acid  and  soda,  and 
therefore  must  contain  two  proportions  of  the 
inflammable  substances,  to  one  of  sodium. 


[  336  ] 

7.  Sodium,  when  made  from  substances  con- 
taining charcoal,  usually  affords  charcoal  by- 
combustion  ;  but  as  yet  no  definite  combina- 
tion of  the  two  bodies  has  been  obtained.  No 
experiments  have  been  made  on  the  action  of 
sodium  on  boron. 

8.  Potassium  and  sodium  combine  with  great 
facility,  and  form  peculiar  compounds,  which 
differ  in  their  properties  according  to  the  pro- 
portions of  their  ingredients.  By  a  small  quan- 
tity of  sodium,  potassium  is  rendered  fluid  at 
common  temperatures,  and  its  specific  gravity 
considerably  diminished.  Eight  parts  of  potas- 
sium, and  one,  of  sodium,  form  a  compound 
that  swims  in  naphtha,  and  that  is  fluid  at  the 
common  temperature  of  the  air.    Three  parts 
of  sodium,  and  one  of  potassium,  make  a  com- 
pound, fluid  at  common  temperatures.  A  little 
potassium  destroys  the  ductility  of  sodium,  and 
renders  it  very  brittle,  and  very  soft. 

9.  The  compounds  of  sodium  are  of  great 
importance  in  the  common  arts,  and  are  sub- 
servient to  many  of  the  wants  of  life.  Soda  is 
the  most  important  ingredient  in  the  diff*erent 
species  of  glass,  and  in  hard  soaps.  The 
glasses  are  composed  of  soda  united  to  earths 
and  oxides  ;  the  soaps  consist  of  soda,  united  to 
oily  substances.  Common  salt  is  found  abun- 
dantly in  nature ;  it  exists  in  small  quantities 


t  S3?  1 

In  almost  all  waters  and  all  Soils.  It  dim'nishes 
the  tendency  of  animal  or  vegetable  Siib  tances 
to,  decompose,  and  probably  preserves  the 
ocean  in  a  state  fitted  for  the  purposes  of  animal 
life.  It  is  a  part  of  the  nourishment  of  animals, 
and  though  taken  in  very  small  quantities, 
feeerns  to  perform  an  important  part  in  their 
ceconomy. 

9.  The  compounds  formed  by  potassium  and 
sodium,  like  the  metals  themselves,  are  possessed 
of  strong  resemblances  ;  they  may  however  be 
chemically  distinguished  by  a  very  simple  test ; 
the  diluted  aqueous  solutions  of  the  compounds  of 
potassium,  render  cloudy  the  nitro-mui  iatic  so- 
lution of  platina,  which  is  not  the  case  with  simi- 
lar solutions  of  the  compounds  of  sodium.  Most 
of  the  compounds  of  sodium  differ  from  those 
of  potassium,  in  containing  double  proportions 
of  the  other  elements.  Potassa  contains  one 
proportion  of  oxygene  only  ;  soda  cotitains  two, 
and  the  salts  having  potassa  for  their  basis, 
contain  only  one  proportion  of  acid,  whilst 
those  having  soda  for  their  basis,  contain  two. 
The  attl^actions  df  potassium  for  all  substances 
that  have  been  examined,  are  strongfer  than 
thtise  of  sodium  ;  arid  when  sodium  is  procured 
frdui  GbrtipOunds,  by  the  agency  of  potassiutn, 
I50  parts  in  weight  of  potassium,  or  two  pro- 

voL.  r.  Z 


[  338  ] 

portions,  are  required  to  produce  8^  parts  df 
sodium,  or  one  proportion. 

3'  Bariums 

1.  There  is  a  mineral  substance  found  in 
Cumberland,  Yorkshirej  and  other  parts  of 
Britain,  called  Witherite,or  carbonate  of  baryta. 
By  dissolving  this  substance  in  dilute  solution 
of  nitric  acid,  evaporating  the  solution  to  dry- 
ness, and  heating  the  salt  obtained  to  whiteness, 
a  light  fawn-coloured  powder  is  procured, 
which  is  baryta  or  barium  combined  with 
oxygene.  To  obtain  barium,  a  quantity  of  this 
substance  is  made  into  a  paste,  with  water,  and 
placed  on  a  plate  of  platina  ;  a  cavity  is  made 
in  the  paste  to  receive  a  globule  of  mercury  ; 
the  mercury  is  rendered  negative,  the  platina 
positive,  by  means  of  a  Voltaic  battery,  con- 
taining about  100  double  plates. 

In  a  short  time  an  amalgam  will  be  formed, 
consisting  of  mercury  and  barium.  This  amal- 
gam must  be  introduced  into  a  little  tube  made 
of  glass  free  from  lead,  which  must  he  bent  in 
the  form  of  a  retort,  filled  with  the  vapour  of 
naphtha,  and  hermetically  sealed.  Heat  must 
be  applied  to  the  end  of  the  tube  containing 
the  amalgam,  till  all  the  mercury  has  been 


[  339  ] 

driven  off;  there  will  remain  a  solid  dilFicultly 
fusible  metal, which  is  barium, 

2-  I  first  gained  indications  of  the  decom- 
position of  baryta,  in  the  end  of  October  1807, 
and  I  obtained  an  alloy  of  it  with  iron,  in. 
March  1808.  The  process  of  electrifying  mer- 
cury, in  contact  with  the  earth,  was  pointed 
out  to  me  in  the  course  of  my  enquiries,  by 
M.  M.  Berzelius  and  Pontin  of  Stockholm, 
in  May  1808  ;  and  in  the  beginning  of  June  in 
the  same  year,  I  obtained  the  metal. 

3.  Barium,  as  procured  by  heating  the  amal- 
gam, appeared  of  a  dark  gray  colour,  with  a 
lustre  inferior  to  that  of  cast  iron.  It  was 
considerably  heavier  than  sulphuric  acid,  for 
though  surrounded  by  globules  of  gas,  it  sunk 
immediately  in  that  fluid.  It  instantly  became 
<;overed  with  a  crust  of  baryta,  when  exposed  to 
air,  and  burnt  with  a  deep  red  light,  when  gently 
heated.  When  thrown  into  water  it  effervesced 
violently,  disappeared,  and  the  water  was  found 
to  be  a  solution  of  baryta. 

Barium  as  yet  has  been  obtained  only  in 
very  minute  quantities.  I  have  never  possessed 
enough  of  it  to  ascertain  its  general  chemical 
and  physical  characters,  and  no  experiments 
upon  it  have  been  published  by  any  other 
person. 

4.  From  some  results  that  I  have  obtained, 


[  S40  ] 


it  seems  probable  that  barium  may  be  procured 
by  chemical,  as  well  as  electrical  decomposi- 
tion. When  baryta,  or  the  salt  improperly 
called  muriate  of  baryta,  ignited  to  whiteness, 
was  exposed  to  the  agency  of  potassium,  that 
metal  being  sent  through  it  in  vapour,  a  dark 
gray  substance  appeared,  diffused  through  the 
baryta,  or  the  muriate,  not  volatile,  that  effer- 
vesces copiously  in  water,  and  that  lo^t  its 
metallic  appearance  by  exposure  to  air  : — the 
potassium  in  this  process  was  converted  into 
potassa. 

5.  Tlie  only  well  kriown  combination  of 
barium,  with  oxygene,  is  baryta  or  baria.  It  is  of 
a  pale  grayish  green  colour.  Its  specific  gravity 
is  about  4,  that  of  water  being  1.  This  substance 
is  a  non-conductor  of  electricity,  has  a  strong 
caustic  taste,  reddens  turmeric,  and  renders 
green,  vegetable  blues.  When  acted  upon  by 
a  small  quantity  of  water,  it  heats  violently, 
becomes  white,  unites  to  a  proportion  of  water, 
and  becomes  a  hydrate.  The  pure  alkaline 
earth  is  infusible,  except  by  an  intense  heat: 
the  hydrate  fuses  at  a  strong  red  heat ;  a  consi- 
derable part  of  its  water  is  expelled  by  a  still 
higher  temperature.  Baryta  is  soluble  at  60°, 
in  about  20  parts  of  water,  and  at  212°  in  about 
2  parts.  That  baryta  is  composed  of  barium 
and  oxygene,  is  proved  by  the  combustion  of 


[  S41  ] 

barium  in  oxygene ;  in  which,  as  I  have  found, 
oxygene  is  absorbed  and  no  product  but  baryta 
formed.  It  is  likewise  proved  synthetically  by 
the  action  of  barium  upon  water,  in  which  case 
hydrogene  is  evolved;  and  analytically  it  ap- 
pears from  the  action  of  potassium,  on  the 
earth.  From  indirect  experiments,  I  am  in- 
clined to  consider  baryta  as  composed  of  89.7 
of  barium,  and  10.3  of  oxygene  :  and  sup- 
posing the  earth  to  consist  of  one  proportion  of 
metal  an4  one  of  oxygene,  the  number  repre- 
senting barium  will  be  1  30,  and  that  represent- 
ing the  alkaline  earth  will  be  14^.  > 

Barium,  as  would  appear  from  the  experi- 
jnents  of  M.  M.  Gay  Lussac  and  Thenard,  is 
capable  of  combining  with  more  oxygene  than 
exists  in  baryta.  These  able  chemists  state, 
that  when  baryta  is  gently  heated  by  a  spirit 
lamp,  in  a  glass  tube  filled  with  oxygene  gas, 
an  absorption  of  the  gas  takes  place.  As  yet 
no  experiments  have  been  made  on  the  pro- 
perties of  this  oxide  of  barium,  or  on  the 
quantity  of  oxygene  it  contains :  probably 
baryta  may  be  easily  combined  with  oxygene, 
by  heating  it  with  byper-oxymuriate  of  baryta. 
T/ie  ky  drat  of  baryta,  if  its  composition  be  esti* 
pnated  ^xpm  M.  JBerthollet's  experiments,consists 
of  one  proportion  of  baryta,  and  one  of  water. 

6.  One  combination  only  of  barium  and 


[  S42  ] 

clilorine  is  known  ;  it  may  be  formed  by  beat* 
ing  baryta  in  muriatic  acid  gas,  or  in  chlorine. 
In  tlie  first  case,  the  oxygene  of  the  baryta 
produces  water  by  combining  with  the  hydro- 
gene  of  the  acid  ;  in  the  second  it  is  expelled  r 
and  in  an  experiment  made  on  purpose,  I  found 
that  for  every  part  in  volume  of  chlorine  ab- 
sorbed, half  a  part  of  Oxygene  was  given  off  from 
the  alkaline  earth.  Hence  it  may  be  concluded 
that  the  compound  of  barium  and  chlorine 
contains  one  proportion,  of  meiai  13O  and  one 
of  chlorine  67.  This  substance  is  fusible  by  a 
very  strong  heat,  is  very  soluble  in  water ;  its 
taste  is  bitter,  its  colour  white,  it  is  crystalline 
Und  transparent.  It  is  improperly  called  in 
the  French  nomenclature,  muriate  of  baryta. 
According  to  the  principles  of  nomenclature 
which  I  have  proposed,  its  name  will  be  barang. 

8.  No  other  combinations  of  barium,  except 
those  with  oxygene  and  chlorine,  have  been  as 
yet  examined ;  there  can,  however,  be  little 
doubt  that  its  powers  of  combination  will  be, 
in  many  respects,  analogous  to  those  of  potas- 
sium and  sodium,  as,  of  all  metallic  substances, 
it  is  the  nearest  related  to  these  bodies. 

9.  The  compounds  of  barium  have  as  yet  been 
applied  to  the  arts  in  very  few  cases.  Baryta  is 
employed  in  small  quantities,  in  the  manufacture 
of  certain  kinds  of  porcelain  ;  most  of  the  salts 


[  343  ] 

containing  baryta  as  a  basis,  are  poisonous. 
The  combination  of  baryta  and  carbonic  acid, 
made  artificially  by  pouring  a  solution  of 
carbonate  of  ammonia,  into  a  solution  of  nitrate 
of  baryta,  forms  a  pigment  of  a  very  pure  white 
colour. 

4'  Strontium' 

1.  Strontium  may  be  procured  precisely  in 
the  same  manner  as  barium;  carbonate  of 
strontia,  or  strontianite,  a  mineral  found  at 
Strontian  in  Scotland,  being  used  instead  of 
"witherite.  1  first  procured  this  metal  in  l8o8, 
but  in  quantities  too  small  to  make  an  accurate 
examination  of  its  properties.  It  seemed  very 
analogous  to  barium,  had  not  a  very  high 
lustre,  appeared  fixed,  difficultly  fusible,  and 
not  volatile.  It  became  converted  into  strontia 
by  exposure  to  air,  and  when  thrown  into 
water,  decomposed  it  with  great  violence,  pro- 
ducing hydrogene  gas,  and  making  the  water 
a  solution  of  strontia. 

Q.  One  combination  of  strontium  with  oxygene 
only  is  at  present  known  ;  it  is  strontia,  or  stron- 
tites,  the  substance  procured  by  burning  stron^ 
tium.  It  may  be  produced  in  large  quantities  by 
igniting  strontianite intensely  with  charcoal  pow- 
der,  or  by  heating  to  whiteness  the  salt  formed 
from  this  fossile,  by  the  action  of  nitric  acid. 


[  344  ] 

It  appears  oF  a  light  fawn  colour,  and  agrees, 
in  many  of  its  characters  with  baryta.  It  is 
fusible  only  by  91)  intense  heat.  Its  specific 
gravity  is  between  three  and  four,  water  being 
one.  It  is  soluble  in  about  200  parts  of  water, 
at  common  temperatures,  and  is  much  more 
soluble  in  hot  than  cold  water;  its  taste  is  acrid 
and  alkaline,  it  reddens  paper  tinged  with 
turmeric.  When  acted  upon  by  a  small  quan- 
tity of  water^  it  becomes  hot,  its  colour  changes 
white,  and  it  is  converted  into  a  hydrate, 
^nd  tlien  becomes  fusible  at  a  white  heat.  Fron^ 
indirect  experiments,  I  am  disposed  to  regard  it 
3s  composed  of  about  §6  of  strpntium  and  I4 
pxygene  ;  and  supposing  it  to  contain  ope 
proportion  of  metal  and  pne  of  oxygene,  the 
l^umber  representing  strontium  will  be  go,  and 
Jh^at  representing  the  earth  103, 

TSo  experiments  have  as  yet  bee«  inade 
on  the  direct  combination  of  strontium  and 
^hloripe ;  but  ^  substance  which  appears  to 
consist  of  these  two  bodies,  and  no  other  ele- 
?nents,may  be  made,  by  heating  strontia  strongly 
jn  chlorine,  or  muriatic  acid  gas,  or  by  igniting 
to  whiteness  the  salt  formed  by  the  solution  of 
strontianite  in  muriatic  gcid.  By  the  action 
of  chloride  on  strontia,  oxygene  is  expelled :  'by 
the  action  of  muriatic  acid  gas  upon  it,  water  is 
fprijQgd.  fhp  cp|aip,9uo^|  of  clilorifie  aiid  stron- 


t  345  ] 

tiiim,  or  sfroniane^  is  a  white  substance,  diffi- 
cijltly  fusible,  fixed  in  the  fire,  a  non-conductor 
pf  electricity,  and  of  a  peculiar  bitter  taste ; 
when  brought  in  contact  with  the  flame  of  wax, 
tallow,  oil,  or  alcohol,  it  tinges  it  of  a  rose 
colour;  and  this  js  a  distinctive  character  of 
the  compounds  of  strontium  ;  the  salts  formed 
from  it  give  this  tint  to  flame,  those  of  baryta 
give  a  yellow  tint.  From  direct  experiments 
I  ascertained  that  50  parts  of  strontane  con- 
sisted of  about  29  parts  of  metal  and  21  of 
chlorine  ;  so  that  it  must  be  regarded  as  com" 
posed  of  one  proportion  of  strontium,  and  one 
of  gas,  go  and  67. 

4.  No  experiments  have  as  yet  been  made 
on  the  action  of  strontium,  on  any  of  the  other 
elementary  substances. 

6.  None  of  the  compounds  of  this  body  have 
3S  yet  been  applied  to  any  of  the  purposes  of 
the  arts,  and  its  combinations  are  rare  in 
nature. 

5.  Calcium. 

1.  Calcium  may  be  obtained  by  the  same 
processes  as  barium  and  strontium.  Mild  cal- 
careous earth,  or  chalk  being  used  instead  of 
-^ilherite  and  strontianite ;  or  common  well- 
burnt  lime  may  be  employed  for  making  the 
paste,  from  which  the  mercurial  amalgam  is 
to  be  fof  med  by  Voltaic  electricity. 


[  346  ] 

I  first  procured  calcium  about  the  same  time 
as  barium  and  strontium,  but  only  in  very 
minute  quantities,  so  that  little  can  be  said 
concerning  its  nature.  It  appeared  brighter 
and  whiter  than  these  two  metals,  and  burnt, 
when  gently  heated,  producing  dry  lime.  I 
have  had  no  opportunity  of  examining  its 
general  physical  and  chemical  qualities. 

S.  There  is  onlyone  known  combination  of  cal- 
cium and  oxygene,  which  is  the  important  suh' 
stZLnce  Jime  or  calcia.  The  nature  of  this  substance 
is  proved  by  the  phssnomena  of  the  combustion 
of  calcium  ;  the  metal  becomes  converted  into 
the  earth,  with  the  absorption  of  oxygene  gas. 
When  the  amalgam  of  calcium  is  thrown  into 
water,  hydrogen e  gas  is  disengaged,  and  the 
water  becomes  a  solution  of  lime  ;  and  from 
the  quantity  of  hydrogene  gas  disengaged, 
compared  with  the  quantity  of  lime  formed  in 
experiments  of  this  kind,  M.  Berzelius  has 
endeavoured  to  ascertain  the  proportion  of 
oxygene  in  lime.    The  nature  of  lime  may  be 
also  proved  by  analysis  ;  when  potassium  in 
vapour  is  sent  through  the  earth,  ignited  to 
whiteness,    the   potassium,    I    have  found, 
becomes  potassa,  and  a  dark  gray  substance  of 
metallic  splendour,  which  is  calcium  either 
wholly  or  partly  deprived  of  oxygene,  is  found 
embedded  in  the  potassa,  and  it  effervesces 


[  3.17  3 

violently,  and  forms  a  solution  of  lime,  by  the 
action  of  water. 

Lime  is  obtained  for  common  purposes,  from 
marble  of  the  whitest  kind,  such  as  the  Parian 
or  Cr.rara  marble,  by  long  exposure  to  a  strong 
heat.  It  is  a  white  soft  substance,  of  specific 
gravity  Q.3.  It  requires  an  intense  degree  of 
heat  for  its  fusion,  and  has  not  yet  been  ren- 
dered volatile.  Its  taste  is  analogous  to,  but 
milder  than  that  of  baryta  and  strontia.  It  is 
soluble  in  about  45O  parts  of  water,  and  seems 
to  be  nearly  as  soluble  in  cold,  as  in  hot  water. 
It  acts  upon  vegetable  colours  in  a  manner 
similar  to  the  other  alkaline  earths.  When  water, 
in  small  quantities,  is  added  to  it,  a  consi- 
derable heat  is  produced,  a  portion  of  the 
water  combines  with  the  lime,  and  it  becomes 
a  hydrate ;  but  water  does  not  adhere  to  it 
with  the  same  degree  of  energy,  as  to  baria 
and  strontia,  for  it  may  be  expelled  by  a 
strong  red  heat.  From  the  experiments  of 
M.  Berzelius,  and  those  which  I  have  made,  it 
appears  that  lime  consists  of  about  50  of  metal 
to  7.5  of  ©xygene,  and  the  number  representing 
calcium  is  40,  and  that  representing  lime  55  ; 
and  the  hydrate  of  lime  must  consist  of  55  lime 
and  1 7  water,  which  estimation  agrees  with  the 
experiments  of  M.  Lavoisier  and  Mr.  Dalton. 


[  348  1 

I  have  attempted  to  combine  lime  with  more 
oxygene,  but  without  success. 

3.  When  lime  is  heated  strongly  in  contact 
with  chlorine,  oxygene  is  expelled,  and  chlo- 
rine absorbed ;  and,  as  happens  in  all  the 
decompositions  of  metallic  oxides,  of  which 
the  metals  combine  with  only  one  proportion 
of  oxygene  and  chlorine,  for  every  two  in 
volume  of  chlorine   absorbed,  a  volume  of 
oxygene  is  expelled.    The  substance  formed 
hy  the  action  of  chlorine  on  Jime,  as  the 
oxygene  of  the  lime  is  expelled,  must  evidently 
consist  of  chlorine  and  calcium.    It  has  been 
called  dry  muriate  of  lime ;  according  to  the 
true  view  of  its  composition,  it  may  be  called 
mtcane.    It  is  a  semi-transparent  crystalline 
substance,  fusible  at  a  strong  red  heat,  a  non- 
conductor of  electricity,  has  a  very  bitter  taste, 
rapidly  absorbs  water  from  the  atmosphere  ;  and 
is  extremely  soluble  in  water :  by  the  evapora- 
tioi)  of  its  solutiop  at  a  low  heat,  crystals  may 
be  obtained,  which  consist  of  calcane,  combined 
with  more  than  a  third  their  weight  of  water. 
From  my  experiments,  it  appears  that  calcane 
consists  of  31  chlorine  and  19  of  calcium,  and 
hence  it  may  be  supposed  to  contain  one  pro- 
portion of  the  metal,  and  one  of  the  gas,  and 
the  number  representing  it  on  this  idea  is  107  ; 


[  349  ] 

And  it  is  evident,  from  the  experiment  on  tli€ 
action  of  clilorine  on  lime,  that  the  proportion 
of  oxygene  in  lime,  and  of  chlorine  in  calcium, 
must  be  in  the  ratio  of  15  to  67. 

4-  As  yet  no  experiments  have  been  made  oil 
the  combinations  of  calcium  with  any  of  the 
inflammable,  or  acidiferous  substances,  or 
metah. 

5.  The  compounds  of  calcium  are  found 
abundantly  on  the  surface  of  the  globe,  and  are 
of  great  importance  in  the  osconoray  of  nature, 
and  in  the  processes  of  art.    Lime  combined 
with  carbonic  acid  is  an  essential  part  of  fertile 
lands :  a  number  of  rocks  are  constituted  by 
this  substance.    Gypsum  or  alabaster,  is  lime 
combined  with  sulphuric  acid;  and  the  earth 
of  bones  consists  of  lime  united  to  phosphoric 
acid.    There  is  no  animal  or  vegetable  sub- 
stance that  does  not  contain  larger  or  smaller 
quantities  of  calcareous  matter.    The  uses  of 
lime  in  m.ortar  are  well  known.  Ouicklimej 
employed  as  a  manure,  tends  to  decompose 
and  dissolve  inert  vegetable  matter,  and  ren- 
ders it  proper  for  the  nourishment  of  plants; 
and  in  this  operation  the  lime  is  United  to  car«  ( 
bohic  acid,  and  becomes  a  permanent  part  of 
the  soil.    In  the  process  of  tanning,  lime  is 
employed  to  remove  the  hair  from  the  skins  of 
animalsj  and  it  is  used  in   certain  opera- 


[  350  ] 

rations  of  bleaching,  dyeing,  and  other  useful 
arts. 

6.  Magnesium, 

1.  Magnesium*  may  be  procured  from  the 
earth  called  magnesia,  wliich  is  the  same  as  the 
calcined  magnesia  of  druggists,  by  processes 
similar  to  those  referred  to  in  the  three  pre- 
ceding sections  ;  but  a  much  longer  time  is 
required  to  produce  an  amalgam  of  magnesium 
and  quicksilver,  by  electrical  powers,  than  to 
produce  amalgams  of  the  metals  of  the  other 
alkaline  earths. 

I  succeeded  in  decomposing  magnesia  like- 
wise, in  the  following  manner :  I  passed  potas- 
sium in  vapour  through  magnesia,  heated  to  in- 
tense whiteness,  in  a  tube  of  platinum,  out  of  the 
contact  of  air ;  I  then  introduced  a  sm  all  quantity 
of  mercury,  and  heated  it  gently  for  some  time 
in  the  tube.  An  amalgam  was  obtained,  which 
by  distillation,  out  of  the  contact  of  the  atmos- 
phere, afforded  a  dark  gray  metallic  film,  which 
was  infusible  at  the  point  at  which  plate  glass 
softened,  and  which,  in  the  process  of  distil- 

*  In  my  first  paper  on  the  decomposition  of  the  earths, 
published  in  1808,  I  called  the  metal  from  magnesia,  mag- 
nium, fearing  lest,if  called  magnesium,  it  should  be  confounded 
with  the  name  formerly  applied  to  manganese.  The  candid 
criticisms  of  some  philosophical  friends  have  induced  me  to 
apply  the  termination  in  the  usual  manner. 


[  351  1 


lation  of  the  mercury,  rendered  the  glass  black 
at  its  point  of  contact  with  it.  This  film  burnt 
when  heated  strongly,  with  a  red  light,  and 
became  converted  into  a  white  powder,  which 
had  the  character  of  magnesia  :  when  a  portion 
of  the  metal  was  thrown  into  water,  it  sunk  to 
the  bottom,  and  effervesced  slowly,  becoming 
covered  with  a  white  powder;  by  adding  % 
little  muriatic  acid  to  the  water,  the  efferves- 
cence was  violent  ;  the  metal  rapidly  disap- 
peared, and  the  solution  was  found  to  contaia 
ma2;nesia. 

I  have  made  several  experiments  with  the 
hope  of  obtaining  larger  quantities  of  magne- 
sium, such  as  might  have  enabled  me  to  exa- 
mine its  chemical  and  physical  properties  ;  but 
without  success.  It  is  very  difficult  to  procure 
a  pure  amalgam  of  magnesium  by  potassium 
and  mercury  ;  the  heat  must  be  intense ;  and  at 
a  high  temperature,  potassium  acts  with  great 
energy  upon  platina,  so  that  unless  the  tube  is 
very  solid,  it  is  destroyed  in  the  process,  and 
when  the  heat  is  not  very  grea.t,  potassium 
remains  in  the  tube,  which  is,  found  afterwards^ 
in  the  amalgam.  The  potassium  may  however 
be  separated  by  the  action  of  water  ;  which, 
even  in  the  amalgam,  rapidly  converts  it  into 
potassa,  but  which  has  a  much  feebler  action 
«R  magnesium,  ^When  the  amalgam  contains 


t  S5«  } 

j)otaSsmm,it  likewise  usually  contains  p!atinurrfj 
which  is  very  soluble  in  the  compound  of 
potassium  and  quicksilver. 

2.  There  is  only  one  knowfi  compound  ormag- 
iiesiumand  oxygene,whiehis  the  sitbstaneefronfi 
Ivhich  the  inetal  is  procured,  Magnesia,  That 
magnesia  consists  of  magnesium  and  oxygene^ 
is  proved  both  by  analysis  and  synthesis.  Iti 
the  production  of  magnesium  by  potassium^ 
the  potassium  is  found  converted  into  potassa^ 
and  therefore  must  have  gained  oxygene  from 
the  magnesia;  and  in  the  formation  of  mag* 
nesia  from  magnesium,  oxygene  is  absorbed. 
No  experiments  have  as  yet  been  made  to  deter- 
mine the  proportions  of  the  elements  in  magne- 
sia ;  biit  from  experiments  which  I  have  made 
on  the  combinations  of  this  substance  with  acids, 
assuming  that  they  ire  single  proportions,  I  am 
inclined  to  adopt  53  as  the  number  representing 
it;  and  if  it  be  supposed  to  be  constituted  by 
one  projiortion  of  metal,  and  orie  of  03tygene, 
the  number  representing  the  metal  will  be  38. 

Magnesia  appears  in  its  comriion  formj  as  a 
white  soft  powdef ;  its  specific  gravity  is  be- 
tWeen  and  3,  It  is  found  in  nature  in  the 
crystalline  form  ;  specimens  have  been  brought 
from  North  America,  which  nearly  resemble 
talc  in  theit  external  characters.  Magnesia  has 
scarcely  my  tftsiej  no  smell ;  it  reddens  tur- 


[  '353  ] 


merle.  It  is  infusible,  except  by  the  intense 
Iieat  produced  by  the  combustion  of  hydrogene 
gas  in  Qxygene,  or  that  generated  by  Voltaic 
electricity.  It  is  scarcely  soluble  in  water,  but 
produces  heat  when  water  is  mixed  with  it, 
and  it  absorbs  a  considerable  portion  of  the 
fluid.  When  it  is  procured  by  the  decomposi- 
tion of  a  solution  in  which  it  is  combined  with 
an  acid,  by  means  of  solution  of  potassa  or  soda, 
it  falls  down  in  union  with  water,  as  a  hydrat; 
but  the  water  adheres  to  it  with  a  very  feeble 
attraction  only,  and  is  expelled  entirely  at  a  red 
heat.  Hydrat  of  magnesia  when  dried  at  212°, 
appears  in  coherent  semitransparent  masses, 
very  brittle  and  soft ;  it  contains  about  ^  of  its 
weight  of  water. 

3.  When  magnesia  is  strongly  heated  in 
contact  with  chlorine,  chlorine  is  absorbed,  and 
oxygene  expelled,  and  in  the  usual  proportions 
as  to  volume.  Hence  it  is  evident  that  there 
exists  a  combination  of  magnesium  and  chlo- 
rine ;  though  this  body,  which  may  be  called 
magnesane^  has  never  been  examined  in  a  se- 
parate state.  The  salt  called-  muriate  of  mag- 
nesia, is  a  compound  of  magnesane  and  water, 
and  when  it  is  acted  on  by  a  strong  red  heat, 
by  far  the  greatest  part  of  the  chlorine  unites 
to  the  hydrogene  of  the  water,  and  rises  in  the 
form  of  muriatic  acid  gas,  and  the  oxygene  of 

VOL.  I.  A  a 


[  354  ] 

the  decomposed  water  combines  with  the  mag- 
nesium to  form  magnesia ;  some  magnesane  is, 
however,  found  mixed  with  the  magnesia, 
which  affords  crystals  of  muriate  of  magnesia 
by  the  action  of  water. 

4.  No  experiments  have  as  yet  been  made 
on  the  action  of  magnesium  upon  any  of  the 
inflammable  or  metallic  substances. , 

5.  The  compounds  of  magnesium  occur  ex- 
tensively  diffused  in  nature.  Magnesia  exists  in 
certain  limestones  which  are  found  in  different 
parts  ol  Great  Britain  and  Ireland,  and  which  are 
less  fitted  for  the  general  purposes  of  manure 
than  common  limestone.  Magnesia,  in  its  un- 
combined  state,  as  appears  from  the  experiments 
ot  Mr.  Tennant,  is  injurious  to  plants,  but  united 
to  carbonic  acid,  it  seems  to  form  an  useful 
part  of  the  soil:  the  magnesian  liniestones  are 
distinguished  by  their  slow  solution  in  acids  ; 
and  they  render  weak  solutions  of  nitric  acid 
turbid  by  their  action  upon  them.  Magnesia, 
and  some  of  its  saline  combinations  are  used  in 
medicine  ;  its  application  in  bleaching  has  been 
referred  to  in  an  earfy  part  of  this  work. 

7.  Aluminum. 

1,  When  a  solution  of  ammonia  or  of  po- 
tassa,  not  in  excess,  is  thrown  into  a  solution 
of  alum,  a  substance  falls  dov/n,  which  when 


[  355  ] 

well  washed,  and  dried  at  a  red  heat,  is 
alumina.  This  substance  appears  to  contain  a 
peculiar  metal,  but  as  yet  Aluminum  has  not 
been  obtained  in  a  perfectly  free  state,  though 
alloys  of  it  with  other  metalline  substances 
have  been  procured  sufficiently  distinct  to 
indicate  the  probable  nature  of  alumina.  Alo- 
mina  cannot  be  decomposed  by  the  electriza- 
tion of  mercury  in  contact  with  it,  in  the  same 
manner  as  the  alkaline  earths.  The  first  ex- 
periment by  which  I  obtained  evidcBces  of  its 
composition,  was  made  in  1808.  by  fusing  iron 
negatively  electrified  in  contact  with  it;  the 
earth  was  moist  in  this  process,  and  a  very 
high  Voltaic  power  was  applied.  The  globule 
of  metal  obtained  was  whiter  than  pure  iron  ; 
effervesced  slowly  in  water,  becoming  covered 
with  a  white  powder,  and  the  sohition  in  mu- 
riatic acid  decomposed  by  an  alkali,  afforded 
alumina  and  oxide  of  iron. 

By  passing  potassium  in  vapour,  through 
alumina  heated  to  whiteness,  the  greatest  part 
of  the  potassium  became  converted  into  potassa, 
which  forme.d  a  coherent  mass  with  that  part  of 
the  alumina  not  decompounded,  and  in  this  mass 
there  were  numerous  gray  particleSj  having  the 
metallic  lustre,  and  which  became  white  when 
heJttedin  the  air,  and  which  slowly  effervesced 
in  water.  In  a  case  in  which  a  similar  experi- 
ment was  made,  a  strong  jed  heat  only  beiag 


; .  [356] 

applied  to  the  alumina,  a  mass  was  obtained, 
which  took  fire  spontaneously  by  exposure  to 
air,  an'!  wh'ch  effer  vesced  violently  in  water, 
and  which  probably  contained  the  basis  of  alu- 
mina united  to  potassium. 

2.  That  oxygens  exists  in  alumina,  cannot 
be  doubted,  when  the  conversion  of  potassium 
into  potassa  by  its  action  upon  it,  is  considered  ; 
and  that  it  contains  an  inflammable  substance 
united  to  oxygene,  seems  likewise  evident ;  and 
that  this  is  metalline  in  its  nature  appears  ex- 
tremely likely,  both  from  the  facts  detailed,  and 
from  analogy  ;  but  this  point  cannot  as  yet  be 
considered  as  demonstrated. 

Alumina,  in  the  form  in  which  it  is  usually 
obtaintd,  has  no  taste  nor  smell,  adheres  strongly 
to  the  tongue,  has  no  action  upon  vegetable 
colours,  is  insoluble  in  water,  is  soluble  in  all 
the  mineral  acids  and  in  hot  solutions  of  fixed 
alkalies    When  the  precipitate  from  solutions 
of  alum  has  been  dried  only  at  the  temperature 
of  the  atmosphere,  it  is  found  combined  with 
nearly  an  equal  weight  of  water,  and  then  ap- 
pears as  a  white  powder  or  a  gelatinous  substance. 
There  is  a  native  hydrat  of  alumina  found  in 
different  parts  of  the  world,  crystallized  and 
transparent,  and  which  has  been  called  Wavel. 
lite  :  from  Mr.  Gregor's  experiments,  and  my 
own,  it  appears  that  this  substance  contains 
about  28  per  cent,  ©f  water,  -i. 


[  357  ] 

No  direct  researches  have  been  made  on  the 
quantity  of  oxygenejn  alumina  ;  but  from  some 
experiments  that  I  made  on  the  quantity  of  am- 
monia required  to  decompose  saturated  solutions 
of  alumina  in  acids,  it  would  appear  that  the 
number  representing  alumina  is  about  48,  and 
supposing  it  to  consist  of  one  proportion  of  alu- 
minum, and  one  of  oxygene,  33  will  be  the  num- 
ber representing  aluminum. 

3.  No  substance  is  known  that  can  be  re- 
garded as  a  compound  of  chlorine  and  aluminum. 
Alumina  is  soluble  in  solution  of  muriatic 
acid  ;  but  by  heating  the  salt  obtained,  muriatic 
acid  gas  rises  and  alumina  remains  behind, 

4.  The  compounds  of  alumina  are  found 
abundantly  in  the  mineral  kingdom,  and  many 
of  them  are  of  great  importance  in  the  common 

^.arts.  Alumina  forms  a  part  of  the  greater 
number  of  rocks,  and  is  found  in  larger  or 
smaller  quantities,  in  almost  all  soils.  In  its 
crystallized  form  coloured  by  small  quanti- 
ties of  iron,  it  constitutes  a  beautiful  class  of 
gems,  distinguishedvb'y  the  name  Telesiaj  in- 
cluding the  rubyV'the  sapphire,  the  oriental 
topaz,  and  other  I  ard  and  brilliant  stones. 

Alumina  combined  with  silica  and  other 
substances,  forms  the  varieties  of  porcelain  and 
chjna-iware.  Its  acid  combinations,  are  used  to 
a  great  extent  in  dyeing  and  calico  printing  fpr 
fixing  colours  on  stixfis. 


[  558  ] 


8.  Glucinum. 

1.  There  is  an  earth  which  was  discovered 
by  Vauquelin  in  1798, called  glucine,  orglucina< 
It  may  be  obtained  from  the  beryl  or  the  eme- 
rald, by  the  following  process  ;  the  stone,  in 
fine  powder,  must  be  ignited  for  half  an  hour 
in  a  crucible  of  silver  or  platina,  willi  three 
times  its  weight  of  hydrat  of  potassa  or  soda. 
The  mass  must  be  dissolved  in  solution  of  mu- 
riatic acid,  and  the  compound  obtained  exposed 
to  heat  till  it  is  dry.  Water  is  then  added  to 
itj'and  the  aqueous  solution  obtained  acted  on 
by  solution  of  carbonate  of  potassa ;  a  white 
powder  is  obtained  which  must  be  dissolved  in 
diluted  oil  of  vitriol  not  added  in  excess ;  a 
little  of  the  salt  called  vitriolated  tartar,  or 
sulphate  of  potassa,  must  be  mixed  with  the  so- 
lution, and  the  whole  evaporated  till  it  begins 
to  crystallize ;  crystals  of  alum  will  form. 
When  no  more  can  be  obtained,  the  remaining 
liquor  must  be  mixed  with  solution  of  carbonate 
of  atnmonia  added  in  great  excess  ;  the  mixed 
iiquor  must  be  passed  through  bibulous  paper, 
evaporated  to  dryness,  and  the  solid  matter 
remaining  heated  to  redness,  it  is  then  glucina. 

2.  There  is  great  reason  to  believe  that 
gluclria  is  a  compound  of  a  peculiar  metallic 
substance,  which  may  be  called  glucinum  and 
gxygene.  The  evidence  that  such  is  its  cona- 


[  S59  ] 

position,  1  have  obtained,^  by  heating,  it  with 
potassium  in  the  same  manner  as  alumina ; 
the  potassium  was  for  the  most  part  converted 
into  potassa,  and  dark  coloured  particles  h;'.ving; 
a  metallic  appearance  were  found  diifu^ed 
through  the  mass,  which  regained  the  earthy 
character  by  being  heated  in  the  air,  and  by 
the  action  of  water,  and  in  this  last  case  hydro- 
gene  was  slowly  disengaged. 

3,  Giucina  in  its  pure  form  appears  as  a 
white  powder  without  taste  or  smell,  it  requires 
an  intense  degree  of  heat  for  its  fusion;  it  is 
not  soluble  in  water  in  any  perceptible  degree, 
it  does  not  alter  the  colour  of  vegetable  blues 
or  yellows.  When  it  is  thrown  down  from  an 
acid  solution,  by  an  alkali,  it  exists  in  combi- 
nation with  water,  as  an  hydrat.  It  forms  sweet- 
tasted  salts  soluble  in  water,  with  the  acids,  and 
hence  it  gained  its  name,  frofti  yxmvg  sweet. 
From  experiments  on  the  quantity  of  ammonia 
necessary  to  decompose  the  muriate  of  giucina, 
I  am  inclined  to  adopt  54  as  the  number  repre- 
senting the  earth,  and  supposing  it  a  protoxide. 
39  as  the  number  representing  the  metal. 

4.  No  compounds  have  been  as  yet  examined 
in  which  glucinum  can  be  supposed  to  exist, 
uncombined  with  oxygens.  Giucina  has  not 
as  yet  been  applied  to  any  of  the  purposes 
of  the  arts,  and  its  combinations  in  nature  are 
very  rare. 


E  360  ] 

9.  Zirconnm. 

1.  There  Is  a  peculiar  earth,  which  was  dis- 
covered by  M.  Klaproth,  in  1793-,  and  which 
may  be  procured  from  a  stone  found  in  Ceylon, 
and  called  the  jargon,  or  zircon,  and  likewise 
from  the  hyacinth,  by  the  following  process'. 
The  powder  of  these  stones  must  be  ignited 
for  a  long  while  with  hydrat  of  potassa  ;  the 
substance  which  is  not  dissolved  by  the  hydrate 
of  potassa,  is  principally  zircon.  The  soluble 
matters  must  be  separated  by  water,  and  the 
insoluble  matter  boiled  in  muriatic  acid,  and 
the  solution  so  obtained,  evapdrated  to  dryness, 
and  heated  to  the  temperature  of  212*.  An 
aqueous  solution  of  zircona  in  muriatic  acid,  is 
obtained  by  the  action  of  water  on  the  solid 
mass  ;  and  pure  zircona  is  procured  by  decom- 
posing this  solution  by  solution  of  ammonia, 
and  heating  the  powder  obtained  to  redness. 

2.  There  is  the  same  evidence  for  believing 
that  zircona  h  a  compound  of  a  metal  and  oxy- 
gene,  as  that  afforded  by  the  action  of  potassium 
on  the  other  earths.  The  alkaline  metal  when 
brought  into  contact  with  zircona  ignited  to 
whiteness,  is  for  the  most  part  converted  into 
potassa,  and  dark  particles,  which  when  exa- 
mined by  a  magnifying  glass,  appear  metallic 
in  some  parts,  of  a  chocolate  brown  in  others, 

-  are  found  diffused  through  the  potassa  and  tlie 
undecompounded  earth.  . 


[361] 

3.  Zircoria  appears  as  a  harsh  whitish  powder 
without  taste  or  smell ;  it  possesses  no  action  on 
vegetable  colours,  and  is  insoluble  in  water ; 
its  specific  gravity  is  rather  above  4.  It  is  fusible 
at  a  lower  temperature  than  any  of  the  other 
earths;  the  heat  of  a  good  forge  is  sufficient  to 
soften  it.  In  a  mass  it  is  very  hard  and  scratches 
rock  crystal.  Zircona  is  insoluble  in  water,  but 
when  precipitated  from  its  solution,  and  dried 
at  a  low  temperature,  is  found  in  the  state  of 
a  hydrat ;  and  has  an  appearance  like  that  of 
resin  or  glue,  its  particles  adhere  together;  the 
hydrat  contains  more  than  4-  of  its  weight,  of 
water,  Zircona  is  soluble  in  the  mineral  acids 
and  in  solutions  of  alkaline  carbonates.  From 
experiments  I  have  made  on  the  comparative 
saturating  powers  of  ammonia  and  zircona,  1  am 
disposed  to  give  85  as  the  number  representing 
the  earth,  and  70  as  the  number  representing 
the  metal;  supposing  the  earth  to  be  a  protoxide. 

4.  No  substance  has  as  yet  been  formed  or 
examined,  in  which  zircpnum  can  be  supposed 
to  exist  free  from  oxygene.  It  forms  a  crys- 
tallised muriate  when  dissolved  in  mnriatic 
acid  ;  but  the  muriatic  acid  is  expelled  by  heatj 
without  any  apparent  union  of  chlorine  and 
the  metal.  Its  combinations  therefore  must 
be  objects  of  future  enquiry. 

Zircona  has  not  yet  been  found  in  sufficient 


I 


[  362  ] 


quantities,  to  be  applied  to  any  of  the  purposes 
of  the  arts.  It  combines  with  the  other  earihs, 
and  forms  compounds  analogous  to  porceh\in. 

10.  Sil'icunu 

1.  Pure  transparent  quartz,  or  rock  crystal, 
consists  almost  entirely  of  a  peculiar  earth  called 
silex  or  silica:  this  earth  raay  be  procured 
from  that  stone  or  from  common  flints  by  ig- 
niting them  in  powder,  with  three  or  four  limes 
their  weight  of  hydrat  of  potassa,  or  soda,  in  a 
silver  crucible,  making  an  aqueous  sohition  of 
the  substance  so  obtained,  and  adding  to  it  any 
acid  in  quantities  barely  sufficient  to  neutralize 
the  alkali,  a  gelatinous  substance  separates,  which 
is  silica  combined  with  water  :  and  the  pure 
earth  may  be  obtained  by  washing  this  substance 
well,  and  then  igniting  it  to  whiteness. 

2.  That  silica  consists  of  oxv2;ene  united  to 
a  peculiar  inflammable  basis,  which  is  probably 
metallic,  is  shev/n  by  many  experiments.  When 
iron  is  negatively  electrified,  and  fused  by  the 
Voltaic  battery  in  contact  with  hydrat  of  silica, 
the  metalline  globule  procured  contains  a  matter 
which  affords  silex  during  its  solution ;  and 
when  potassium  is  brought  in  contact  with  silica 
ignited  to  whiteness,  a  compound  is  formed 
consisting  of  silica  and  potassa,  and  black  par- 
ticles not  unlike  plumbago  are  found  diffused 


through  the  compound.  From  some  expefL 
ments  I  made,  I  am  inclined  to  believe  that 
these  particles  are  conductors  of  electricity ; 
they  have  little  action  upon  water,  unless  it 
contain  an  acid,  when  they  slowly  dissolve  in  it 
with  effervescence;  they  burn  when  strongly 
heated,  and  become  converted  into  a  white 
substance  having  the  characters  of  silica  ;  so 
that  there  can  be  little  doubt,  both  from  ana- 
lysis and  synthesis,  of  the  nature  of  silica  ;  but 
no  direct  experiments  have  as  yet  been  made 
upon  the  proportion  of  oxygene  it  contains. 

3.  Silica  is  a  white  powder,  very  analogous 
in  its  physical  characters  to  the  other  earths  ;  iti 
its  state  of  hydrate  it  is  soluble  in  alkaline  lix- 
ivia, and  likewise  in  acids.  It  is  separated  from 
the  common  mineral  acids  by  a  very  gentle 
heat,  they  rise  from  it  in  vapour,  but  it  forms 
permanentcompounds  with  boracic,  phosphoric, 
and  fluoric  acids ;  its  compound  with  phos- 
phoric and  boracic  acids  is  a  white  powder, 
that  with  fluOric  acid  a  permanent  gas.  From 
Some  experiments  that  I  have  made  on  the 
quantity  of'  ammonia  necessary  to  decompose 
the  saturated  solution  of  silica  in  muriatic 
acid,  and  from  the  composition  of  its  gaseous 
fluoric  combination,  as  ascerfained  by  my  bro- 
ther Mr.  John  Davy,  I  estimate  the  number 
tepresenting  silica  as  61  ;  and  as  it  seems  to 
combine  with  double  proportions  ol"  acids,  I 


[  364  ] 

am  inclined  to  regard  it  as  a  deutexide,  com* 
posed  of  31  basis,  and  30  oxygene. 

4.  No  compound  of  silicum  and  chlorine  is 
known  ;  and  as  this  substance  has  never  been 
procured  in  masses,  or  even  in  an  insulated 
state,  its  action  upon  the  other  undecompounded 
substances  has  not  been  examined. 

5.  Silica  is  one  of  the  earths  most  generally 
diffused  in  nature.  It  forms  perhaps  the  largest 
part  of  the  solid  surface  of  the  globe.  It  is  of 
great  use  in  many  of  the  arts  ;  it  is  the  basis  of 
glass  and  porcelain,  and  the  art  of  manufacturing 
these  substances  depends  upon  the  attraction  of 
silica  for  other  metallic  oxides. 

11.  Ittrivm. 

1.  There  is  a  mineral  substance  called  Gado- 
linite,  found  at  Itterby  in  Roslagen  in  Sweden, 
in  which  a  peculiar  earth  was  discovered  In 
1794,  by  Mr.  Gadolin,  and  to  which  the  name 
of  illria  has  been  given.  To  procure  this  earth, 
the  pulverized  fossile  must  be  digested  for  a 
considerable  time  in  solution  of  muriatic  acid. 
The  solution  obtained  must  be  evaporated  to 
dryness,  redissolved  in  distilled  water,  and 
precipitated  by  caustic  ammonia  ;  the  precipi- 
tate obtained  must  be  digested  with  solution  of 
hydrat  of  potassa  ;  the  remaining  substance 
must  be  redissolved  in  solution  of  muriatic  acid 
^ot  used  in  excess,  succinate  of  soda  must  be 


[  365  1  . 

poured  into  this  solution  till  all  precipltatiorf 
is  complete  ;  the  filtered  liquor  must  be  de- 
composed by  carbonate  of  soda,  a  white  powder 
will  fall  down,  which  when  ignited  strongly,  is 
pure  ittria. 

2.  When  ittria  is  treated  with  potassium  in 
the  same  manner  as  the  other  earths,  similar 
results  are  obtained  ;  the  potassium  becomes 
potassn,  and  the  earth  gains  appearances  of 
metallization,  so  that  it  is  scarcely  to  be  doubted 
that  ittria  consists  of  inflammable  matter,  me- 
tallic in  its  nature,  combined  with  oxygene. 

3.  Ittria  appears  as  a  white  powder,  without 
taste,  smell,  or  power  of  action  on  vegetable 
colours;  it  requires  an  intense  degree  of  heat 
for  its  fusion  ;  it  is  not  soluble  in  water.  No 
experiments  have  been  made  to  ascertain  whe- 
ther it  forms  a  hydrat  with  water,  but  this  is 
most  probably  the  case  ;  its  specific  gravity  is 
greater  than  that  of  any  of  the  other  earths, 
being  more  than  4  5.  It  combines  with  the 
acids,  and  forms  sweet-tasted  salts  with  those 
in  which  it  is  soluble.  With  acetic  and  sul- 
phuric acids  it  forms  crystals  of  an  amethyst 
colour.  It  is  not  acted  upon  by  solutions  of 
caustic  alkalies  ;  it  is  slightly  soluble  in  solution 
of  carbonate  of  ammonia. 

4>.  It  is  probable  that  a  compound  of  chlorine 
and  ittria  may  be  obtained  ;  but  as  yet  no  ex- 
periments have  been  made  on  any  compounds 


[  366  ] 


of  this  substance,  except  such  as  contain  oxy- 
gene  ;  the  proportion  of  oxygene  in  ittria  cannot 
be  determined  from  any  experiments  hitherto 
published.  According  to  Klaproth  55  parts  oF 
ittria  combine  with  18  parts  of  carbonic  acid  ; 
consequently,  if  it  be  supposed  that  the  carbonate 
of  ittria  consists  of  one  proportion  of  acid,  and 
one  of  earth,  the  number  representing  ittria 
wili  be  I£6;  and  on  the  iiypothesis  that  ittria 
consists  of  one  proportion  of  metal,  and  one  of 
oxygene,  which  is  probable  from  all  analogy, 
the  number  representing  ittrium  will  be  111. 
.  5.  The  compounds  of  ittria  are  very  rare 
in  nature,  and  as  yet  no  applications  of  this, 
substance  has  been  made  to  any  of  the  purposes, 
of  the  arts. 

XII.  Manganesum. 

1.  The  mineral  called  manganese  has  been 
referred  to,  page  227  ;  it  consists  of  a  peculiar 
metal,  mangaiiesum  united  to  oxygene.  To  pro- 
cure the  pure  metal,  solution  of  muriatic  acid 
mustbe  distilled  from  manganese  in  fine  powder, 
the  mixture  strongly  heated,  and  the  pra- 
cess  repeated  till  the  washings  in  pure  water  give 
only  a  white  precipitate  with  a  solution  of  the 
salt  called  prussiate  of  potassa  and  iron  ;  an 
aqueous  solution  of  potassa  is  then  added  to 
the  mixture,  so  as  to  render  it  alkaline;  the 
whole  is  then  poured  on  a  filtre,  and  the  solid 


[  367  ] 


matter  obtained  well  washed,  dried,  mixed  with 
charcoal  powder  and  oil,  and  intensel)'-  heated 
for  half  an  hour  in  an  infusible  earthen  crucible 
lined  with  charcoal  powder  ;  a  number  of  small 
metallic  globules  will  be  obtained,  which  are 
o;lobules  of  manacanesum. 

2.  Manganesim  was  first  procured  in  its  pure 
form  by  Kaim  and  Gahn,  between  17;0  and 
1775.  It  is  of  a  grayish  white  colour,  it  has 
not  much  lustre  ;  its  hardness  is  nearly  that  of 
iron  ;  the  specific  gravity  is  about  6. 850.  It  is 
very  brittle.  It  requires  a  higher  degree  of  heat 
than  iron  for  its  fusion.  It  immediately  tar- 
nishes in  the  air,  and  becomes  gray,  brown, 
and  at  last  black  ;  when  strongly  heated  in 
contact  with  ox y gene,  it  burns  with  great  bril- 
liancy, throwiog  ofi' vivid  sparks;  when  heated 
in  chlorine  it  takes  fire  and  burns.  It  dissolves 
with  effervescence  in  the  mineral  acids. 

3.  There  are  two  definite  combinations  of 
manganesum  and  oxygene,  one  dark  olive,  and 
one  brownish  black.  The  first,  or  olive  o.vide, 
may  be  obtained  by  ciiss  olving  common  manga- 
nese in  nitrous  acid,  adding  a  little  sugar,  and 
precipitating  by  solution  of  potassa ;  a  white 
powder  is  obtained,  which  must  be  heated  to 
redness  out  of  the  contact  of  air,  it  is  then  the 
substance  in  question.  The  same  body  may 
be  formed  by  precipitating  the  muriatic  or 


[  368  ] 


sulphuric  solutions  of  manganese  by  potassa, 
and  treating  the  precipitate  by  heat ;  the  white 
powder,  when  exposed  to  air,  rapidly  changes 
its  colour  to  yellow,  then  puce  colour,  and  lastly 
red  brown  ;  to*  be  preserved  it  should  be  washed 
in  boiling  water,  which  contains  little  air,  and 
the  water  driven  off  from  it  in  a  retort  filled 
with  hydrogene  gas. 

The  dark  olive  oxide  of  majtganesum  in  its 
pure  form,  when  examined  in  large  quantities, 
appears  almost  black,  but  when  spread  upon 
white  paper  its  olive  tint  is  apparent.  It  takes 
fire  when  gently  heated,  increases  in  weight, 
and  gains  a  browner  tint.  It  slowly  absorbs 
oxygene  from  the  air,  even  at  common  tempe- 
ratures. It  is  the  only  known  oxide  of  manga- 
nesum  which  dissolves  in  the  acids  without 
effervescence.  The  white  powder  produced  by 
the  action  of  acids  on  solutions  of  this  oxide,  is 
a  compound  of  the  oxide  and  water,  or  the  Ivy- 
drated  oxide  oj  manganesum ;  and  the  different 
tints  that  it  assumes  by  exposure  to  air,  seem  to 
depend  upon  the  formation  of  smaller,  or  larger 
quantities  of  the  dark  brown  oxide,  which  pro- 
bably retains  the  water  contained  in  the  white 
hydrat,  and  in  this  state  is  deep  puce  coloured  ; 
and  when  the  water  is  expelled  from  it,  it  becomes 
dark  brown,  and  then  appears  to  be  the  same 
substance  as  the  native  oxide  of  manganesum, 


[  369  1 

whiGh  may  be  called  the  peroxide  of  tnanganesiim. 
The  specific  gravity  of  the  peroxirle  is  about  4  ; 
it  is  not  capable  of  being  combined  with  any 
of  the  acids  ;  it  gives  off  oxygens  gas  by  a  strong 
lieat,  as  has  been  already  stated,  and  by  intense 
ignition  it  is  partly  or  wholly  converted  into 
the  first  or  olive  oxide  of.  man2;anesum-  From 
some  experiments  that  I  have  made  on  the  two 
oxides  of  manganese,  I  conclude  that  the  olive 
oxide  consists  of  about  2 1  of  oxygene  to  79  of 
metal,  and  that  the  dark  brown  oxide  contains 
nearly  ten  per  cent,  more  of  oxygene.  Accord- 
ing to  these  estimations,  supposing  the  olive 
oxide  a  deutoxide,  or  an  oxide  containing  two 
proportions  of  oxygene,  the  number  represetit- 
hig  manganesumwill  be  113 ;  and  the  olive  oxide 
will  be  represented  by  143 ;  and  the  dark  brown 
oxide  by  158,  that  is,  it  must  be  atritoxide  or  an 
oxide  containing  three  proportions  of  oxygene. 
The  white  hydrated  oxide  of  manganesum  ap- 
pears from  ray  experiments  to  contain  about 
24  per  cent,  of  water.  Hence  it  may  be  re- 
garded as  consisting  of  one  proportion  of  olive 
oxide  of  manganesum  143,  and  34  of  water,  and 
the  number  representing  it  is  17  7.  This  hydrat 
is  erroneously  described  in  chemical  books  as 
the  oxide  of  manganesum  containing  the 
smallest  (juantily  of  oxygene;  and  there  are 
VOL.  I.  B  b 


[3)0] 

tnany  other  cases  in  which  hydrats  have  been 
confounded  with  oxides. 

It  has  been  supposed  that  there  is  a  peculiar 
oxide  of  manganese,  which  may  be  procured  by 
alkalies  from  the  sulphuric  solution;  but  when 
this  solution  is  concentrated  the  precipitate  is 
the  pale  hydrat,  having  a  very  slight  tint  only 
of  puce  colour  apparently  from  the  formation 
of  a  little  of  the  other  oxide  in  consequence 
of  the  absorption  of  oxygene  from  the  air  dis- 
solved in  the  alkaline  solution  used  for  its  pre- 
cipitation.   It  has  been  likewise  conceived  that 
there  is  a  green  oxide  of  manganesum  ;  the 
olive  oxide  becomes  green  by  the  action  of 
potassa;  but  in  this  case  a  combination  takes 
place  between  the  alkali  and  the  oxide.   I  have 
made  many  experiments  on  the  native  dark 
©xide  by  expositig  it  at  different  intervals  for 
several  hours  to  intense  heat:  in  these  cases  it 
passed  through  different  shades  of  brown  and 
olive  brown,  and  finally  became  dark  olive. 
Colour  is  too  indefinite  a  property  to  found  a 
definite  species  upon ;  a  mere  change  of  tempera- 
ture, without  any  evident  change  in  composition, 
alters  the  colours  of  many  bodies;  and  it  is  very 
probable  that  the  different  shades  of  colour  of 
different  precipitates  from  solutions  of  manga- 
ncsium  depend  upon  mixtures  of  the  white 


[371] 

liydrat  with  the  puce  coloured  hydrat  formed  at 
the  time  of  precipitation  by  the  absorption  of 
oxygene  from  the  air  in  the  fluid,  and  the  white 
hydrat  seems  to  be  always  the  result  of  the  ac- 
tion of  alkali  on  solutions,  in  cases  when  there 
can  be  no  interference  from  the  influence  of 
free  or  loosely  combined  oxygene, 

4.  A  compound  of  chlorine  and  mangane- 
sum  may  be  obtained  by  combustion  of  the 
metal  in  chlorine,  or  by  heating  strongly  the 
substance  obtained  by  the  solution  of  manganese 
in  muriatic  acid.  When  made  in  this  last  way, 
it  appears  as  a  pale  pink  coloured  substance, 
and  semitransparent,  and  in  brilliant  scales. 
This  compound  has  been  described  by  Mr.  J. 
Davy  as  consisting  of  chlorine  and  manganese, 
and  from  his  experiments  may  be  considered 
as  consisting  of  one  proportion  of  the  metal  113, 
and  two  ©f  chlorine  134.  It  is  probable  that  ano- 
ther compound  consisting  of  one  proportion  of 
the  metal  and  two  of  chlorine  may  be  formed. 

5.  Hydrogene,  azote,  sulphur,  and  charcoal, 
have  no  distinct  chemical  action  on  mangane- 
sium, 

6.  Phosphorus  has  been  combined  with  man- 
ganesium  by  Pelletier ;  the  phosphuret  is  a 
substance  possessing  metallic  lustre  and  very 
combustible;  its  constitution  has  not  yet  been 
ascertained. 


[  372  ] 


.  /•  The  action  of  boron,  and  the  metals  of 
the  alkalies,  and  earths,  on  manganesium  has 
not  yet  been  tried. 

8.  Mano-anesum  in  its  oxidated  form  is  of 
considerable  use  in  certain  arts.  Its  application 
for  the  production  of  chlorine  has  been  already 
described.  It  Is  employed  in  glass-making,  for 
depriving  glass  of  colour :  when  in  its  state  of 
full  oxidation  it  gives  a  purple  tint  to  glass, 
which  is  destroyed  by  thrusting  a  piece  of  wood 
into  the  melted  glass,  the  inflammable  matter 
of  which  seizes  upon  a  part  of  its  oxygene. 

It  is*  in  some  cases  used  to  give  colours  to 
enamels  in  the  manufacture  of  porcelain.  The 
changes  of  colour  of  glass  containing  oxide  of 
manganesum  according  to  its  different  states  of 
oxidation  are  easily  exemplified  by  adding  a 
little  dark  oxide  to  powdered  glass  mixed  with 
borax,  and  fusing  them  by  the  blow  pipe :  as 
long  as  the  globule  is  preserved  within  the  blue 
flame,  where  there  is  combustible  matter,  it 
remains  colourless;  but  when  it  is  exposed  to 
air  at  the  extreme  point  of  the  flame  it  becomes 
purple.  1  am  inclined  to  believe  that  the 
deutoxide  is  the  only  oxide  which  enters  into 
combination  with  vitrifiable  substances ;  and 
that  the  peroxide  when  formed  is  mechanically 
diffused  through  the  glass,  and  being  produced 
cnly  in  very  minute  quantities  is  transparent 


[  373  I 


and  coloured.  There  is  great  reason  to  believe 
that  the  colouring  matters  of  many  gems  are 
merely  oxides  finely  divided  in  a  state  of  me- 
chanical diffusion  thfOU2;h  their  substance, 

13.  Zinc  or  Zincum. 

1.  Zinc  is  procured  for  the  purposes  of 
commerce  from  various  ores  known  by  the 
names  of  calamine  and  blende  or  black  jack. 
To  obtain  the  metal  from  calamine,  which  is 
a  combination  of  zinc  with  oxygene  and  car 
bonic  acid,  the  ore  is  strongly  ignited  with 
charcoal  or  carbonaceous  substances  ;  the  zinc, 
which  is  volatile,  rises  at  a  strong  red  heat,  and 
becomes  condensed  in  the  cool  part  of  the 
furnace  or  retort  in  which  the  process  is  carried 
on.  Zinc  is  procured  from  blende  by  a  similar 
operation,  but  the  blende  must  be  previously 
roasted,  that  is,  exposed  for  a  long  while  to  a 
dull  red  heat  in  a  state  of  minute  division.  The 
zinc  of  commerce  is.  seldom  quite  pure;  to 
obtain  it  in  this  state  white  vitriol  or  sulphate 
of  zinc  is  dissolved  in  pure  water  and  exposed 
to  the  action  of  a  plate  of  common  zinc ;  this 
will  separate  any  volatile  metals  that  may  hap- 
pen to  exist  in  the  solution,  which  is  then  to 
be  precipitated  by  subcarbonate  of  potassa:  the 
white  precipitate  ignited  with  charcoal  powder 
affords  the  metal. 


[  374  ] 

2.  Zinc  is  of  a  bluish  white  colour.  Its 
hardness  is  nearly  equal  to  that  of  copper.  Its 
specific  gravity  varies  from  6.8  to  rather  more 
than  7.  When  hammered  it  is  7-2.  Its  fusing 
point  is  680°  Fahrenheit,  at  a  red  heat  in  close 
vessels  it  volatilizes;  and  at  this  temperature  in 
the  atiKOSphere  it  burns  with  a  brilliant  bluish 
white  flame.  It  has  a  certain  degree  of  duc- 
tility, and  when  heated  a  little  above  212°  Fah- 
renheit, it  is  malleable,  and  when  annealed  it 
may  be  passed  through  rollers,  and  obtained  in 
small  thin  sheets  or  leaves  ;  it  may  be  drawn 
into  wire,  the  tenacity  of  which,  according  to 
Muschenbroek,  is  such,  that  a  wire  of  —  of  an 
inch  in  diameter  will  support  a  weight  of  about 
261bs.  Its  capacity  for  heat,  according  to 
Wilcke,  is  0.102. 

The  atmosphere  has  but  little  effect  on  zinc 
at  common  temperatures  ;  by  exposure  to  the  air 
for  some  time  it  acquires  a  grayish  coloiar  on 
the  surface,  which  is  owing  to  a  partial  oxid- 
ation. Zinc  filings  very  slowly  decompose 
water,  hydrogene  gas  is  evolved,  and  oxygene 
combines  with  the  metal.  The  effect  is  rapidly 
produced  when  steam  is  passed  over  zinc  at 
elevated  temperatures.  Zinc  in  thin  leaves 
introduced  into  chlorine  takes  fire,  and  burns 
with  a  white  light;  even  when  in  thick  wire  it 
may  be  made  to  burn  in  this  gas  by  a  gentle  heat. 


[  375 

3  There  is  one  well  known  combination  of 
zinc  with  oxygene ;  it  is  obtained  by  the  com- 
bustion of  zinc  in  the  atmosphere,  or  by  the 
precipitation  of  solutions  of  zinc  in  acids  by 
alkalies  and  subsequent  ignition.  When  ex- 
amined in  a  state  of  minute  division,  such  as  it 
appears  when  obtained  by  combustion,  it  is 
white,  and  similar  to  cotton  in  its  appearance  ; 
but  when  examined  in  mass  it  has  a  tint  of  pale 
yellow.  It  becomes  fluid  at  a  white  heat,  and 
is  capable  of  being  volatilized  by  an  intense 
white  heat.  It  is  soluble  in  most  of  the  acids, 
and  in  aqueous  solutions  of  the  fixed  alkalies ; 
when  precipitated  from  its  acid  solutions  by 
alkalies,  it  is  in  the  state  of  combination  with 
water,  and  a  strong  red  heat  is  required  for 
the  expulsion  of  the  water  with  which  it  is 
combined.  From  my  experiments,  and  those 
made  by  my  brother  Mr.  John  Davy,  it  appears 
that  the  white  oxide  of  zinc  contains  about  82 
parts  of  metal  and  18  of  oxygene.  M.  Proust 
eives  80  to  20,  which  is  not  a  wide  difference. 
On  the  estimation  of  18  per  cent.,  supposing 
that  the  oxide  of  zinc  consists  of  one  proportion 
of  oxygene  and  one  of  metal;  the  number  re- 
presenting zinc  is  66  taking  away  the  fractional 
part;  the  oxide  of  zinc  is  represented  by  Si: 
arid  the  hydrate,  supposing  it  to  contain  one 
proportion  of  water,  will  be  denoted  by  17 


* 


C  376  ] 

added  to  81 ;  but  as  yet  no  experiments  have 
been  made  to  she\y  that  this  is  the  composition 
of  the  hydrate.  It  has  been  supposed  that 
there  is  a  gray  oxide  of  zinc  produced  by  keep- 
ing zinc  melted  in  the  open  air  ;  and  a  yellow 
oxide  formed  by  fusing  the  white  povv^der  pro- 
duced by  precipitation  from  acids,  both  con- 
taining less  -oxygene  than  the  oxide  just  de- 
scribed ;  but  there  are  no  facts  to  warrant  the 
idea  that  these  bodies  are  distinct  compounds 
of  zinc  and  oxygene.  The  gray  powder  formed 
upon  the  surface  of  melted  zinc,  I  am  inclined 
to  consider  as  a  mixture  of  the  white  oxide 
with  small  particles  of  unburnt  zinc,  and  the 
yellow  oxide  the  same  as  tlse  oxide  produced 
by  combustion  free  from  water. 

4.  When  ziiic  is  burned  in  chlorine  a  solid 
substance  is  formed  of  a  whitish  gray  colour 
and  semitransparent.  This  is  the  only  com- 
pound known  of  zinc  and  chlorine.  It  may 
likewise  be  made  by  heating  together  zinc 
tilings  and  corrosive  sublimate ;  it  is  as  soft  as 
wax,  fuses  at  a  temperature  a  little  above  212\ 
and  rises  in  the  gaseous  form  at  a  heat  much 
below  the  red  heat.  Its  taste  is  intensely  acrid, 
and  it  corrodes  the  skin ;  it  acts  upon  water 
and  dissolves  in  it,  producing  much  heat,  and 
its  solution  decomposed  by  an  alkali  affords  the 
white  hydrated  oxide  of  zinc.  The  compound  oC 


• 


[  377  ] 

2!!licand  clilorine  lias  been  caiied  butter  of  zinc' 
and  muriate  of  zinc;  following  the  nomenclature 
already  proposed  us  name  will  be  zhicane;  from 
the  experiments  of  my  brother,  Mr.  John  Davy 
it  consists  of  nearly  equal  parts  by  weight  of 
zinc  and  chlorine ;  consequently  it  contains  one 
proportion  of  metal  and  one  of  gas  66  and  67, 
and  the  number  representing  it  will  be  1 33. 

5.  It  is  not  easy  to  combine  zinc  and  sulphur. 
"When  a  solution  of  sulphuretted  hydrogene 
and  an  alkali  is  dropped  into  an  acid  solution 
of  zinc,  a  whitish  powder  falls  down,  which 
has  been  supposed  to  be  a  siilphnret  of  zinc. 
When  zinc  and  sulphur  are  heated  together  in 
close  vessels  the  sulphur  rises  in  vapour  with- 
out uniting  to  the  zinc;  but  it  is  stated  by  Mr. 
E.  Davy,  that  in  some  experiments  made  in  the 
laboratory  of  the  Royal  Institution,  in  which 
sulphur  in  vapour  was  passed  over  melted  zinc, 
they  united,  and  formed  a  white  crystalline 
substance,  analogous  to  the  substance  found  in 
nature,  and  called  phosphorescent  blende,  The 
proportions  of  the  elements  in  the  blendes,  or 
supposed  siilphurets  of  zinc,  have  not  yet  been 
ascertained  with  accuracy;  but  if  some  experi- 
ments on  record  can  be  depended  upon  they 
must  contain  two  proportions  of  metal  to  one 
of  sulphur. 

6.  Zinc  combines  with  phosphorus ;  when 


[  378  ] 


the  metal  is  fused  and  the  phosphorus  brought 
in  contact  with  it,  The  phosphoret  of  zinc  was 
discovered  by  Pelletier ;  it  is  possessed  of  me- 
tallic splendour,  and  is  of  a  dull  gray  colour 
analogous  to  lead  ;  when  hammered  or  filed  it 
emits  the  odour  of  phosphorus.  From  expe- 
riments made  on  its  composition  in  the  labora- 
tory of  the  Royal  Institution  by  Mr.  E.  Davy, 
it  is  probable  that  it  consists  of  one  proportion 
of  phosphorus  and  one  of  metal. 

7,  Zinc  has  not  been  combined  with  hydro- 
gene,  azote  or  boron  :  zinc  sometimes  during  its 
solution  in  acids  leaves  a  residuum  havina:  the 
characters  of  carbonaceous  matter :  Imt  no  de- 
finite compound  of  zinc  and  carbon  has  as  yet 
been  described. 

8,  Zinc  readily  enters  into  union  with  the 
metals  of  the  fixed  alkalies  ;  great  heat  is  pro- 
duced during  the  process,  and  metallic  com- 
pounds or  alloys  are  obtained,  which  rapidly 
decompose  vv-ater  and  tarnish  in  the  atmosphere. 

9,  Zinc  is  applied  to  a  number  of  import- 
ant uses :  it  is  particularly  employed  in  the 
manufacture  of  brass  and  tombacs  ;  w]:ich  con- 
sist of  this  metal  combined  with  different  pro- 
portions of  copper.  It  is  used  by  the  Chinese 
in  various  alloys  :  some  of  its  combinations  are 
employed  in  medicine. 


[  379  ] 


jTzw  or  Stannum» 

1.  Tin  is  procured  from  the  native  combi- 
nations of  this  metal  with  oxygene,  known  by  the 
names  of  tin  stones,  or  oxides  of  tin,  by  ignition 
with  charcoal  or  carbonaceous  substances.  The 
metal  obtained  from  these  ores  is  not  pure.  To 
obtain  it  in  a  state  of  purity,  metallic  tin  should 
be  boiled  for  some  time  in  solution  of  nitric  acid, 
the  white  powder  formed,  should  be  well  washed 
in  pure  water,  and  heated  strongly  in  contact 
with  about  ^  of  its  weight  of  charcoal  powder 
in  a  covered  crucible  for  about  half  an  hour  ;  a 
button  of  pure  tin  will  be  found  at  the  bottom 
of  the  crucible. 

2,,  Tin  has  been  known  since  the  earliest 
periods  of  civilization  ;  it  was  used  in  the  time  ' 
of  Moses  :  it  is  mentioned  by  Homer,  and  was 
brought  from  Cornwall  by  the  Phoenicians  and 
Greeks,  some  centuries  before  the  Christian  era; 
it  is  called  by  Aristotle  Kacro-m^oi/  KATJxoy,  or 
Celtic  tin.  The  colour  of  tin  is  white,  and  re- 
sembles that  of  silver.  Its  hardness  is  greater 
than  that  of  lead,  and  less  than  that  of  zinc. 
Its  specific  gravity  is  7.291,  and  it  is  some- 
what increased  by  hammering  ;  it  is  very  mal^ 
leable,  and  may  be  extended  into  extremely 
thin  leaves.  Tin  foil  is  about  the  -jfo  o-  P*''^'^  of 
an  inch  thick ;   it  has  comparatively  little 


[  38a  3 


ductility  or  tenacity.  It  is  flexible,  and  wlieii 
bent  produces  a  crackling  noise.  It  has  a  slight 
taste,  and  when  rubbed  emits  a  peculiar  smell.  It 
fuses  at  442  Fahrenheit,  but  requires  an  intense 
degree  of  heat  for  its  evaporation.  Its  capa- 
city for  heal,  according  to  D.dtcn,  is,  .07.  It 
acquires  a  slight  tarnish  by  exposure  to  the 
atmosphere,  but  undergoes  no  further  change. 
It  is  not  affected  by  water  at  common  tempe- 
ratures, but  when  steam  is  passed  over  red  hot 
tin  it  is  decomposed,  oxide  of  tin  is  formed,  and 
hydrogene  gas  is  evolved.  When  heated 
strongly  jn  air,  it  takes  fire  and  burns  with  a 
pale  white  light ;  when  burnt  upon  charcoal 
by  a  stream  of  oxygene  gas,  the  colour  of  the 
flame  is  white,  edged  with  violet.  Tin  foil 
burns  when  very  gently  heated  in  chlorine. 

3.  There  are  two  definite  combinations  of  tin 
and  oxygene:  the  first,  which  maybe  called  the 
proloxide,  is  gray  ;  the  second,  which  may  be 
called  the  per  oxide^  is  white;  the  first  is  formed 
by  heating  tin  in  the  air,  or  by  dissolving  tin  in 
muriatic  acid,  and  precipitating  the  solution 
whilst  recent,  and  before  it  has  been  exposed  to 
air  by  solution  of  hydrat  of  potassa,  not  added 
in  excess.  This  substance,  after  being  heated 
to  whiteness,  is  the  protoxide  of  tin  ;  and  it  is 
converted  into  the  peroxide  by  being  boiled 
with  diluted  nitric  acid,  dried  by  evaporation" 


[381] 

and  heated  to  redness.  From  experiments  which 
i  have  mac^e,  it  appears  that  the  protoxide  of 
tin  contains  about  13.5  per  cent,  of  oxygene, 
and  from  experiments  made  hy  Mr.  John  Davy, 
the  peroxide  is  composed  of  about  24  of  oxygene 
and  76  of  metal.  These  oxides  are  difficultly 
fusible  bodies,  insoluble  in  water,  soluble  in 
diluted  oil  of  vitriol,  and  in  fixed  alkaline  solu- 
tions. Computing  from  their  composition,  and 
supposing  one  to  consist  of  one  proportion  of 
tin  and  one  of  oxygene,  and  the  other  of  one  of 
tin  and  two  of  oxygeoi",  the  number  represent- 
ing tin  will  be  110,  and  the  number  standing 
for  the  protoxide  will  be  125,  and  that  standing 
for  the  deutoxide,  or  white  oxide,  140.  Both 
these  oxides  appear  capable  of  combining  with 
water  to  form  hydrats  ;  and  when  precipitated 
from  their  acid  solutions  ,  they  always  con- 
tain water,  but  experiments  are  wanting  (^o 
determine  the  quantity:  both  are  insoluble 
in  water. 

4.  As  there  are  two  combinations  of  tin  with 
oxygene,  so  there  are  two  which  it  forms  with 
chlorine.  When  tin  is  burnt  in  chlorine  a  very 
volatile  clear  liquor  is  formed,  a  nonconductor 
of  electricity,  and  which,  when  mixed  with  a 
little  water,  becomes  a  solid  crystalline  sub- 
stance, a  true  muriate  of  tin  containing  the 
jperoxide  of  tin.     This  liquor,  which  h^s 


[  382  ] 


been  called  Libavias's  liquor,  from  its  dis- 
coverer Libavius,  may  be  likewise  procured  by 
heating  togetiier  tin  filings  and  corrosive  subli- 
mate, or  an  amalgam  of  tin  and  corrosive  subli- 
mate. It  consists,  according  to  the  analysis  of 
Mr.  J.  Davy,  of  two  proportions  of  chlorine 
134,  and  one  of  tin  110;  and  according  to  the 
proposed  principles  of  nomenclature,  its  name 
will  be  stamianea.  The  other  compound  of  tin 
and  chlorine  is  a  gray  semitransparent  crystal- 
line solid ;  it  may  be  procured  by  heating  toge- 
ther an  amalgam  of  tin  and  calomel ;  it  dissolves 
in  water  and  forms  a  solution  which  rapidly 
absorbs  oxygene  from  the  air,  depositing  oxide 
of  tin.  This  compound  of  chlorine  and  stan- 
nane,  it  appears  from  the  experiments  of  Mr. 
J.  Davy,  who  first  described  it,  consists  of  one 
proportion  of  tin  110,  and  one  of  chlorine  67  ; 
it  may  be  called  stannane, 

5.  There  are  two  siilphurets  of  tirij  one  may 
be  made  by  fusing  tin  and  sulphur  together  ;  it 
is  of  a  blueish  colour  and  lamellated  structure  ; 
and  from  the  experiments  of  my  brother  con- 
sists of  one  proportion  of  tin  and  one  of  sul- 
phur 110  and  30,  The  other  sulphuret  of  tin, 
or  the  supersulphuret,  is  made  by  heating  to- 
gether the  peroxide  of  tin  and  sulphur ;  it  is 
of  a  beautiful  gold  colour,  and  appears  in  fine 
flakes ;  it  was  formerly  called  aurum  musivum. 


[  383  ] 


It  has  been  supposed  by  Pelletier  and  Proust 
to  contain  tin  in  an  oxidated  state,  but  Mr.  John 
Davy  has  shewn  that  this  is  not  the  case ;  and 
that  it  consists  merely  of  one  proportion  of 
metallic  tin  combined  with  two  proportions  of 
sulphur,  110  and  6o  ;  so  that  the  number  re- 
presenting it  is  170. 

6.  Tin  combines  with  phosphorus  when  the 
two  substances  are  heated  together.  As  yet 
only  one  compound  is  known,  which  appears 
from  my  experiments  to  consist  of  17  per  cent, 
of  phosphorus,  and  therefore  may  be  regarded 
as  composed  of  one  proportion  of  tin  and  one 
of  phosphorus,  1 10  and  20.  The  phosphoret  of 
tin  has  a  metallic  appearance,  is  so  soft  that  it 
may  be  cut  with  a  knife  ;  the  phosphorus  burns 
when  it  is  gently  heated  in  the  air. 

7.  Tin  has  not  been  combined  with  hydro- 
gene,  azote,  carbon,  or  boron  ;  it  readily  unites 
to  the  metals  of  the  fixed  alkalies,  and  forms 
alloys  which  speedily  tarnish  in  the  air,  and 
which  effervesce  in  water.  It  unites  with  zinc 
by  fusion  ;  the  alloy  is  harder  than  zinc  and 
stronger  than  tin. 

8.  Tin  is  a  metal  of  great  use,  and  of  various 
application  ;  it  is  an  important  ingredient  in 
pewter,  bell-metal,  and  bronze ;  it  is  employed 
to  cover  culinary  vessels,  as  tin  plate  ;  some  of 
its  acid  compounds  are  used  in  dyeing.    Tin  is 


[  384  ] 

almost  always  found  in  nature  in  the  oxidated 
state,  and  in  the  crystalline  form ;  and  it  appears 
from  the  analysis  of  Klaproth  that  the  native 
oxide  or  tin  stone  of  Cornwall  must  contain  one 
proportion  of  tin  and  two  of  oxygene.  All  the 
well  known  combinations  of  this  metal  are  such 
as  they  ought  to  be  according  to  the  theory  of 
definite  proportions,  and  its  compounds  with 
oxygene,  sulphur,  and  chlorine,  afford  similar 
results,  which  correspond  with  the  numbers 
gained  from  its  simplest  combination. 

16.  Iron  or  Fcrrum. 

1.  The  iron  of  comtaerce  is  obtained  froixi 
various  ores  of  that  metal,  in  which  it  exists 
combined  with  oxygene,  by  intense  ignition 
with  carbonaceous  substances  :  the  purest  iron 
is  made  from  an  ore  called  haematites  by  igni- 
tion with  charcoal ;  and  the  metai  is  hammered 
whilst  in  a  softstate,  exposed  to  air.tillitbecomes 
ductile.  Iron  was  known  in  the  time  of  Moses, 
and  used  for  the  manufacture  of  swords,  knives, 
and  axes.  It  is  referred  to  in  the  Iliad  and  the 
Odyssey  of  Homer,  A  ball  of  iron  was  one  of 
the  prizes  offered  by  Achilles  at  the  funeral 
rites  of  Patroclus  ;  and  the  effect  of  the  burn- 
ing brand  thrust  by  Ulysses  and  his  companions 
into  the  eye  of  Polyphemus,  is  compared  by 
the  poet  to  that  of  the  hot  iron  plunged  int<? 


[  385  ] 


watet  bythe  sinith.  T{iie  soft  iron  employed  in 
the  useful  arts  is  free  from  any  alloy,  and  there- 
fore maybe  used  for  the  purposes  of  chemistry. 

S.  The  colour  of  iron  is  well  known,  and  its 
oilier  sensible  properties ;  its  specific  gravity  is 
about  7.7.  Its  malleability,  though  considerable, 
is  inferior  to  that  of  gold,  silver,  and  coppei'. 
Its  ductility  and  tenacity  are,  however,  greater; 
it  may  be  drawn  into  extremely  fme  wire,  and  a 
wire  of  0.078  of  an  inch  in  diameter  is  capable 
of  supporting  549.2<5lbs.  It  requires  the  highest 
heat  of  a  wind  furnace  for  its  perfect  fusion  :  it 
is  attracted  by  the  magnet  and  is  capable  of  ac- 
quiring magnetism,  though  in  its  unalloyed  state 
it  retains  it  only  for  a  very  short  time.  When 
itbh  is  exposed  to  the  atmosphere  it  slowly 
combines  with  oxygene  and  carbonic  acid,  and 
its  suirface  becomes  covered  with  a  yellowish 
substance  well  known  by  the  name  of  rust.  It 
burns  with  great  splendour  in  oxygene  gas,  as 
has  been  stated  page  At  common  tempera-- 
tures  it  slowly  decomposes  water.  Hydrogene 
gas  is  evolved,  and  oxygene  combines  with  the 
metal.  The  effect  is  rapidly  produced  when  the 
vapour  6f  water  is  passed  over  red  hot  iron. 
When  gently  heated  in  chlorine  it  takes  fire 
and  burns  with  a  deep  red  light. 

3.  The  combinations  of  iron  and  oxygene 
have  been  referred  to,  page  110.    The  black 

VOL,  I,  C  c 


[  386  ] 

and  the  red-brown  oxides  are  the  only  oxides  of 
this  metal  known  j  these  substances,  which  have 
been  considered  as  green  and  white  oxides,  are 
in  fact  hydrated  oxides.  The  black  oxide  of 
iron,  which  may  be  regarded  as  a  deutoxide, 
as  containing  two  proportions  of  oxygene,  is 
formed  by  the  rapid  combustion  of  iron  in 
oxygene.  The  red-brown  oxide,  which  must 
be  considered  as  a  tritoxide,  may  be  produced 
from  the  black  by  keeping  its  powder  red  hot 
for  a  considerable  time  in  contact  with  the  at- 
mosphere often  changing  the  surface.  Reason- 
ing on  the  composition  of  these  oxides,  103 
must  be  the  number  representing  iron;  and  the 
black  oxide,  or  the  deutoxide,  consists  of  one 
proportion  of  iron  103,  and  two  of  oxygene  30; 
and  the  brown-red  oxide,  or  tritoxide  of  103 
metal,  and  4-5  oxygene.  Both  these  oxides  are 
soluble  in  the  common  acids.  The  black  pro- 
duces pale  green  solutions ;  the  brown-red,  deep 
yellow  solutions  :  the  solutions  of  triple  prussiate 
of  potassa,  precipitate  the  solutions  of  the  black 
oxide  white ;  those  of  the  red  bright  blue. 
When  solutions  of  these  oxides  are  acted  upon 
by  solutions  of  pure  alkalies,  a  white  precipi- 
tate, having  a  tint  of  green  or  olive,  is  thrown 
down  from  the  solution  containing  the  black 
oxide  ;  and  an  orange  coloured  precipitate  from 
the  solution  containing  the  red-brown  oxide ;  and 


[  387  ] 

both  these  precipitates,  I  find,  are  the  oxides 
combined  with  water  or  hydrates.  The  pale 
hydrate,  when  exposed  to  air,  rapidly  changes 
in  colour,  first  becomes  pale  olive,  then  dark 
olive,  then  olive  brown,  and  last  of  all  orange  j 
so  that  there  is  strong  reason  to  conclude  that 
the  colours  of  different  precipitates  depend  upon 
their  being  composed  of  mixtures  of  the  two  hy- 
drates ;  and  solutions  of  the  black  oxide  cannot 
be  exposed  to  air  for  a  moment  without  being 
changed  by  the  absorption  of  oxygene.  I  have 
made  no  experiments  to  ascertain  the  composi- 
tion of  the  two  hydrates;  probably  the  white 
contains  two  proportions  of  water.  It  would 
seem  from  the  experiments  of  Dr.  Thomson 
that  there  is  a  black  hydrate  formed  by  passing 
steam  over  iron ;  and  which  probably  consists  of 
one  proportion  of  iron,  two  of  oxygene,  and  one 
of  water.  Mr.  Daubuisson  has  described  a  na- 
tive hydrated  oxide  of  iron. 

4.  There  are  two  compounds  of  iron  and 
chlorine.  The  one  containing  tlTe  largest  pro- 
portion of  chlorine  is  formed  by  burning  iron 
wire  in  the  gas.  It  is  a  very  beautiful  substance 
of  a  bright  yellowish  brown  colour.  It  has  a  high 
degree  of  splendour,  and  is  very  volatile,  rising 
in  the  gaseous  state  at  a  temperature  a  little  above 
that  of  boiling  water,  and  crystallizing  in  small 
irrideseeiit  plates.    It  acts  with  violence  upon 

C  c  2 


[  388  ] 


water,  arid  forms  a  solution  of  red  muriate  of 
iron.  I  have  called  it  ferranea,  and  I  find  by 
analysis  that  it  consists  of  one  proportion  of 
iron  103,  and  three  proportions  of  chlorine 
1201. 

The  other  compound  of  chlorine  and  iron  has 
been  formed  and  analyzed  by  my  brother,  Mr. 
John  Davy ;  it  contains  proportions  which  agree 
nearly  with  one  of  iron  103,  and  two  of  chlorine 
134.  It  is  a  dark  gray  opaque  substance,  fusiblfe 
at  d.  red  heat,  and  not  rising  in  vapour  at  the 
point  of  fusion  of  glass.  It  forms  a  solution  of 
green  muriate  of  iron  by  its  action  upon  water , 
it  may  be  named  ferrane. 

5.  No  Combinations  of  iron  with  bydrogene 
or  azote  are  known  j  but  this  metal  readily 
combines  with  sulphur.  There  are  two  well 
known  sulphurets  of  iron;  one  is  formed  by 
heating  iron  filings  and  sulphur  together  out 
of  the  contact  of  air ;  they  combine  with  great 
energy,  producing  the  effect  of  ignition.  The 
siilphuret  of  iron  formed  in  this  way<is  of  metallic 
splendour,  and  a  dull  yellow  colour.  This  com- 
pound is  found  in  nature,  and  has  been  analyzed 
by  Mr.  Hatchett.  It  is  magnetie,  and  has  beers 
called  magnetic  pyrites.  The  other  sulphuret 
of  iron,  which  may  be  called  the  siipersulpku7^ei, 
has  not  yet  been  made  artificially,  but  it  is 
found  abundantly  in  metallic  veins :  it  is  of  a 


[  389  1 

bright  yellow  colour,  and  often  crystallized  in 
cubes.  According  to  Hatcliett  and  Proust,  the 
sulphuret  of  iron  consists  of  about  63  of  iron  to 
37  sulphur,  and  the  supersulphuret  of  about  46 
to  54 ;  so  that  the  quantity  of  iron  remaining 
the  same,  the  last  sulphuret  contains  nearly 
double  as  much  sulphur  as  the  first;  and  iroa 
being  represented  by  103^  the  proportions  are 
not  verj^  remote  from  two  of  sulphur  60  in  the 
sulphuret,  and  four  of  sulphur  120  in  the  hy- 
persulphuret. 

6.  Iron  is  capable  of  combining  with  phos- 
phorus ;  but  the  proportions  of  the  elements  of 
phosphoret  of  iron  have  not  been  ascertained  j 
nor  is  it  known  whether  more  than  one  com- 
pound of  this  kind  exists.  The  phosphoret 
may  be  made  by  passing  phosphorus  in  vapour 
over  ignited  iron.  It  is  very  brittle,  of  a  dark 
steel  gray  colour,  and  of  the  specific  gravity  of 
6.7.  This  substance,  which  was  first  found 
in  the  peculiar  iron  called  cold  short  iron, 
because  it  is  brittle  when  cold,  was  once  sup- 
posed by  Bergman  and  Meyer  to  be  a  peculiar 
metal;  but  Klaproth  discovered  its  real  nature. 
It  may  be  formed  hkewise  by  heating  together 
phosphoric  acid,  iron,  and  charcoal. 

7.  Iron  is  capable  of  combining  with  car* 
bon;  and  steel,  perhaps  the  most  important  sub- 
stance employed  in  the  useful  arts,  is  one  of 

Cc3 


[  390  ] 

the  results  of  their  combination.    Steel  is  usually 
made  by  a  process  called  cementation,  which 
consists  in  keeping  bars  of  iron  in  contact  with 
powdered  charcoal  in  a  state  of  ignition  for  teq 
or  twelve  days,  in  earthen  troughs,  or  crucibles, 
the  mouths  of  which  are   closed  with  clay. 
Cemented  steel  is   made  into  the  substance 
caWed  cast  steel  by  being  fused  in  a  close  crucible 
with  a  mixture  of  powdered  glass  and  charcoal. 
Steel  is  possessed  of  the  power  of  receiving 
very  different  degrees  of  hardness  by  different 
applications  of  heat  or  cold.    When  it  is  heated 
to  redness,  and  suffered  to  cool  slowly,  it  is 
found  very  soft  j  but  if  plunged  into  cold  mer- 
cury or  water,   it  acquires  extreme  hardness; 
and  by  heating  hard  steel  to  different  degrees, 
■it  receives  different  degrees  of  temper  from 
that  which  renders  it  proper  for  files,  to  that 
which  fits  it  for  watch  springs.    In  the  process 
of  tempering,   the  steel  changes  colour  even 
though  plunged  under  oil.    Between  430°  and 
450°  Fahrenheit,  according  to  Mr.  Stoddart,  it 
assumes  ^  pale  yellowish  tinge;  at  460°  the 
colour  is  a  straw  yellow,  and  the  metal  is  of  the 
temper  necessary  for  pen  knives,  razors,  and 
fine  edged  tools.    The  colour  gradually  deepens 
as  the  temperature  rises  higher,  and  it  passes 
through  brown,  red,  and  purple,  to  580,  when 
it  becomes  of  an  uniform  deep  blue.  These 


[  S91  ] 

changes  of  colour  seem  to  depend  upon  some 
change  in  the  arrangement  of  the  exterior  layer 
of  particles  of  the  metal ;  they  cannot  depend 
on  oxidation,  as  they  take  place  under  mercury. 
Steel  is  of  greater  specific  gravity  than  iron ; 
when  the  metal  is  hammered  it  is  about  "].$. 
When  it  is  acted  upon  by  an  acid,  such  as 
diluted  nitric  acid,  a  black  spot  appears  upon 
it  from  the  separation  of  the  carbonaceous  mat- 
ter. Steel  is  attracted  by  the  magnet,  and  is 
capable  of  receiving  permanent  magnetism.  It 
is  not  easy  to  determine  the  exact  quantity  of 
carbon  in  steel,  but  it  consists  of  several  pro- 
portions of  iron  to  one  of  carbonaceous  matter. 
Different  specimens  of  steel  are  said,  on  the 
authority  of  Bergman,  Vauquelin,  and  Mushet, 
to  contain  only  from  yto-  to      oi' carbon. 

Iron  has  been  converted  into  steel  by  ce-i 
mentation  with  diamond  by  Morveau  and  Sir 
George  Mackenzie, 

Plumbago,  or  blacli  lead,  as  has  been  mentioned 
page  313,  is  a  compound  of  carbon,  with  -Jg-  its 
weight  of  iron.  There  is  a  substance  formed 
in  iron  founderies  called  kish,  of  a  brilliant  ap- 
pearance, usually  in  thin  scales,  analogous  to 
plates  of  polished  steel.  It  consists  chiefly  of 
carbonaceous  matter  united  to  iron,  and  a  little 
manoranesum. 

8.  When  iron  and  charcoal  are  sirongly 


I  392  ] 

Ignited  with  boracic.  acid,  the  iron  produces, 
daring  its  solution,  boracic  acid,  as  M.  Descotils 
has  shewn.  Hence  it  is  probable,  as  M.  M. 
Gay  Lussac  and  Thenard  have  supposed,  that 
iron  is  capable  of  combining  with  boron, 

9.  Iron  is  capable  of  combining  with  potas- 
sium and  sodium ;  these  alloys  are  more  fusible 
and  whiter  than  iron,  and  effervesce  copiously 
in  water.  There  is  great  reason  to  believe  that 
alloys  may  be  formed  of  iron  and  the  metals  of 
the  earths.  Cast  iron,  which  is  produced  by 
fusing  iron  ores  with  pitcoal,  during  its  con- 
version into  malleable  iron,  aifords  about  one 
fourth  of  its  weight  of  a  glass,  which  consists  of 
silex,  alumine,  lime,  oxide  of  iron,  and  oxide 
of  manganesum.  In  the  process  for  reducing 
cast  iron  into  malleable  iron  called  bloominz^ 
the  iron,  after  being  fused  in  a  forge  by  a  fire 
of  charcoal,  is  hammered,  whilst  in  a  soft  state, 
on  an  anvil  by  a  large  hammer  worked  by 
water ;  a  vivid  combustion,  which  seems  to  be 
connected  with  the  formation  of  the  slass  and 
the  oxides,  takes  place  on  the  surface  of  the 
mass :  that  the  earths  are  formed  by  the  oxida- 
tion of  metals  combined  in  the  cast  iron  seems 
probable  from  the  circumstance  of  the  combus- 
tion ;  and  the  idea  is  confirmed  by  the  distinct 
metallic  character  of  cast  iron;  it  is  white,  crys- 
tallized, and  has  all  the  appearances  of  a  perfect 


[  393  ] 

alloy.  Specimens  of  cast  iron  ustially  contaia 
likewise  sulphur  and  carbon. 

10.  Manganesum  forais  very  readily  binary 
combinations  with  iron;  the  alloys  have  a  white 
colour,  and  are  very  brittle.  Iron  likewise 
combines  with  tin.  By  fusing  the  two  metals 
together  Bergman  obtained  two  alloys;  the  first 
containing  21  parts  of  tin,  and  one  part  of  iron: 
the  second  two  parts  of  iron  and  one  of  tin. 
The  first  was  very  malleable,  harder  than  tin, 
and  not  so  brilliant;  the  second  scarcely  malle- 
able and  very  hard.  The  formation  of  tin  plate 
depends  upon  the  chemical  attraction  between 
the  two  metals.  Tin  plate  is  formed  by  dipping 
thin  plates  of  iron  into  melted  tin,  the  iron  must 
be  very  clean.  It  is  usual  to  add  ^  of  copper 
to  the  tin  to  prevent  it  from  forming  too  thick 
a  coat. 

11.  To  describe  the  uses  of  iron  would  re- 
quire volumes  ;  as  it  is  the  most  generally  dif- 
fused metal,  so  it  is  likewise  the  most  important 
in  its  applications  to  the  purposes  of  society. 
By  means  of  it  the  earth  has  been  cultivated 
and  subdued.  Without  iron,  houses  cities  and 
ships,  could  not  be  built.  It  is  subservient 
both  to  the  common  and  the  refined  arts; 
it  forms  the  machinery  by  which  the  most 
important  mechanical  powers  are  generated 
and  applied.    Its  uses  have  awakened  human 


[  S94  ] 

industry,  and  made  it  more  efficacious,  and  have 
offered  an  infinite  variety  of  resources  to  in- 
genuity and  talent. 

1 7.  Lead  or  Plumbum. 

1.  The  lead  of  commerce  is  chiefly  procured 
from  certain  ores  in  which  it  is  combined  with 
sulphur.  The  sulphur  is  expelled  or  burnt  by 
a  long  continued  heat  in  a  reverberatory  furnace, 
and  the  metal  is  obtained  by  fusion.  To  pro- 
cure pure  lead  a  solution  of  the  lead  of  com* 
merce  in  nitric  acid,  largely  diluted  with  vi-ater^ 
j-nay  be  precipitated  by  zinc ;  or  a  solution  of 
acetite  of  lead,  i.  e  sugar  of  lead,  may  be  used. 
The  arborescent  brilhant  metallic  substance  pro- 
duced from  solution  of  sugar  of  lead  by  zinc  is 
generally  pure  lead. 

2.  Lead  was  known  in  a  very  early  age  of 
the  world.  It  is  often  mentioned  by  Moses; 
and  is  described  by  Homer  as  in  common  use 
lit  the  period  of  the  Trojan  war. 

Lead  is  of  a  blueish  white  colour,  but  soon 
tarnishes  by  exposure  to  the  air.  It  is  the  softest 
0f  the  common  metals.  Its  specific  gravity  is 
11. 35^,  and  is  not  increased  by  hammering.  It 
is  very  malleable,  but  not  very  ductile.  Its 
tenacity  is  such  that  a  wire  of  -^i.-r  ^'^^^''^ 
in  diameter,  supports  only  ]8.4  pounds.  Its 
point  of  fusion  is  CIS*,  but  an  intense  degree 


[  S95  3 


oFheat  is  required  for  its  evaporation.  It  com- 
bines with  oxygene  slowly,  at  the  temperature 
of  its  fusion,  and  burns  when  strongly  ignited 
in  the  atmosphere;  when  a  current  of  oxygene 
gas  is  thrown  upon  it  in  this  state,  the  flame  it 
emits  is  of  a  brilliant  whiteness,  and  it  sends  cfF 
a  dense  smoke.  When  heated  in  chlorine  it 
unites  to  it,  but  does  not  inflame. 

3.  Lead  combines  with  oxygene  in  different 
|3roportions ;  and  three  of  its  combinations  with 
this  substance  appear  to  be  well  defined  and 
distinct  bodies.  Two  of  the  oxides  of  lead  may 
be  formed  by  heat  with  accession  of  air;  the 
one  is  massicot^  the  other  is  minium,  or  red  lead. 
When  lead  is  heated  in  contact  with  the  at- 
mosphere, it  soon  becomes  of  a  dirty  yellow, 
or  yellowish  green  colour,  and  at  length  of  a 
pure  yellow  colour.  This  oxide  is  massicot, 
and  is  the  oxide  existing  in  the  different  salts  of 
lead ;  when  precipitated  from  these  salts  by 
{Caustic  alkalies,  it  falls  down  in  combinatior^ 
with  water,  and  appears  as  a  white  hj-drated 
oxide  of  lead;  the  water  may  be  expelled  from 
it  by  a  strong  red  heat-  From  the  experiments 
of  Vauquelin  and  Klaproth,  it  may  be  con- 
cluded that  this  oxide  of  lead  contains  about 
7  per  cent,  of  oxygene.  Litharge  is  this 
oxide  of  lead,  according  to  Dr.  Thomson, 
fnixed  with  a  little  carbonate  of  lead :  litharge 


[  396  ] 

is  formed  dormg  the  extraction  of  silver  from 
lead  by  the  calcination  of  the  lead,  and  the 
carbonic  acid  is  acquired  from  the  carbonaceous 
matter  burnt  in  the  flame  of  the  furjnace. 

Massicot  is  fusible  at  a  strong  red  heat,  and 
appears,  when  fused,  as  a  yellow  glass,  insoluble 
in  water,  without  taste  or  smell,  and  of  great 
specific  gravity. 

The  first  oxide  of  lead  by  being  heated 
moderately  in  contact  with  air,  for  a  considera- 
Me  time,  combines  with  an  additional  quantity 
of  oxygene,  and  then  becomes  of  a  beautiful 
red  colour,  in  which  state  it  is  called  minium, 
or  red  lead,  100  parts  of  lead  carefully  and 
slowly  converted  into  minium  become  between 
J  JO  and  111  parts  ;  so  that  there  is  strong  reason 
to  believe  that  the  quantity  of  lead  being  the 
same,  the  oxygene  in  minium  is  to  that  in  mas- 
sicot, as  3  to  2.  Minium  exposed  to  a  strong 
red  heat  gives  olf  from  3  to  4  per  cent,  of  oxy- 
geiie  gas,  and  becomes  massicot. 

When  nitric  acid  is  digested  upon  minium,  a 
part  is  dissolved,  but  a  puce  coloured  powder 
remains,  which  contains  more  oxygene  than 
minium,  and  the  formation  of  which  seems  to 
be  owino;  to  the  circumstance  that  the  oxide, 
which  dissolves  during  its  solution,  becomes 
massicot,  and  affords  oxygene  to  the  undissolved 
portion,  so  as  to  convert  it  into  a  new  substance. 


I  S97  ] 


The  puce  coloured  oxide  of  lead,  long  dried 
at  212°,  loses  from  6  to  7  parts  per  cent,  dur- 
ing its  conversion  into  massicot  by  fusion;  so 
that  it  may  be  considered  as  containing  twice 
as  much  oxygene  as  that  oxide,  the  proportion 
of  lead  being;  considered  as  the  same.  On  these 
views  massicot  will  be  a  deutoxide  of  lead, 
minium  a  tritoxide,  and  the  puce  coloured 
oxide  a  tetroxide  ;  and  the  number  represent- 
ing lead  will  be  398  ;  and  the  oxides  will  be 
composed  respectively  of  398  of  metal,  and  30^ 
45j  and  60,  of  oxygene, 

4.  One  combination  only  of  lead  with  chlorine 
is  known,  it  may  be  obtained  directly  by  heating 
lead  in  chlorine,  or  by  decomposing  the  oxides 
of  lead  by  chlorine,  in  which  case  oxygene  is 
expelled,  or  by  acting  on  oxides  of  lead  by 
muriatic  acid  gas,  when  water  is  formed.  The 
combination  of  chlorine  and  lead  is  a  dull 
whitish  seihttransparent  substance,  fusible  at  a 
heat  below  redness,  and  volatile  at  an  interne 
heat.  This  substance  has  a  sweetish  taste, 
and  is  soluble  in  parts  of  cold  water.  It 
was  called  horn  lead  by  the  old  chemists, 
and  improperly  muriate  of  lead  by  modem 
chemists.  The  name  proposed  for  it  is  plum^ 
bane.  According  to  my  experiments  made  oa 
the  absorption  of  chlorine  by  lead,  it  contains 
401  of  lead  to  131  of  chlorine,  which  ag-reei 


t  398  ] 

Very  nearly  indeed  with  one  proportion  of  metal^ 
and  two  of  chlorine;  and  this  compound  de*> 
composed  byalkah'es  affords  the  oxide  contain-' 
ing  two  proportions  of  oXygene. 

5.  Sulphur  is  easily  made  to  unite  With  lead 
by  a  gentle  heat.  One  combination  only  of 
these  bodies  is  certainly  known,  and  it  is  the 
same  as  the  substance  found  in  nature,  referred 
to  in  the  beginning  of  this  sectioiij  and  called 
galena.  It  is  very  brittle,  brilliant,  and  of  a  deep 
blueish  gray  colour.  It  is  less  fusible  than  lead, 
and  crystallizes  in  cubes.  100  parts  of  lead  in 
becoming  the  sulphuret  unite  to  about  15  parts 
of  sulphur;  which  gives  the  sulphuret,  as  con* 
sisting  of  one  proportion  of  metal  and  two  prof 
portions  of  sulphur. 

6.  A  compound  of  lead  with  phosphorus 
may  be  formed  by  fusing  together  equal  parts 
of  filings  of  lead  and  phosphoric  acid.  It  is  of 
a  silver  white  colour  with  a  shade  of  blue ;  may 
be  cut  with  a  knife,  but  is  brittle  under  the 
hammer.  The  same  substance  may  be  formed 
by  bringing  phosphorus  in  contact  with  melted 
lead.  According  to  Pelletier  it  consists  of  8S 
parts  lead  and  12  of  phosphorus,  which  gives 
nearly  3  proportions  of  phosphorus  6o,  to  one 
ofleadsgS. 

7.  There  are  no  known  combinations  of  lead 
with  hydrogene,  azote,  carbon,  or  boron. 


[  399  3 

8.  Lead  unites  by  fusion  with  tli6  metals  df 
the  fixed  alkalies,  and  Form  compounds  which 
tarnish  in  the  air,  and  are  readHy  decomposed 
by  the  agency  of  water. 

9.  Lead  combines  with  zinc,  tin,  and  iron. 
Its  alloy  with  iron  is  made  with  great  difficulty, 
and  has  not  been  accurately  examined.  The 
alloys  of  zinc  and  lead  may  be  easily  made  by 
fusion.  These  alloys  are  harder  than  zinc,  and 
ductile.  In  whatever  proportions  the  metals 
are  melted  together,  the  mass,  on  cooling,  is 
found  to  contain  them  in  a  state  of  chemical 
union  or  intimate  mixture.  Lead  and  tin  com- 
bine in  a  similar  manner ;  this  alloy  is  harder 
and  more  tenacious  than  tin.  It  is  said  by 
Muschenbroeck  that  these  qualities  exist  in  the 
highest  degree  in  the  alloy,  when  it  is  composed 
of  5  parts  of  tin,  and  one  of  lead;  which  quan- 
tities nearly  correspond  with  single  proportions 
©f  each  of  the  two  metals.  This  mixture  is 
often  employed  to  cover  copper  vessels ;  and, 
as  appears  from  the  experiments  of  M.  Proust, 
is  difficultly  acted  upon  by  vegetable  acids,  and 
when  acted  upon,  the  tin  is  dissolved,  and  not 
the  lead ;  so  that  such  vessels  may  be  safely 
employed  for  culinary  purposes. 

30.  Lead  is  very  extensively  used  both  in 
thte  common  and  refined  arts.  Its  oxides,  and 
some  of  its  saline  combinations,  are  extensively 


[  400  ] 

applied  in  painting;  white  lead  is  the  deutoxide 
combined  with  carbonic  acid.  Both  massicot 
and  minium  are  common  pigments.  Thedeut- 
oxide  combined  with  chromic  acid  forms  the 
most  beautiful  and  permanent  deep  yellow 
known.  Lead  is  used  as  an  ingredient  in 
various  solders;  it  is  applied  for  covering 
houses  and  churches.  It  will  he  unnecessary 
to  dwell  upon  its  still  more  familiar  applica- 
tions. Its  oxide  forms  an  important  part  of  flint 
glass,  and  is  used  in  various  enamels  and  pastes. 

18.  Antimoivy  or  Anthnonium. 
The  ancients  were  acquainted  with  certain 
ores  of  antimony ;  the  most  common  of  them, 
the  sulphuret  of  antimony,  was  employed  by 

the  ladies  of  the  oriental  countries  to  tino^e  the 

o 

extremity  of  the  eyelid  black  for  the  purpose 
of  giving  greater  brilliancy  of  eflect  to  the  pupil, 
Basil  Valentine  is  the  first  chemist  who  has  de- 
scribed the  process  of  extracting  antimony  from 
the  sulphuret,  though  it  does  not  appear  that 
he  was  the  inventor  of  this  process.  He  pub- 
lished  his  Currus  Triumphalis  Antimonii  to- 
wards the  end  of  the  fifteenth  century* 

To  procure  antimony,  the  common  antimony 
sold  by  druggists,  which  appears  as  a  series  of 
crystals,  like  needles,  possessing  the  metallic 
brilliancy,  and  which  are  composed  of  the  metal 


C  401  ] 

and  sulphur,  are  ignited  with  half  their  weight 
©f  iron  filings,  and  a  quarter  of  their  weight  of 
nitre  added  when  they  arp  in  fusion ;  the  anti- 
mony will  be  found  in  the  bottom  of  the  vessvd 
in  which  the  experiment  is  made.  To  obtain 
it  quite  pure,  it  may  be  dissolved  in  aqua  regia, 
water  is  added  to  the  solution,  a  white  powder 
will  fall  down  ;  this  is  to  be  ignited  for  about 
BO  minutes,  with  twice  its  weight  of  tartar,  when 
the  metal  will  be  produced. 

2.  Antimony  is  of  a  brilliant  white  colour 
with  a  shade  of  blue,  its  hardness  is  equal  to 
that  of  zinc.  Its  specific  gravity  is  about  6.8. 
It  is  very  brittle,  and  may  be  easily  pulverised. 
It  has  little  tenacity.  It  fuses  at  about  810** 
Fahrenheit.  On  cooling  it  crystallizes,  and  its 
laminated  structure  is  owing  to  the  new  arrange- 
ment of  its  parts.  It  is  but  little  afiected  by 
exposure  to  the  air  or  water  at  common  tem- 
|)eratures ;  but  when  the  vapour  of  water  is 
passed  over  red  hot  antimony,  it  acts  so  power- 
fully upon  the  water,  as  to  decompose  it  with 
explosions. 

3.  Two  combinations  of  antimony  with  oxy- 
gens are  known ;  one,  the  fusible  cvide,  is  ob- 
tained by  dissolving  antimony  in  muriatic  acid 
by  heat,  and  adding  w^ater  to  the  concentrated 
soluiion,  a  white  powder  falls  down,  which, 

VOL.  I.  D 


[  402  ] 

when  washed  with  a  solution  of  subcarbon^ite 
of  potassa,  and  afterwards  with  distilled  water, 
is  a  combination  of  the  fusible  oxide  with  water, 
and  by  fusion  at  a  red  heat  it  becomes  the  pure 
oxide.  This  substance  is  of  a  dirty  yellowish 
white  colour.  It  crystallizes  by  slow  cooling 
after  fusion.  By  being  strongly  heated  in  con- 
tact with  the  atmosphere  it  combines  with  more 
oxygcne,  rises  in  the  volatile  form,  and  con- 
denses in  white  crystals  of  a  silvery  lustre ;  and 
this  substance  is  the  peroxide  or  antimony  satu- 
rated with  oxygene.  This  oxide  is  much  less 
fusible,  yet  more  volatile  than  the  other,  and  is 
more  difficultly  combined  with  acids.  The 
fusible  oxide,  in  its  combination  with  water, 
was  for  a  long  while  called  the  powder  of 
Algaroth,  from  its  discoverer  Algarotti.  Anti- 
mony burns,  when  heated  strongly  in  the  air, 
with  a  faint  white  light,  and  produces  the 
second  or  the  volatile  oxide,  which  rises  from 
it  in  the  form  of  a  dense  white  smoke.  From 
experiments  made  on  these  two  oxides  by  Mr. 
John  Davy  and  myself,  it  appears  that  the  fusible 
oxide  contains  -f-  as  much  oxygene  as  the  volatile 
oxide,  supposing  the  metal  to  be  the  same  in 
both  ;  and  calculating  from  his  experiments  on 
the  fusible  oxide,  thenumber  representing  anti- 
mony is  1 7 Oj  the  fusible  oxide  may  be  considered 


t  ] 

as  consisting  of  170  metal^  and  30  of  oxy- 
gene,  an  J  the  peroxide  of  I70  metal,  and  45 
bxygene. 

4.  Antimony  burns  spontaneously  when 
powdered  and  thrown  into  chlorine.  In  this 
"way  the  only  known  compound  of  antimony 
and  chlorine,  antimonane,  or  butter  of  antimony, 
is  formed.  It  is  a  soft  semitransparent  substance, 
of  a  yellowish  white  colour,  very  fusible,  vola- 
tile at  a  moderate  decree  of  heat.  It  crystallizes 
in  parallelopipeds.  It  is  a  very  caustic  and  cor- 
rosive substance  ;  it  acts  with  great  energy  upon 
water:  with  a  small  quantity  of  water  it  heats 
"violently,  and  forms  a  solution  ;  a  large  quantity 
precipitates  the  fusible  oxide  of  antimony,  and 
muriatic  acid  is  found  in  the  solution.  Anti- 
monane  may  be  likewise  formed  by  the  distilla- 
tion of  a  mixture  of  powdered  corrosive  subli- 
mate and  antimony.  From  the  experiments 
of  Mr.  John  Davy,  it  appears  to  contain  44 
per  cent,  of  chlorine,  and  therefore  may  be 
regarded  as  consisting  of  one  proportion  of 
metal  and  two  of  chlorine. 

5.  Sulphur  and  antimony  are  readily  com- 
bined by  fusing  them  together,  when  they  form 
a  compound  of  metallic  appearance,  similar  to 
the  natural  sulphuret,  and  which  is  much  more 
fusible  than  antimony:  according  to  Proust  it 
contains  about  25  per  cent,  of  sulphur,  and 


[  404  ] 

may  therefore  be  considered  as  consisting  of 
one  proportion  of  metal,  and  two  proportions  of 
sulphur,  170  and  60. 

6.  Antimony  has  not  yet  been  combined  with 
hydi'ogene,  azote,  carbon,  or  boron. 

7.  Antimony  combines  with  phosphorus  by 
fusion.  According  to  the  experiments  of  M. 
Pelletier,  the  phosphuret  is  white,  brittle,  and 
has  the  metallic  lustre;  its  composition  has  not 
been  determined. 

8.  Potassium  and  sodium  may  be  combined 
with  antimony  by  fusion ;  they  form  alloys 
very  similar  to  those  they  form  with  lead  and 
tin  in  their  obvious  properties.  Antimony 
may  be  combined  with  all  the  other  metals 
which  have  been  described.  The  alloy  of  tin 
and  antimony  is  employed  in  the  arts,  particu- 
larly for  making  rnusic  plates.  Antimony  very 
much  impairs  the  magnetic  properties  of  iron. 
The  alloy  of  lead  and  antimony  is  used  fo-r 
printers  types  ;  and  for  this  purpose  it  is  formed 
of  16  pgfrts  of  lead  and  one  of  antimony.  The 
oxides  of  antimony  are  used  for  giving  a  yellow 
colour  to  glass.  Various  combinations  of  anti- 
mony are  employed  in  medicine. 

19.  Bismuth  or  Bismiithiim. 

1.  The  bismuth  of  commerce  is  procured 
from  ores  which  usually  contain  it  in  the  metallis 


[  405  ] 

state,  or  combined  with  sulphur,  by  roasting, 
and  ignition  with  charcoal.  The  metal  may- 
be obtained  in  a  state  of  purity  by  dissoi%'inT 
the  ore  in  strong  nitric  acid,  and  adding  water 
to  the  solution,  a  white  precipitate  will  appear, 
it  is  to  be  washed,  dried,  and  heated  to  a  dull 
red  for  about  20  minutes,  with  a  little  oil,  and 
some  black  flux,  a  substance  made  by  heating 
together  nitre  and  tartar  ;  a  globule  of  metal 
will  thus  be  procured. 

2.  The  ores  of  bismuth  were  first  described 
by  Agricola  before  1530;  the  properties  of  the 
pure  metal  were  not  known  before  the  middle 
of  the  last  century.    The  colour  of  bismuth  is 
white  with  a  slight  tint  of  red.    It  is  nearly  of 
the  same  hardness  as  copper.    Its  specific  gra- 
vity is  9.822,  and  it  is  increased  by  hammering. 
It  is  brittle,  it  cannot  be  drawn  into  wire.  Its 
tenacity  is  such  that  a  rod  ~  of  an  inch  in  dia- 
meter sustains  a  weight  of  about  29lbs.  It 
fuses  at  about  476°  Fahrenheit,  and  if  slowly 
cooled  crystallizes  in  cubes:  if  it  is  exposed  to 
a  strong  heat  in  close  vessels  it  sublimes  un- 
altered.   Bismuth  acquires  a  superficial  tarnish 
by  exposure  to  the  air;  it  is  not  affected  by 
water. 

3.  One  combination  only  of  bismuth  and  oxy- 
gene  is  certainly  known.  When  bismuth  is  kept 
at  a  dull  red  heat  in  open  vessels,  its  surface 


[  406  ] 

soon  becomes  tarnished ;  and  by  exposing  fi  esk 
surfaces  the  whole  may  be  converted  into  an  ox- 
ide. When  heated  more  intensely  in  the  atmos- 
phere, or  in  oxygene  gas,  it  burns  >yith  ablueisb 
flame,  and  a  yellow  oxide  is  formed,  which  fusea 
at  an  elevated  temperature.  The  oxides  formed  by 
slow  or  rapid  combustion  are  of  the  same  kind. 
When  in  powder,  they  are  yellow,  when  fused, 
>they  form  a  yellowish  green  vitreous  mass.  The. 
oxide  of  bismuth  requires  an  intense  degree  of 
heat  for  its  volatilization.  When  this  oxide 
is  precipitated  from  its  solutions  in  adds  by^ 
water  or  alkalies,  it  appears  as  a  white  powder, 
which  probably  is  a  compound  of  the  oxide  and 
water.  Klaproth  has  shewn  that  100  parts  of 
bismuth  by  treatment  with  nitric  acid  and  water, 
produce  about  123  parts  of  the  white  powder. 
This  powder  has  been  called  mapistery  of  bis- 
muth. Geoffioy  found  100  parts  of  bismuth 
become  110  parts  by  exposure  to  heat  and  air ; 
but  in  his  experiments  probably  some  of  the 
metal  escaped  oxidation.  Mr.  J.  Davy  has  found, 
the  yellow  oxide  to  contain  in  100  parts  90, 
parts  of  metal,  and  10  of  oxygene,  and  this 
estimation  is  very  near  that  of  Bucholz;  and! 
supposing  the  oxide  to  consist  of  one  propor* 
tion  of  metal,  and  one  of  oxygene,  the  number 
representing  bismuth  will  be  135. 

4'  JBismuth,  when  thrown  in  fine  powdej 


[  407  ] 


into  chlorine,  takes  fire,  and  burns  with  a  pale 
blue  light;  in  this  case  the  only  known  com- 
pound, bismuth  and  chlorine,  is  formed.  It 
has  been  called  hutter  of  bismuth.  It  may  be 
called  bismuthane.  It  is  an  easily  fusible  sub- 
stance, volatile  at  a  moderate  heat ;  its  colour  is 
grayish.  It  corrodes  the  skin,  and  is  readily 
decomposed  by  water ;  the  bismuth  combines 
with  the  oxygene  of  the  water;  the  chlorine 
with  its  hydrogene.  From  the  experiments 
of  Mr.  J.  Davy,  it  appears  that  bismuthane 
contains  33.6  per  cent,  of  chlorine,  and  there- 
fore may  be  considered  as  consisting  of  one 
proportion  of  metal,  and  one  of  the  gas,  135 
and  67. 

5.  There  are  no  known  combinations  of  bis- 
muth with  hydrogene,  azote,  carbon,  or  boron. 

6.  Bismuth  combines  with  sulphur  when 
they  are  fused  together;  the  sulphuret  is  of  a 
bluish  gray  colour,  and  has  metallic  lustre. 
According  to  Mr.  J.  Davy's  experiments  it  con- 
tains about  18  per  cent,  of  sulphur.  By  this 
estimation,  the  sulphuret  of  bismuth  must  con- 
tain about  one  proportion  of  metal  to  one  of 
sulphur. 

7.  Bismuth  appears  to  have  little  affinity  for 
phosphorus,  the  attempts  hitherto  made  to  form 
this  compound  have  been  unsuccessful. 

8.  The  action  of  the  metals  of  the  fixed 


[  408  ] 

alkalies  on  bismuth  is  similar  to  thai  which  they 
exert  on  other  easily  fusible  metals. 

9.  Ei&muth  forms  alloys  \*iih  all  the  metals 
which  have  been  descnbed,  except  zinc  ;  these 
alloys  have  been  little  examined.  It  sometimes 
enters  into  the  composition  of  pewter  ;  and  it 
forirxS  a  principal  pare  of  Newton's  fusible  metal. 
This  alloy  is  composed  of  8  parts  of  bismuth, 
5  of  lead,  and  3  of  tin,,  and  melts  at  a  tempera- 
tare  below  that  at  which  water  boils. 

10.  Bismuth  is  not  of  much  use  in  the  arts. 
The  white  hydrat  is  employed  as  a  pigment, 
but  is  not  very  permanent,  becoming  yellow  by 
the  action  of  light.  It  is  probable  that  the 
Roman  ladies  used  the  oxide  of  bismuth  for 
whitening  the  skin ;  for  Martial  in  speaicing  of 
a  lady,  who  made  too  free  a  use  of  cosmetics^ 
describes  her  as  afraid  of  the  sun. 

This  metal  is  sometimes  employed  in  .illoys 
to  make  easily  fusible  solders.  The  white  hy- 
drat has  been  lately  employed  in  medicine,  as  a 
remedy  in  spasmodic  affections  of  the  stomach, 

20.  Tellurium, 
1.  Tellurium  was  discovered  by  Klaproth,  in 
179S,  and  was  procured  by  him  from  an  ore 
found  near  Zalethna  in  Transylvania,  in  which 
it  exists,  in  alloy  with  gold,  lead,  and  silver. 
The  process  for  obtaining  the  metal  is  very 


[  409  ] 


simple;  the  ore  is  dissolved  in  aqua  regia  made 
of  a  mixture  of  1  part  strong  nitric  acid  and 
two  parts  raurlatic  acid.  Wiien  the  solution  is 
saturated,  water  is  to  be  added,  a  white  powder 
falls  down,  which,  when  dried,  and  heal  ed  in  a 
retort  of  glass,  with  of  its  weight  of  charcoal 
powder,  will  afford  pure  tellurium, 

2.  Tellurium  is  of  a  colour  nearly  the  same 
as  that  of  antimony.  It  easily  fuses,  and  rises 
in  vapour  at  a  strong  red  heat.  It  burns,  when 
heated  in  the  air,  with  a  vivid  biueish  green 
flame,  sending  off  a  dense  while  smoke.  Its 
powder  takes  fire  in  chlorine.  Its  specific  gra* 
vity  is  6.1 15, 

3.  One  oxide  of  tellurium  only  is  known,  the 
substance  formed  by  combustion  of  the  metal ;  it 
is  white  with  a  tint  of  yellow,  when  examined  in 
the  mass.  It  fuses  by  a  strong  heat,  and  requires 
a  very  high  temperature  for  its  volatilization. 
When  precipitated  from  its  acid  solutions,  it  is 
found  in  union  with  water,  as  a  white  hydrat. 
According  to  Klaproth  178  grains  of  oxide  of 
tellurium  afford  I48  grains  of  metal:  supposing 
the  oxide  to  consist  of  one  proportion  of  oxy- 
gene,  and  one  of  metal,  the  number  represent- 
ing tellurium  will  be  74. 

4.  When  tellurium  is  burnt  in  chlorine  an 
easily  fusible  substance  is  formed,  which  rises 
jn  vapour  at  a  strong  heat,  and  crystallizes.  Its 


[  410  J 


colour  is  white:  it  is  seraitransparent ;  when 
decomposed  by  water,  it  affords  the  white  hy- 
drated  oxide.  From  my  own  experiments  it 
appears  this  compound,  or  tellurane,  consists  of 
2  in  weight  of  metal  to  I.83  of  chlorine;  ife 
may  therefore  be  regarded  as  composed  of  one 
proportion  of  metal  74,  and  of  chlorine  67. 

5.  Tellurium  and  hydrogene  are  capable  of 
being  combined.  To  make  this  combination, 
hydrat  of  potassa  and  oxide  of  tellurium  are 
ignited  with  charcoal,  and  the  mixture  acted 
upon,  by  diluted  sulphuric  acid,  in  a  retort  con- 
nected with  a  mercurial  pneumatic  apparatus ; 
an  elastic  fluid  will  be  generated,  which  consists 
of  hydrogene  holding  tellurium  in  solution. 
It  is  possessed  of  very  singular  properties.  It 
is  soluble  in  water,  and  forms  a  claret  coloured 
solution.  It  combines  with  the  alkalies.  It 
burns  with  a  blueish  flame,  depositing  oxide  of 
tellurium.  Its  smell  is  very  strong  and  pecu- 
liar, not  unlike  that  of  sulphuretted  hydrogene. 
I  discovered  this  elastic  fluid  in  August  1809, 
When  tellurium  is  made  the  electrical  negative 
surface  in  water  in  the  Voltaic  circuit,  a  brown 
powder  is  formed,  which  appears  to  be  a  solid 
combination  of  hydrogene  and  tellurium,  and 
■which  was  first  observed  by  M.  Ritter,  in  I8O8 : 
a  claret  coloured  solution  of  the  gas  is  likewise 
formed  when  the  water  is  free  from  air.  The^ 


[  411  ] 

<;omposition  of  telluretted  h/drogene  gas,  and  of 
the  solid  k^druret  of  tellurium  has  not  been, 
yet  ascertained. 

6.  Tellurium  has  not  been  combined  with 
azote,  carbon,  or  boron.  No  experiments  are 
on  record  as  to  its  action  on  phosphorus. 

7.  It  unites  to  nearly  its  own  weight  of  sul- 
phur by  fusion  ;  the  result  is  a  lead  coloured 
striated  mass.  It  seems  probable  that  the  sul- 
phuret  contains  two  proportions  of  sulphur. 

8.  Very  few  experiments  have  been  made 
upon  the  alloys  of  tellurium.  It  combines 
readily  by  fusion  with  potassium  and  sodium, 
producing  heat  and  light;  and  forms  with  them 
difficultly  fusible  alloys,  which,  when  thrown 
into  water,  produce  purple  solutions  consisting 
of  the  alkalies  united  to  telluretted  hydrogene. 

Tellurium  has  as  yet  been  found  in  quantities 
too  small  to  render  it  applicable  to  any  of  the 
purposes  of  the  common  arts. 

21.  Cobalt  or  Cobaltum. 

1.  Cobalt  is  procured  from  its  ores,  which 
are  for  the  most  part  combinations  of  this  sub- 
stance with  other  metals  ;  or  of  its  oxide  with 
arsenic  or  sulphuric  acids.  It  is  difficult  to 
obtain  the  metal  in  a  state  of  complete  purity. 
The  pure  oxide  may  be  procured  by  dissolving 


[  412  1 


the  ore  known  hy  the  name  of  arsenical  coball  in 
nitric  acid.  The  sulphur  either  remains  on 
the  surface,  or  is  acidified  with  the  arsenic,  when 
both  are  to  fee  separated  by  nitrate  of  lead. 
The  excess  of  lead  is  to  be  removed  by  a  little 
sulphuric  a-cid,  and  the  copper,  if  any,  preci- 
pitated, by  a  bar  of  iron.  The  clear  solution 
is  to  be  precipitated  by  carbonate  of  potassa, 
and  the  precipitate  digested  with  solution  of 
ammonia.  The  ammoniuret  is  to  be  evaporated 
till  it  does  not  tinge  turmeric,  and  then  acted 
on  by  solution  of  potassa :  the  precipitate,  if 
any,  is  to  be  separated,  and  the  clear  fluid  eva- 
porated to  dryness.  The  solid  matter  obtained 
by  evaporation  will  afford  cobalt  when  mixed 
with  a  little  very  fine  charcoal  powder,  and 
exposed  to  an  intense  heat  for  about  half  an 
hour  in  a  covered  Hessian  crucible. 

Metallic  cobalt  was  first  procured  by  Brandt 
in  1733. 

gray  colour,  with  a 
tint  of  red  ;  its  hardness  appears  to  be  greater 
than  that  of  copper  ;  its  specific  gravity  is  about 
7.7.  It  is  rather  brittle  ;  its  fusing  point  is  very 
high,  not  much  inferior  to  that  of  iron,  on  the 
scale  of  Wedgwood  as  130  to  158  ;  i,t  suffers 
little  change  from  beirig  exposed  to  air  or 
water  at  common  temperatures.  Like  iron,  it  is 
attracted  by  the  magnet,  and  is  capable  of  being 


[  413  3 


rendered  permanently  magnetic.  When  fused 
on  charcoal,  and  acted  on  by  a  stream  of 
oxygene  gas  it  burns  briUiantly,  throwing  off 
bright  sparks. 

S.  Cobalt  combines  with  oxygene  ;  when  kept 
red  hot  for  some  time  it  becomes  covered  with 
a  dark  powder,  and  by  being  long  exposed  to 
air  in  a  state  of  intense  ignition,  it  is  entirely 
oxidated,  and  in  this  process,  according  to 
Klaproth,  100  grains  of  the  metal  became  118 
grains  of  oxide.    This  oxide  though  it  appears 
blackj  is  in  fact  deep  blue,  and  gives  this  tint 
to  glass.  It  seems  to  be  cobalt  in  its  first  state  of 
oxygenation,  and  when  dissolved  by  acids  and 
thrown  down  by  fixed  alkalies,  forms  the  basis 
of  «  kydrat  of  a  bright  blue  colour.  By  heating 
the  hy  drat  gently  in  the  air^  it  gradually  becomes 
black,  loses  its  water,  and  absorbs  oxygene. 
This  black  powder  has  the  property  of  decom- 
posing muriatic  acid  ;  its  excess  of  oxygene 
combines  with  the  hydrogene,  and  the  chlorine, 
is  set  free.   From  a  rude  experiment  I  am  in- 
clined to  conclude  that  the  oxygene  in  the  black 
powder  from  cobalt  is  to  that  in  the  blue  oxide 
as  2  to   3.    If  Klaproth's   experiments  be 
made  the  ground  work  of  calculation,  and  the 

r 

blue  oxide  be  considered  as  a  deutoxide,  theu 
the  number  representiog  cobalt  will  be  J  66,  and 
the  blue  oxide  will  consist  of  166  of  cobalt 
and  30  of  oxygene ;  and  the  black  oxide  of 


C  414  ] 

166  and  45.  Mr.  Thenard  states  that  there  is 
an  olive  oxide  of  cobalt,  produced  by  exposing 
the  blue  powder,  which  must  be  regarded 
as  a  hydrat,  to  air  at  common  temperatures. 
And  Mr.  Proust  has  stated  that  there  is  a  red 
Iiydrated  oxide  of  cobalt ;  it  is  probable  that 
this  last  is  a  compound  of  the  black  oxide  and 
water;  and  the  substance  supposed  by  Mh 
Thenard  to  be  an  olive  oxide,  a  mixture  of  the 
two  hydrates. 

4.  Cobalt  combines  with  chlorine  :  the  com- 
pound may  be  obtained  by  introducing  chlorine 
into  an  exhausted  retort  containing;  the  metal 
in  fine  powder  and  gently  heating  it  ;  a  combus- 
tion takes  place,  but  the  results  of  this  combus- 
tion have  not  yet  been  accurately  exarriinedi 

5.  Cobalt  is  not  known  to  enter  into  com- 
bination with  hydrogene,  azote,  carbon,  or 
boron. 

6.  Cobalt  combines  with  sulphur  and  phos- 
phorus, but  with  considerable  difficulty.  The 
sulphuret  is  formed  by  acting  on  oxide  of 
cobalt  in  a  state  of  ignition  by  sulphur,  and 
according  to  Proust,  it  consists  of  71. 5  parts 
cobalt  and  28.5  of  sulphur  ;  which  indicate 
uearly  one  proportion  of  metal  166,  and  two  of 
sulphur,  6o.  The  phospkuret  is  made  "by  drop- 
ping phosphorus  upon  ignited  cobalt ;  it  has 
not  been  minutely  examined,  nor  its  composi- 
tion ascertained. 


[  415  i 

7.  The  action  of  the  metals  of  the  alkalies 
and  earths  on  cobalt  has  not  been  examined. 

8.  There  are  no  accurate  experiments  onth^ 
€ombinalions  of  pure  cobalt  with  the  common 
metals.  Lead  unites  with  it,  as  Gmelin  has 
shewn,  and  forms  an  alloy  less  malleable  in 
proportion  as  it  contains  more  cobalt. 

9.  Cobalt  in  its  metallic  state  is  not  employed 
in  the  useful  arts.  In  its  state  of  combination, 
with  oxygene,  it  is  used  to  give  glass,  porce- 
lain, k.c.  a  rich  blue  colour.  One  grain  of  the 
pure  oxide  will  give  a  deep  tint  of  blue  to  240 
grains  of  glass.  The  solution  of  the  oxide  of 
cobalt  in  muriatic  acid,  forms  one  of  the  most 
beautiful  of  the  sympathetic  inks.  This  solution 
when  concentrated  is  pale  rose-coloured  in 
the  cold,  but  beomes  blue  green  when  heated; 
letters  or  figures  traced  by  it  upon  paper  are 
invisible  in  the  cold,  but  become  blue  ereen 
when  held  before  the  fire. 

£2.  Copper,  Cuprum. 

1  The  copper  of  commerce  is  procured  from 
the  native  combinations  of  this  metal  with  sul- 
phur, oxygene,  and  certain  acids,  by  roasting 
and  fusion  either  alane  or  with  lime  and  car- 
bonaceous substances  ;  it  is  not  however  quite 
pure.  To  obtain  it  in  a  state  of  purity— dis« 
solve  copper  in  strong  muriatic  acid,  dilute  the 


1416] 

solution  witii  water,  and  put  into  it  a  polished 
plate  of  iron,  the  copper  will  be  precipitated' 
in  its  metallic  state  :  it  should  be  washed 
in  dilute  muriatic  acid  and  then  with  pure 
water, 

2.  Copper  is  of  a  red  colour,  it  is  a  little  harder 
than  silver,  its  specific  gravity  is  about  8.89. 
When  rubbed  it  emits  an  unpleasant  smell,  and 
it  has  a  disagreeable  taste.  It  is  very  malieablet 
has  considerable  ductility,  and  in  tenacity  is  su- 
perior to  all  the  metals  except  iron;  it  fuses  at  a 
low  white  heat.  By  exposure  to  the  air  copper 
becomes  tarnished,  and  after  some  tijne  is  coated 
with  a  green  crust,  which  consists  of  the  metal 
in  union  with  oxygene  and  carbonic  acid. 
Copper  is  not  affected  by  being  kept  in  water, 
nor  does  it  decompose  this  fluid  at  any  tempe- 
rature.—It  burns  with  a  red  flame  edged  with 
green,  when  fused  and  acted  upon  by  oxygene, 
when  in  thin  leaves  it  inflames  spontaneously 
in  chlorine. 

3.  Two  compounds  are  known,  consisting  of 
oxygene  and  copper.  One  is  found  native,  and 
is  the  rub/  copper  ore.  It  occurs  in  octaedrons 
of  a  considerable  lustre,  its  powder  is  dull 
orange  red.  According  to  Mr.  Chenevix  it 
contains  11.5  per  cent,  of  oxygene  ;  according 
to  Mr.  J.  Davy  about  11  per  cent.  It  is  soluble 
in  solution  of  muriatic  acid  ;  and  when  this 


[  417  ] 


solution  is  precipitated,  a  pale  orange  coloured 
powder  falls  down,  which  is  this  oxide  united 
to  water.  The  other  oxide  of  copper  is  formed 
in  the  combustion  of  copper,  or  by  heating  the 
precipitate  from  a  nitrous  solution  of  copper  by 
potassa  to  redness.  It  is  a  black  powder,  and 
appears,  from  various  experiments,  to  contain 
about  20  per  cent,  of  oxygene;  when  it  is 
precipitated  from  acids  by  potassa  it  is  in 
combination  with  water,  and  is  then  pale  blue; 
a!id,  as  1  have  found,  contains  10  per  cent, 
of  water.  If  the  red  oxide  of  copper  be 
considered  as  a  protoxide  and  the  black  a 
deuloxide,  the  number  representing  copper 
will  be  120,  and  this  number  will  be  found  to 
correspond  accurately  with  that  gained  from 
the  analysis  of  the  other  combinations  of  the 

.metal.  The  number  representing  the  protoxide 
is  135  and  tiiat  representing  the  deutoxide  150, 
and  that  representing  the  blue  hydrat  I67. 

4.  As  there  are  two  combinations  of  copper 
and  oxygene,  so  there  are  likewise  two  com- 
binations of  this  metal  with  chlorine  ;  both  aie 

.produced  at  the  same  time,  by  the  combustion 
of  the  metal  in  chlorine  ;  one  is  a  fixed  easily 
fusible  substance,  like  rosin  in  its  exterior  cha- 

;  racters,  the  other  is  a  yellowish  sublimate.  The 
fii:st  of  these,  as  appears  froni  the  analysis  of 

■  Mr.  John  Davy,  consists  of  36  chlorine,  and 

5  VOL.    I.  E;  C:  ■ 


t  4iS  ] 


64  copper  ;  and  the  second  of  53  cblorhie  and 
47  copper  ;  the  first  may  be  called  cupraney  the 
second  cupranea.  Guprane  may  be  formed 
likewise  by  heating  strongly  together  a  ir^ixture 
of  one  part  of  copper  filings,  and  two  parts  of 
corrosive  sublimate  ;  and  it  was  in  this  way  first 
produced  by  Boyle,  who  appears  to  have  been 
its  discoverer.  Guprane  is  converted  into  cu- 
pranea by  being  heated  in  chlorine.  Guprane 
may  be  regarded  as  consisting  of  one  propor- 
tion of  copper  120,  and  one  of  chlorine  67  ; 
and  cupranea  of  one  of  copper  120,  and  two  of 
chlorine  134,  Cupiane  is  not  soluble  in  water, 
but  slowly  becomes  green  by  the  action  of  the 
atmosphere;  when  introduced  into  the  flame 
of  a  candle,  it  produces  a  most  beautiful  lio-ht 
possessing  almost  all  the  prismatic  colours. 
Cupranea  dissolves  in  water  and  givesit  a  o-reen- 
ish  colour  ;  it  is  decomposed  by  a  strong  heat, 
and  converted  into  cnpranej^y  the  expulsion 
of  oxygene. 

5.  Gopper  readily  combines  with  sulphur, 
producing  ignition  when  they  are  fused  to- 
gether; and  they  form  together  a  substance 
more  fusible  than  copper,  brittle,  and  of  a 
deep  gray  colour.  This  substance  is  likewise 
found  native,  and  according  to  the  analysis 
cf  Mr.  Ghenevix,  contains  about  19  per  cent» 
of  sulphur.  The  artificial  sulphuret  in  some 
synthetical  experiments  which  I  made  upon 


[  419  ] 

it,  appeared  to  contain  from  21  to  19  per 
cent.  It  may  therefore  be  regarded  as  com- 
posed of  one  proportion  of  copper  120,  and 
one  of  sulphur  30.  It  is  probable  that  a  saper- 
sulphuret  of  copper  may  exist:  some  of  the 
golden  coloured  copper  pyrites,  which  contain 
as  much  as  41  per  cent,  of  copper,  afford  from 
35  to  45  of  sulphur:  but  they  likewise  contain 
iron.  No  supersulphuret  has  as  yet  been  made 
artificially. 

6.  Copper  combines  with  phosphorus,  by 
fusion.  The  phosphiiret  is  of  a  white  colour  and 
very  brittle-,  its  specific  gravity  is  7.1220.  It 
Avas  first  formed  by  Margraaf,  According  to 
Pelktier  it  contains  20  per  cent,  of  phosphorus; 
and  allowing  this  estiaation  it  must  be  com- 
posed  of  two  proportions  of  metalj  and  three 
of  phosphorus,  240  and  60. 

7.  Copper  has  not  yet  been  combined  with 
hydogene,  azote,  carbon,  or  boron. 

S.  It  unites  to  the  fixed  alkaline  metals,  and 
to  all  the  common  metals  that  have  been  de^- 
scribed.  Some  of  its  alloys  with  the  common 
metals  are  well  known.  Copper  is  rendered 
yellowish  white  by  alloy  with  a  small  quantity 
of  manganesum.  United  to  zinc,  copper  pro- 
duces brass,  Dutch  gold,  Rupert's  metal,  and 
pinchbeck :  from  a  third  to  a  twelfth  of  zinc 
is  used ;  the  paler  the  alloy  required,  the 
larger  the  quantity  of  zjae. 


[  420  ] 

Copper  with  a  fourth  of  its  weight  of  lead, 
forms  pot  metal.  Copper  alloyed  with  from 
YT  -f  of  tin  forms  the  different  species  of 
bronze  and  bell-metal.  The  best  composition 
for  the  mirrors  of  reflecting  telescopes  is  a  com- 
bination of  32  parts  copper,  15  parts  tin,  1  part 
brass,  1  silver,  and  1  of  arsenic.  TiUcnag,  ac- 
cording  to  Keir,  is  a  white  alloy  of  copper,  zinc 
and  iron. 

9.  The  account  of  the  alloys  of  copper  proves 
its  importance  in  the  arts.  It  is  used  unalloyed 
likewise  for  various  important  purposes,  such  as 
sheathing  ol"  ships,  forming  vessels  when  united 
with  other  metals,  for  culinary  purposes,  See 
In  early  ages  the  alloys  of  copper  formed  the 
principal  arms  olFensive  and  defensive.  1  have 
examined  an  ancient  Attican  helmet  which 
consisted  of  an  alloy  of  copper  and  tin.  The 
swords  and  spear-heads  of  the  early  inhabitants 
of  Greece  and  Italy  seem  to  have  been  composed 
of  the  same  materials. 

All  the  saline  combinations  of  copper  are 
poisonous. 

23.  Mckel  or  Mickolim. 
JSlckel  was  discovered  by  Groastedt  in  J  751, 
and  examined  in  its  pure  state  by  Beigman,  in 
1773.  Nickel  exists  in  an  ore  called  kupfer- 
nickel  combined  chiefly  with  sulphur,  or  in 
nickel  ochre,  in  which  it  is  imited  to  osy^ene. 
The  metal  may  be  obtained  from  these  ores  by 


[  m  ] 


roastmg  and  ignition  with  charcoal ;  but  in  this 
case  it  is  far  from  being  pure.  Piwe  nickel,  or, 
at  least  nickel  free  from  any  other  metallic  sub- 
stance, may  he  procured  by  nearly  the  same 
process  as  cobalt.  The  precipitate  from  the 
aramoniacal  solution  by  solution  of  potassa, 
contains  the  nickel,  and  this  precipitate  must 
he  intensely  heated  with  charcoal  powder. 

2.  Nickel  is  of  a  white  colour,  and  possesses 
considerable  lustre  ;  its  hardness  is  little  in- 
ferior to  that  of  iron:  its  specific  gravity  is 
about 8. 3S,  but  when  forged  it  increases  to 
8.82.  It  is  ductile  and  malleable.  It  requires 
a  stronger  heat  for  its  fusion  than  iron — like  that 
metal  it  is  attracted  by  the  magnet.  When  in 
fusion  it  burns  like  iron  under  a  stream  of 
oxygene  gns. 

S.  Nickel  when  intensely  ignited,  exposed 
to  air,  becomes  a  dark  brown  powder,  which 
is  still  attractable  by  the  magnet.  Its  solution 
in  nitric  acid  decomposed  by  pptassa  affords  a 
pale  grass  green  hydrated  oxide,  which  contains 
more  than  a  fourth  of  its  weight  of  water,  and 
which  when  heated  to  dull  redness  becomes  an 
oxide  of  a  pale  ash  gray  colour,  and  which, 
according  to  Tupputi,  is  composed  of  21.2  parts 
of  oxygene,  and  78.8  of  metal  ;  this  oxide  by 
strong  ignition  becomes  darker  coloured,  but 
wheri  pure  cannot  be  reduced  to  the  metallic 
state  by  heat  alone.    Another  oxide  of  nickel 


[mi 

lias  been  described  by  M,  Tlienard  containing 
more  oxygene.  It  may  be  procured  by  acting 
on  the  hydrat  of  nickel  by  the  salts  called  hy- 
peroxymnriates ;  it  is  of  a  black  colour ;  its 
composition  has  not  been  accurately  ascertained. 
From  the  nature  of  the  compounds  of  nickel 
and  sulphur,  to  be  discussed  immediately,  it 
seems  probable  that  the  gray  oxide  is  a  deut- 
oxide ;  and  if  this  be  allowed,  the  number  re- 
presenting nickel  will  be  111,  and  the  gray 
oxide  will  be  represented  by  two  proportions  of 
oxyg,ene  SO  added  to  one  proportion  of  metal. 

4.  Nickel  when  strongly  healed  in  chlorine, 
smokes  and  produces  an  olive  coloured  sub- 
stance ;  but  the  composition  of  this  substance 
has  not  been  ascertained,  nor  its  properties  ex- 
amined. When  muriate  of  nickel  is  decora- 
posed  by  heat  some  white  brilliant  scales  are 
formed,  which,  as  appears  from  experiments 
made  by  Mr.  E.  Davy,  consist  of  nickel  and 
chlorine;  but  their  composition  has  not  been 
exactly  ascertained. 

Sulphur  combines  with  nickel  by  fusion, 
and  forms  a  bright  gray  sulphuret,  possessing 
metallic  lustre.  From  experiments  made  on  this 
mlphuret  by  Mr.  E.  Davy,  it  appears  to  contain 
about  34  per  cent,  of  sulphur,  which  gives  pro-^ 
portions  corresponding  nearly  to  one  propor- 
tion of  metal  111  and  two  of  sulphur  60,  and 
harmonizes  with  the  supposition  that  the  olire 


[  423  ] 

oxide  is  a  deutoxide.  Tlie  same  enquirer  states 
that  there  is  a  supersulpliuretj  which  may  be 
formed  by  heating  the  gray  oxide  with  sulphur,, 
and  which  contains  about  56.5  of  nickel  to  43-5i 
of  sulphur,  and  which  agrees  nearly  with  one 
proportion  of  metal  to  three  of  sulphur. 

6.  Fhosphuret  of  nickel  may  be  formed  by 
causing  phosphorus  in  vapour  to  act  on  me- 
tallic nickel  in  ignition ;  the  phosphuret  is 
almost  black  and  has  metallic  lustre.  Its  compo- 
sition has  not  as  yet  been  accurately  determined, 

7.  Some  specimens  of  nickel  alFord  carbon 
during  their  solution  in  acids ;  but  no  definite 
compound  of  carbon  and  the  metal  has  been 
obtained.  Nickel  has  not  yet  been  combined 
with  hydrogene,  azote,  or  boron,  nor  have 
any  accurate  experiments  been  made  on  its 
action  on  the  metals  of  the  fixed  alkalies. 

8.  It  forms  alloys  with  some  of  the  common 
metals  ;  but  few  of  these  compounds  have  been 
examined  with  attention  :  with  tin  it  produces 
awhite  brittle  compound.  Its  alloy  with  copper 
is  less  ductile  than  pure  copper,  and  is  slightly 
inaffnetic.  Its  combination  with  iron  is  the 
most  interesting  of  these  compounds ;  these 
metals  seem  to  unite  in  ail  proportions ;  the 
colour  of  the  alloy  approaches  nearer  to  that 
of  silver  in  proportion  as  the  nickel  prevails, 
and  the  iron  retains  its  malleability.  In  all  the 
meteoric  stones  that  have  been  examined  it  is 


[  m  ] 

remarkable  that  tlie  iron  is  alloyed  by  froiir 
1.5  to  17  per  cent,  of  nickel.  The  masses 
of  iron  found  in  Siberia  and  Soutli  America 
contain  nickel,  and  there  is  the  strongest  pro*- 
habiiity  that  they  are  likewise  of  meteoric 
origin.  The  alloy  of  iron  and  nickel  is  much 
Jess  liable  to  rust  than  common  iron,  and  it 
is  likely  may  be  advantageously  applied  in  the 
useful  arts.  The  oxide  of  nickel  is  employed 
to  give  colours  to  enamels  and  porcelain;  iii 
different  mixtures  it  produces  brown  red,  and 
grass  wreen  tints, 

24.  Uranium 

1.  Uranium  was  discovered  by  Klaproth  In 
1  789.  It  may  be  procured  from  the  ores  Cxilled 
Pechblende,  and  Uranochre,  by  the  following 
process.  Let  the  ores  be  boiled  in  moderately 
diluted  nitric  acid,  and  solution  of  sulphate  of 
soda  added,  and  the  precipitate,  if  any,  separated. 
The  clear  solution  is  to  be  acted  on  by  solution 
of  potassa,  the  precipitate  digested  in  ammonia, 
and  the  residuum  heated  with  strong  nitric  acid, 
and  evaporated  to  dryness.  The  clear  solution 
obtained  from  the  mass  by  pure  water  whep 
precipitated  by  solution  of  potassa  will  afford 
a  yellow  powder,  and  this  made  into  a  ball 
with  wax,  and  intensely  ignited  in  a  crucible  of 
charcoal,  affords  metallic  uranium. 

^,  Uranium  i$  of  an  iron  gray  colour  and  h^s 


[  425  ] 

considerable  lustre  ;  it  is  hard  and  brittle.  Its 
specific  gravity,  according  to  Klaproth,  is  8.1, 
its  fusing  point  is  higher  than  that  of  manga- 
nesum.  It  undergoes  no  change  by  exposure  to 
air,  but  when  heated  strongly,  burns,  combines 
with  oxygene,  and  assumes  a  blackish  colour. 

3.  Two  compounds  of  uranium  and  oxygene 
have  been  examined  by  Klaproth  ;  the  preci- 
pitate thrown  down  from  the  solution  of  ura- 
nium in  nitric  acid  when  heated  to  dull  redness 
is  still  yellow,  and  this  treated  with  oil  and  in- 
cinerated slightly,  so  as  to  burn  off  the  oil, 
becomes  a  black  oxide.  It  appears  probable 
from  Bucholz's  experiments,  that  the  oxygene 
in  the  black  oxide  is  to  that  in  the  yellow  as 
1  to  3,  and  that  the  yellow  oxide  contains  about 
80  of  metal  and  20  of  oxgene.  I  found  that  8 
parts  of  potassa  precipitated  8.2  parts  of  yellow 
oxide  of  uranium  from  the  saturated  nitrous 
solution;  and  from  this  experiment,  if  potassa 
and  the  yellow  oxide  of  uranium  be  supposed 
analogous  in  composition,  76.8  will  be  the  num- 
ber for  the  metal,  and  the  black  oxide  must  be 
a  compound  of  three  proportions  of  metal  with 
one  of  oxygene.  The  substance  that  has  been 
called  the  native  oxide,  and  which  is  crystallizeiJ 
in  quadrangular  plates,  is,  I  find,  a  hydraied 
oxide.  Bucholz  supposes  that  there  are  several 
different  oxides  of  uranium  ;  but  he  founds  his 
opinion  upon  the  different  colours  of  precipi- 


[  426  ] 

tates,  wliich  may  be  mixtures  of  hydrates  of  the 
two  oxides. 

4.  No  experiments  have  as  yet  been  mada 
Oil  the  action  of  uranium  on  chlorine,  hydro- 
gene,  azote,  boron,  the  metals  of  the  fixed  alka- 
lies, or  the  common  metals. 

5.  A  sulphuret  of  uranium  may  be  procured 
by  igniting  the  oxide  with  sulphur.  It  is  a 
"black  heavy  powder :  its  composition  has  not 
been  ascertained. 

6.  Uranium  has  been  hitherto  found  in  quan- 
tities too  small  to  render  it  applicable  to  the 
purposes  of  the  arts.  Its  oxides  give  bright 
colours  to  glass,  which  according  to  the  propor- 
tions are  brown,  apple  green,  or  emerald  green. 

2§.  Osmium. 

1.  This  metallic  substance  was  discovered  by- 
Mr.  Tennantin  I8O4.  it  may  be  obtained  from 
crude  platina,  by  dissolving  all  the  soluble 
parts  in  aqua  regia,  and  distilling  the  black 
powder  that  remains  with  nitre,  at  a  heat  under 
redness  ;  a  sublimate  rises,  which  is  soluble  in 
water.  When  mercury  is  shaken  with  the  so- 
lution, an  amalgam  is  formed,  and  by  distilling 
off  the  mercury,  pure  osmium  is  obtained. 

2.  This  metal  has  been  procured  only  in  very 
minute  quantities ;  it  is  of  a  dark  blue  colour,  has 
not  been  fused,  nor  does  it  undergo  any  change 
at  the  most  intense  hsat  unless  in  contact  with 
air,  when  it  is  converted  into  a  volatile  o^ide. 


S.  The  composition  of  the  oxide  of  osmmm 
has  not  been  ascertained ;  it  is  a  solid  semi- 
transparent  substance,  having  a  sweet  taste  and 
a  strong  smell :  it  is  soluble  in  water,  combines 
with  potassa,  and  makes  witli  it  an  orange  solu- 
tion in  water.  It  tinges  the  skin  of  a  dark  colour; 
and  produces  a  purple  with  solution  of  galls. 

4.  No  corabirtationsof  osmium  with  any  of  ths 
undecompounded  substances  described  in  the 
foregoing  sections  except  that  with  oxygene 
have  been  examined.  The  metal  is  not  soluble 
in  any  of  the  acids  ;  but  when  fused  with  the  hy- 
drat  of  potassa  becomes  oxidated  and  combines 
with  the  potassa.  It  is  a  metal  very  easily  re- 
duced, being  precipitated  from  the  aqueous 
solution  of  the  oxide  by  ether  or  alcohol, 

26.  'Tungsten  or  Tungstenuni. 
1.  Tungstenum  is  obtained  from  a  mineral 
known  by  the  name  wolfram;  it  contains  the 
oxides  of  tungsten,  iron,  and  manganese,  with 
earthy  matter.  To  procure  the  metal  pure,  boil 
finely  pulverised  wolfram  in  strong  muriatic  acid 
for  some  time;  separate  the  solution  ;  the  resi- 
duum contains  a  yellow  powder;  it  is  to  be 
washed,  dissolved  in  ammonia,  evaporated  to 
dryness,  then  mixed  with  a  little  fine  charcoal 
powder,  and  exposed  to  a  very  intense  heat  fot 
about  ^0  minutes  in  a  covered  hcssian  crucible. 
Small  grains  of  pure  tungstenura  will  be  found 
^t  thebotlom  of  the  crucible. 


[  428  ] 


Tungstenum  in  its  metallic  form  was  first 
procured  by  Messrs.  D'EIhuyars,  in  1782. 

5.  Tungstenum  is  of  a  grayish  white  colour, 
and  has  considerable  lustre.  Il  is  hard  and 
rather  brittle.  Its  specific  gravity  is  about  I  7.3. 
It  requires  the  strongest  heat  of  a  forge  for  its 
fusion.  It  is  scarcely  affected  by  exposure  to  air 
at  common  temperatures.  At 'a  temperature 
below  redness  its  surface  exhibits  iridescent 
colours  like  iron» 

3.    Tungstenum  combines  with  oxygene. 
When  the  metal  in  fine  powder  is  heated  to 
rednessj  it  soon  acquires  a  yellow  colour,  and  is 
gradually  converted  into  a  yellow  oxide,  which  is 
not  soluble  in  water.   Its  specific  gravity  is  61?, 
water  being  100.    It  is  very  difficultly  fusible. 
According  to  Messrs.  D'EIhuyars  lOO  grains  of 
metal  by  calcination  form  124  grains  of  yellow- 
oxide.    Supposing  the  oxide  a  deutoxide,  this 
result  would  give  the  number  representinq; 
tungstenum  as  125,  and  the  number  represent- 
ing the  yellow  oxide  as  155.    Taking  Klaproth's 
analysis  of  the  combination  of  tungstic  acid  and 
lime,*  as  the  basis  of  calculation,  and  supposing 
double  proportions  of  the  oxide  to  one  propor- 
tion  of  lime,  the  number  representing  the  yellow 
oxide  will  be  124.    From  this  it  is  probabje 
that  in  D'EIhuyars'  experiments  the  metal  was 
not  entirely  converted  into  oxide;  and  that 
•  17  of  lime,  77  of  tungstic  oxide. 


[  429  ] 


the  number  is  about  94  ;  but  new  experi- 
ments are  wanting  to  elucidate  this  point. 
When  the  yellow  oxide  of  tungstenum  is  di- 
gested with  solution  of  tin  in  muriatic  acid,  it 
becomes  blue  from  loosing  oxygene.  It  is  pro- 
bable that  in  this  state  it  is  a  protoxide,  but  nO 
accurate  researches  have  been  made  on  this  blue 
substance. 

4.  Tungstenum,  I  have  found,  burns  with  a 
deep  red  light  when  heated  in  chlorine,  and 
forms  an  orange  coloured  volatile  substance, 
which  affords  the  vellow  oxide  of  tunp-stenura, 
and  muriatic  acid,  when  decomposed  by  water.  I 
have  made  no  experiments,  nor  are  any,  I  believe, 
on  record  on  the  composition  oi'  liingsteuaiie. 

5.  Sulphur  and  phosphorus  are  both  capable 
of  being  combined  with  tungstenum  by  being 
made  to  act  upon  it  in  a  state  of  ignition ;  but 
the  properties  of  the  sidphuret  and  phosphuret 
have  not  been  examined  accurately. 

6.  Tills  substance  has  not  been  combined 
with  hydrogene,  azote,  carbon,  boron,  or  the 
metals  of  the  fixed  alkalies.  From  the  experi' 
menls  of  Messrs.  D'Elhuyars,  it  appears  to 
unite  with  most  of  the  common  metals;  but  its 
alloys  have  been  only  rudely  examined. 

7.  Tungstenum  and  its  oxides  have  as  yet 
been  applied  to  no  uses :  it  was  stated  by  Guylon 

^    de  Morveau  that  the  yellow  oxide  formed  a 
mordant  useful  in  dyeing  ;  that  the  red  juices 


t  430  ] 

of  fmils  \vQVQ  fixed  by  it,  so  as  to  make  per-* 
manent  and  beautiful  lakes,  The  dyers  who  have 
tried  the  experiments  in  this  country  have  not, 
however,  given  a  favourable  report  of  the  results, 

27.  Tilanium. 

1.  Titanium  is  obtained  from  a  mineral  lonir 
known  by  the  name  of  red  schorl,  or  titanite. 
The  mineral  in  powder  is  to  be  fused  with  five 
or  six  times  its  weight  of  subcarbonate  of  po- 
tassa  ;  the  mass  is  to  be  fully  exposed  to  the 
action  of  water,  and  the  solid  matter  remaininfr 
digested  and  boiled  with  muriatic  acid.  The 
white  powder  not  dissolved,  when  mixed  with 
oil,  and  intensely  heated  in  a  crucible  of  char- 
coal, affords  titanium.  The  oxide  of  titanium 
was  discovered  by  Mr.  Gregor,  in  1781,  in  an. 
ore  found  in  the  valley  of  Menachan  in  Corn- 
wal ;  but  metallic  titanium  was  not  produced 
till  1796,  by  Vauquelin  and  Hecht. 

2.  Little  is  known  concerning  the  physical 
^and  chemical  properties  of  litanhm;  it  has 
only  been  procured  in  minute  quantities,  and 
in  an  imperfectly  reduced  state.  Its  colour 
resembles  that  of  copper.  It  has  much  lustre. 
It  is  brittle.  It  tarnishes  by  exposure  to  air; 
and  requires  the  most  intense  keat  of  a  forge 
even  for  its  imperfect  fusion. 

3.  Titanium  combines  with  oxygene  when  it 
is  exposed  to  heat  in  the  atmosphere,  and  ac- 
quires a  blue  colour.    The  red  oxide,  whicli 


Corttams  a  larger  proportion  of  oxygene,  is 
found  in  the  mineral  kingdom.  There  is  a  pow- 
der of  a  white  colour  procured  by  fusing  the 
fed  oxide  with  potash.  This  has  been  supposed 
to  be  a  peruxide,  but  is  probably  an  hydrate^ 
oxide;  no  precise  experiments  have  been  made 
on  the  composition  of  these  bodies.  This  white 
powder  is  insoiuble  in  acid  and  alkaline  solu- 
tions: and  becomes  yellow  by  being  heated. 

4'  The  combination  of  titanium  with  chlorine 
has  not  yet  been  made. 

5.  Titanium  is  not  known  to  combjiie  witl^ 
hydiogene,  azote,  carbon,  or  boron. 

6.  Titanium  has  not  yet  been  combined  witih 
-sulphur.  It  enters  into  union  with  phosphorus. 
The  phosphuret  is  brittle,  and  has  metallic 
lustre.  Its  composition  has  not  been  determined. 

7.  The  agency  of  the  metals  of  the  alkalies 
on  titanium  has  not  been  examined.  It  has 
not  been  combined  with  any  of  the  common 
metals  ej^cept  iron  ;  and  this  aiioy  is  not  cha- 
racterised by  any  remarkable  properties. 

8.  Titanium  has  not  been  employed  in  the 
arts  except  for  one  purpose;  its  oxide  has  been 
used  at  Sevres  in  the  manufacture  of  porcelain^ 
to  impart  a  brown  colour. 

28.  Coliimbium. 
1.   Columbium  exists  in  an  ore  brono-hJ* 
from  North  America,  of  a  black  colour;  and 
likewise  In  two  substances  found  in  Sweden 


t  43^  ] 


called  tantalite  and  ittrotantalite.  The  metal 
may  be  procured  by  igniting  the  ores  with 
hydrated  fixed  alkali;  and  saturating  the  alkali 
with  nitric  acid,  a  white  powder  falls  down. 
This  powder  was  first  obtained  by  Mr.  Hatchett 
from  the  American  specimen,  in  1S()2:  and 
soon  after  the  same  substance  was  procured  by 
Ekeberg  from  the  Swedish  mineral,  and  Con- 
sidered by  him  as  a  new  substance.  Dr.  Wol- 
laston,  in  1810,  demonstrated  the  identity  of 
the  two  bodies, 

2.  The  white  powder  combines  with  alkalies 
and  metallic  oxides,  and  reddens  litmus  paper. 
Hence  Mr.  Hatchett  named  it  columbic  acid» 
Attempts  were  made  to  reduce  it  by  ignition 
with  charcoal,  in  the  same  manner  as  the  oxide 
of  titanium,  but  without  success;  it  became  black, 
but  did  not  acquire  the  metallic  lustre.  By 
passing  potassium  in  vapour  ilirough  the  white 
powder,  heated  to  redness,  I  found  that  the 
potassium  became  converled  into  potassa,  and 
a  dark  coloured  brilliant  powder,  like  plumbago, 
■yvas  produced.  This  is  probably  the  metallic 
basis  yf  the  substance,  or  pure  columbium, 

3.  .  No  experiments  have  been  made  upon 
the  combinations  of  this  substance.  The  white 
powder  is  soluble  in  boiling  sulphuric  acid ; 
and  it  is  precipitated  from  its  solution  of  an 
olive  colour  by  triple  prussiale  of  potash,  and 
of  a  bright  orange  by  solution  of  galls. 


[  433  ] 


29.  Cerium, 

1.  There  is  a  mineral  found  at  RIdderhytta 
in  Sweden,  very  like  tungsten,  of  a  reddish 
colour,  and  which  has  been  called  cerite.  From 
this  substance,  Hissinger  and  Berzelius,  in. 
1804,  extracted  a  brown  powder,  having  the 
characters  of  a  metallic  oxide,  and  which  they 
named  oo'ide  of  cerium.  To  procure  this  pow- 
der, the  ore  is  digested  with  solution  of  nitro- 
muriatic  acid  ;  and  the  solution  obtained  eva- 
porated to  dryness,  and  heated  with  a  little 
muriatic  acid  ;  the  solution  so  procured  is  to  be 
precipitated  by  solution  of  ammonia,  the  preci- 
pitate redissolved  in  muriatic  acid,  and  acted 
upon  by  solution  of  hydrosulphuret  of  potassa; 
the  clear  liquor,  precipitated  by  solution  of 
carbonate  of  potassa  in  excess,  affords  a  white 
powder,  which,  when  heated  to  redness,  affords 
the  br  own  oxide  of  cerium. 

2,  Cetium  had  not  been  obtained  in  the  me- 
tallic form  till  I  succeeded  in  reducing  some 
oxide  sent  me,  by  M.  Berzelius,  by  means  of 
potassium^  poiasda  was  formed,  and  a  deep 
gray  metallic  powder,  which  became  brov/n  by 
oxidation. 

S.  When  the  brown  oxide  of  cerium  is  di- 
gested in  the  mineral  acids,  it  becomes  dissol- 
ved;, and  is  thrown  down  from  those  solutions 

VOL.  I  F  f 


C  434  3 


by  alkalies^,  as  a  white  powder:  it  is  supposed 
that  this  powder  contains  less  oxygene  than 
the  brown  oxide ;  but  it  is  probably  a  hjdrat. 
As  yet,  no  experiments  have  been  made  either 
on  the  composition  of  the  brown  oxide,  or  the 
white  powder. 

4.  No  researches  have  as  yet  been  made  on 
the  combinations  of  cerium  with  the  other  un- 
decompounded  bodies.  The  solutions  of  cerium 
are  not  precipitated  by  solutions  of  galls  ;  they 
give  a  white  precipitate  with  the  triple  prussiate 
ofpotassa. 

30.  Palladium. 

1.  Palladium  was  discovered  by^Dr,  Wollas- 
ton,  in  1803.  It  exists  in  the  ores  of  platinum, 
both  those  from  Peru  and  the  Brazils.  It  may 
be  procured  by  dissolving  crude  platina  in  aqua 
regia,  and  precipitating  the  saturated  solution 
by  solution  of  prussiate  of  mercury.  The  pre- 
cipitate, washed,  dried,  and  exposed  to  a  strong 
heat,  is  converted  into  palladium. 

2.  The  colour  of  palladium  is  white,  resem* 
bling  that  of  platinum.  Its  hardness  is  rather 
greater  than  that  of  bar  iron.  Its  specific  gravity 
varies  from  11.3  to  11.8.  It  is  very  malleable,  but 
has  little  ductility.  It  fuses  at  a  high  tempera- 
ture; but  the  precise  point  has  not  been  deter- 
mined.    It  is  not  alfectcd  by  air  or  water  at 


i  435  ] 


common  temperatures.  When  it  is  heated 
strongly,  its  surface  acquires  a  blue  colour. 

3.  Palladium  combines  with  oxygene  and 
chlorine  by  heat ;  but  neither  its  oxides  nor 
its  combinations  with  chlorine  have  as  yet  been 
examined.  Dissolved  in  nitric  acid  it  forms  a 
beautiful  red  solution,  from  which  the  alkalies 
throw  down  an  orange  coloured  powder,  which 
probably  is  a  hjdrated  oxide. 

4.  Palladium  readily  combines  with  sulphut 
when  they  are  heated  together  in  a  glass  tube. 
The  sulphuret  is  rather  paler  than  the  metal, 
and  very  brittle:  in  an  experiment  that  I  made, 
6.1  grains  of  palladium  gained  1.5  grains,  by 
being  converted  into  the  sulphuret;  and  suppos- 
ing the  sulphuret  to  consist  of  one  proportion 
of  metal,  and  one  of  sulphur,  the  number  repre- 
senting palladium  will  be  1 34. 

5.  Palladium  seems  to  have  no  action  oft 
hydrogene,  azote,  or  carbon.  Its  relations  of 
attraction  to  boron,  and  the  metals  of  the  fixed 
alkalies,  have  not  yet  been  examined.  It  forms 
alloys  with  most  of  the  common  metals;  but 
the  properties  of  these  compounds  have  not 
been  examined  with  attention. 

Palladium  has  not  as  yet  been  found  in  sulK- 
cient  quantities  to  be  applied  to  the  purposes 
ol'  the  arts. 


[  436  ] 


31.  Iridium. 

1.  Iridium  was  discovered,  in  1803,  by  Mr. 
Tennant ;  before  Mr.  Tennant  had  published 
his  experiments,  it  was  likewise  discovered  by 
M.  Descotils. 

Iridium  exists  in  minute  quantity  in  the  crude 
ore  of  platina.  To  obtain  it,  the  black  powder 
(remaining  after  the  solution  of  the  ore  of  platina 
in  nitro  muriatic  acid)  is  to  be  mixed  with  about 
five  times  its  weight  of  pure  soda,  and  heated 
to  redness  in  a  silver  crucible  for  about  30 
minutes.  The  dry  mass  is  to  be  dissolved  in 
diluted  muriatic  acid,  and  the  undissolved  re- 
siduum is  to  be  alternately  treated  with  alkali 
and  acid ;  by  which  means  it  will  be  all  taken 
up.  The  solution,  containing  an  excess  of  mu- 
riatic acid,  is  to  be  evaporated  to  dryness,  re- 
dissolved  in  pure  water,  and  slowly  evaporated, 
so  long  as  any  octohedral  crystals  form.  These 
crystals  are  muriate  of  iridium,  and  are  reduced 
to  the  metallic  state  by  exposing  them  for  a  short 
time  to  an  elevated  temperature  in  a  platinum 
crucible. 

2.  Little  is  known  concerning  the  properties 
of  this  metal.  Iridium  is  of  a  white  colour.  It 
is  brittle ;  and  required  for  its  fusion  a  most  in- 
tense heat:  it  im  probable  that  its  specific  gravity 
is  higher  than  that  of  platinum.    It  is  not  acted 


[  437  ] 


upon  by  oxygene  even  when  heated  to  white- 
ness. From  its  relations  to  muriatic  acid,  which 
dissolves  it,  it  seems  that  it  is  capable  of  unit- 
ing to  chlorine. 

3.  Iridium  has  not  been  combined  with  hy- 
drogene,  azote,  sulphur,  phosphorus,  carbon,  or 
boron,  or  the  metals  of  the  alkalies.  It  unites 
to  lead  ;  and  forms  a  malleable  alloy  with 
copper.  Dr.  WoUaston  has  found  amongst  the 
grains  of  crude  platina  small  white  particles  of 
specific  gravity  19.25;  which  consist  of  indium 
alloyed  with  osmium,  and  no  other  metallic 
substance.  The  osmium  may  be  oxidated  by 
the  water  in  hydrat  of  potassa,  and  united  with 
the  potassa  ;  and  the  iridium  combined  with 
chlorine  by  treatment  with  muriatic  acid,  and 
thus  dissolved. 

S2.  Rhodium. 

1.  Rhodium  was  obtained  by  Dr.  Wollastoa, 
in  1804,  from  the  ore  of  piatina,  by  the  follow- 
ing process.  The  ore  is  dissolved  in  dilute 
aquaregia;  a  solution  of  sal  ammoniac  is  added ; 
the  clear  liquor,  separated  from  the  precipitate, 
is  acted  on  by  a  rod  of  zinc.  By  the  zinc,  a 
black  powder  is  thrown  down,  which  is  washed 
with  very  diluted  nitric  acid.  This  black  pow- 
der is  redissolved  in  dilute  aqua  regia;  to  this 


[  438  ] 

solution  some  common  salt  is  added;  the  wbole 
is  then  evaporated  to  dryness,  and  wi*shed  by 
alcohol,  till  it  has  dissolved  all  the  soluble  mat- 
ter; there  remains  behind  a  deep  red  substance, 
which,  when  dissolved  in  water,  and  acted  on 
by  a  rod  of  zinc,  affords  a  metallic  powder, 
which,  intensely  ignited  with  borax,  gives  a 
metallic  button  of  rhodium, 

2.  The  specific  gravity  of  rhodium  exceeds 
1 L  Its  colour  approaches  to  that  of  silver,  with 
a  tint  of  yellow.  It  is  not  acted  upon  by  nitric 
or  sulphuric  acids.  It  is  not  known  whether 
it  combines  with  oxygene;  but  solution  of 
potassa  throws  down  a  yellow  coloured  powder 
from  the  red  crystals  obtained  by  dissolving  in 
water,  the  powder  left  after  the  washing  by 
alcohol,  and  evaporating,  so  as  to  permit  crys^ 
tallization.  From  the  action  of  nitro-muriatic 
acid  on  rhodium,  it  is  probable  that  it  combines 
with  chlorine. 

3.  Rhodium  unites  with  sulphur,  and  is  ren- 
dered easily  fusible  by  it.  It  likewise  combines 
with  lead,  copper,  and  bismuth ;  and  its  alloys 
are  easily  soluble  in  nitro-muriatic  acid. 

33.  Mercury,  or  Merciirium. 

1.  Mercury  has  been  known  from  the  earliest 
ageji  of  the  world.    It  is  found  native  in  the 


[  439  ] 

mines  ofldria,  Spain,  and  Peru;  and  likewise 
combined  with  sulphur  in  cinnabar,  from  which 
it  is  separated  by  distillation  with  quicklime 

2.  Mercury  is  of  the  specific  gravity  1-^.56. 
Its  colour  is  a  brilliant  white-  It  is  fluid  at  the 
common  temperature  of  the  air;  and  becomes  a 
solid  at  39°  below  0  of  Fahrenheit's  scale:  at 
about  660°  it  boils.  It  is  capable  of  being  burnt 
when  the  Voltaic  flame  is  made  to  act  upon 
it,  and  it  produces  a  brilliant  greenish  lig,ht: 
its  capacity  for  heat  has  been  referred  to 
page  77. 

3.  There  are  two  well  known  compounds  of 
mercury  and  oxygene,  one  black  and  the  other 
red  ;  the  first  may  be  made  by  keeping  mercury 
long  in  agitation,  as,  for  instance,  by  fastening 
it  in  a  bottle  containing  much  air,  to  a  mill 
wheel.  The  second  is  produced  by  keeping 
it  heated  in  the  atmosphere  for  a  long  while, 
nearly  at  its  boiling  point.  The  black  oxide 
of  mercury  may  be  likewise  made  by  acting  on 
calomel  by  solution  of  potassa  ;  and  the  red 
oxide  by  acting  on  corrosive  sublimate  by  the 
same  substance,  and  gently  heating  the  pre- 
cipitates after  they  are  washed.  The  black 
oxide  changes  when  gendy  heated  in  the  air, 
and  becomes  the  red  oxide.  Both  the  black 
and  the  red  oxides  of  mercury  are  decomposed 
by  a  strong  heat ;  the  mercury  revived  and 
oxygene  liberated ;  from  experiments  on  their 


[  440  ] 

decomposition  I  ascertained  that  the  quantity 
of  mercury  being  the  same,  the  red  oxide  eon- 
tamed  exactly  twice  as  much  oxygene  as  the 
hJack  ;  and  my  results  give  the  number  repre- 
senting mercury  about  380,  the  protoxide  or 
black  oxide  as  composed  of  380  mercury  and 
15  oxygene,  and  the  red  oxide  or  deutoxide  as 
constituted  by  38O  metal  and  30  oxygene.  It 
has  not  yet  been  ascertained  whether  these 
oxides  can  be  combined  with  water,  so  as  to 
form  hydrates. 

4.  Mercury  combines  with  chlorine  :  when 
the  metal  is  heated  in  the  gas  ;  it  burns  with  a 
pale  red  flame,  and  the  substance  called  corro- 
sive sublimate  is  formed.  When  corrosive  sub- 
limate is  long  rubbed  with  mercury  till  they 
afe  incorporated  together,  and  the  mass  sub- 
limed, the  substance  called  calomel  is  formed. 
I  have  found  by  a  minute  analysis,  that  the 
quantity  of  chlorine  in  calomel  is  to  that  in 
corrosive  sublimate  as  1  to  2,  the  quantity  of 
mercurvbeiniT  the  same  in  both.  Calomel  is  taste- 
less,  corrosive  sublimate  has  an  acrid  burning 
taste;  calomel  is  insoluble,  corrosive  sublimate 
soluble  in  water.  Calomel,  according  to  my  ana- 
lysis, consists  of  one  proportion  of  mercury  3SO, 
and  one  proportion  of  chlorine  67.  Corrosive 
sublimate  of  3S0  metal,  and  134  chlorine.  The 
names  tnercurane  and  mercurana^  which  may 
be  adopted  to  signify  the  relations  of  their  com- 


[  441  ] 


position,  are  too  similar  to  each  other  to  be 
safely  used  as  familiar  appellations  for  the  two 
substances,  as  corrosive  sublimate  is  a  powerful 
poison,  calomel  an  excellent  medicine. 

5.  Sulphur  and  mercury  readily  combine 
by  fusion  ;  three  parts  of  mercury  and  one  of 
sulphur  melted  together,  heated  to  redness, 
and  then  sublimed  out  of  the  contact  of  air, 
afford  a  cake  of  a  fine  red  colour,  called  cin- 
nabar^ and  known  in  commerce  under  the  name 
of  vermilion.    It  seems  from  the  experiments 
made  on  this  substance,  that  it  contains  one  pro- 
portion of  mercury,  and  two  of  sulphur.  When 
sulphur  and  mercury  are  heated  strongly  toge- 
ther, but  not  to  sublimation,  a  black  mass  is  ob- 
tained, which  has  been  called  Ethiops  mineral. 
It  is  probable  that  this  substance  contains  a 
larger  quantity  of  sulphur  than  cinnabar,  but  its 
composition  has  never  been  ascertained,  and  it  is 
always  converted  into  cinnabar  by  sublimation. 
The  specific  gravity  of  cinnabar  is  about  10, 
that  of  Ethiops  is  less:  both  these  substances 
are  easily  decomposed  by  any  metal  having  a 
stronger  affinity  for  sulphur  ;  when  heated  with 
iron  filings,  for  instance,  the  sulphur  combines 
with  the  iron,  the  mercury  rises  in  vapour  and 
condenses.  , 

6.  I  have  made  a  combination  of  phospho- 
rus and  mercury,  by  strongly  heating  together 


C  442  ] 

p^sosphorus  and  calomel.  It  is  of  a  chocolate 
colour,  and  not  fusible  at  the  boiling;  point  of 
mercury,  I  have  made  no  experiments  on  its 
composition. 

7.  No  combinafions  have  as  yet  been  effected 
of  mercury  with  hydrogene,  azote,  charcoal,  or 
boron. 

8.  Mercury  unites  readily  with  potassium 
and  sodium,  and  forms  solid  alloys  ;  the  com- 
bination is  attended  with  much  heat.  1  part  of 
potassium  renders  solid  at  common  tempera- 
tures 70  parts  of  mercury.  These  amalgams ^ 
for  so  the  metallic  combinations  of  mercury  are 
called,  are  of  the  colour  of  silver;  the  mercury 
rises  from  them  at  a  heat  below  redness.  The 
alkaline  metals  are  rapidly  separated  from  the 
mercury  by  the  oxygene  of  air  or  water. 

9.  Mercury  combines  with  most  of  the  common 
metals  described  in  the  preceding  pages,  and 
forms  amalgams  with  them.  It  unites  most 
readily  with  the  easily  fusible  metals,  but  few 
researches  have  been  made  on  its  union  with 
the  diflBcuhly  fusible  metals,  as  its  volatility 
renders  it  difficult  to  make  the  experiments 
under  favouiable  circumstances. 

10.  Mercury  is  a  very  important  and  useful' 
metal.    It  is  employed  for  extracting  gold  and 
silver  from  their  ores.  It  is  used  in  amalgamation 
Vi'iih  tin  for  covering  mirrors.    The  sulphuret 


[  443  ] 

forms  the  most  perfect  red  pigment  as  yet 
discovered.  Its  oxides  and  combinations  with 
chlorine  constitute  some  of  the  most  important 
substances  employed  in  pharmacy. 

34.  Silver^  or  Argentum. 
I.  Silver  is  found  native,  or  is  procured  from 
ores,  which  are  principally  combinations  of 
silver  with  other  metals  or  with  sulphur,  but 
the  silver  of  commerce  is  not  pure.  To  obtain, 
it  pure;  the  metal  must  be  dissolved  in -nitric 
acid,  and  the  solution  mixed  with  solutioQ 
of  common  salt  until  no  further  precipitate 
takes  place.  The  precipitate  must  be  washed 
and  ignited  strongly  with  about  three  times  its 
weight  of  subcarbonate  of  potassa,  mixed  with 
a  little  charcoal  in  powder,  for  half  an  hour ;  a 
button  of  pure  silver  will  be  procured. 
.  2.  Silver  is  of  a  brilliant  white  colour.  It 
has  no  taste  or  smell;  it  has  great  lustre.  Ita 
hardness  is  inferior  to  that  of  copper : 
specific  gravity  is  about  IO.40,  and  it  is  slightly 
increased  by  being  hammered.  It  yields  to  none 
of  the  metals  except  gold  in  malleabiliiy.  It  is 
very  ductile,  and  may  be  readily  diitwa  out 
itito  extremely  fine  wire.  Its  tenacity  is  con- 
siderable. A  wire  of  0.0  7  B  of  an  inch  iu 
diameter  will  support  187.13  lbs.  weighu  Its 
fusing  point  is  about  1000°  Fahienheit.  It 


[  444  ] 


tarnishes  slowly  in  the  air ;  and  this  tarnish 
is  owing  to  the  presence  of  fumes  containing 
sulphur. 

3.  Silver  enters  into  combination  with  oxy- 
gene ;  it  absorbs  this  gaseous  principle  when 
kept  intensely  ignited  in  an  open  vessel  for 
some  time,  and  is  converted  into  an  olive- 
coloured  glass.    It  burns  with  a  fine  green 
flame,  and  is  converted  into  an  oxide  when 
acted  upon  by  a  powerful  Voltaic  instrument. 
»  The  olive  oxide  of  silver  is  likewise  obtained 
by  dissolving  the  metal  in  nitrous  acid,  pre- 
cipitating by  aqueous  solution  of  baryta,  and 
heating  the  precipitate  to  dull  redness.  From 
my  experiments  1  conclude  that  100  of  silver 
absorb  about  7-3  parts  of  oxygene  to  become 
the  brown  oxide  ;  and  supposing  this  oxide  to 
be  composed  of  one  proportion  of  metal  aud 
one  of  oxygene,  the  number  representing  silver 
will  be  205.    No  other  oxide  of  silver  except 
the  brown  is  certainly  known. 

4.  Silver  combines  with  chlorine  when  the 
metal  is  heated  in  contact  with  the  gas.  The 
compound,  which  may  be  called  argentane,  has 
been  long  known  by  the  name  of  hornsilver. 
It  is  a  whitish  serai-transparent  substance,  cuts 
like  horn,  is  fusible  at  a  red  heat,  and  is  inso- 
luble in  water.  It  contains  about  24-5  percent, 
of  chlorine,  and  may  be  considered  as  consist- 


[  445  ] 

ing  of  one  proportion  of  silver  205,  and  one  of 
chlorine  67 . 

5-  Silver  is  not  known  to  combine  with  hy- 
drogene,  azote,  carbon,  or  boron. 

6.  Silver  and  sulphur  combine.  This  com- 
bination is  effected,  according  to  M.  Proust, 
when  silver  is  exposed  for  a  considerable  time 
to  the  atmosphere;  it  is  readily  formed  by 
heating  to  redness  thin  plates  of  silver  and  sul- 
phur. It  is  of  a  black  colour,  is  brittle,  and 
has  the  metallic  lustre.  According  to  the 
experiments  of  Wenzel,  100  parts  ol  silver  by 
fusion  combines  with  I4.7  parts  of  sulphur. 
The  sulphuret  of  silver  may  therefore  be  re- 
garded as  constituted  by  one  proportion  of 
silver  205,  and  one  of  sulphur  30. 

7.  Silver  combines  with  phosphorus.  This 
compound  may  be  made  according  to  M.  Pelle- 
tier,  by  heating  to  redness  a  mixture  of  silver, 
phosphoric  glass,  and  charcoal  powder.  It  is  a 
white  brittle  substance  ;  its  composition  has  not 
been  determined  with  precision. 

8.  Silver  has  not  yet  been  combined  with 
hydrogene,  azote,  carbon,  or  boron. 

9.  The  action  ot  the  metals  of  the  alkalies 
and  earths  on  silver  has  not  been  examined. 
Sliver  forms  alloys  with  most  of  the  other 
metals,  but  the  greater  number  of  them  have 
not  been  examined  with   much  attention, 


[  446  ] 

or  been  applied  to  the  purposes  of  the  arts. 
The  alloy  of  silver  and  copper  is  employed  in 
coins.  It  is  harder  than  pure  silver,  and  better 
adapted  to  receive  a  fine  impression 

10»  Silver  is  employed  for  a  great  variety  of 
purposes  in  the  useful  and  ornamental  arts. 
It  is  largely  used  for  silvering  copper,  brass, 
and  sometimes  iron.  In  the  common  form  in 
which  it  is  applied,  it  is  alloyed  with  -J^-of  cop- 
per, which  gives  to  it  hardness,  without  im- 
pairing its  colour  or  its  lustre. 

35.  Gold,  or  Aurum. 

1.  Gold  is  found  native,  alloyed  with  copper 
or  silver.  To  obtain  it  in  a  state  of  purity.  Gold 
is  dissolved  in  nitro  muriatic  acid,  the  silver  will 
remain  an  insoluble  muriate,  and  must  be  sepa- 
rated ;  to  the  clear  solution  a  solution  of  green, 
sulphate  of  iron  must  be  added;  the  gold  will  be 
precipitated  in  the  state  of  a  fine  powder,  and 
after  being  well  washed  in  diluted  muriatic  acid, 
and  then  in  distilled  water,  may  be  fused  into 
a  mass. 

2.  Gold  is  of  a  fine  light  yellow  colour  ;  its 
hardness  is  scarcely  superior  to  that  of  tin.  Its 
specific  gravity  is  about  19.277,  audit  is  some- 
what increased  by  hammering.  In  malleability 
and  ductility  it  is  superior  to  all  the  other 
metals.  It  has  a  considerable  degree  of  tenacity ; 
a  wire  of  0.078  inch  in  diameter  will  support 


[  447  ] 


a  weight  of  l50lbs.  It  fuses  at  about  1300 
Fahreoheit.  It  is  not  altered  by  exposure  to 
air  or  water. 

3.  There  are  no  accurate  experiments  re* 
corded  on  the  combinations  of  gold  with  oxy- 
gene.  A  purple  oxide  is  formed  when  gold 
leaf  is  burnt  by  electricity,  or  gold  wires  by 
the  Voltaic  battery,  but  its  composition  has  not 
been  ascertained.  No  deoendance  can  be  put 
on  the  statements  of  chemists  relative  to  pure 
oxides  of  gold,  said  to  be  obtained  by  treating 
solution  of  gold,  with  potassa,  lime,  and  other 
substances,  for  in  these  instances,  as  far  as  ray 
experience  has  gone,  triple  compounds  always 
appear  to  be  formed. 

4.  Gold  combines  with  chlorine  when  the 
metal,  in  a  minute  state  of  division,  is  heated  in 
chlorine,  or  when  the  nitro-muriate  of  gold  is 
part'ally  decomposed  by  heat,  treated  with 
muriatic  acid  and  evaporated  to  dryness.  It 
is  a  brown  substance,  is  very  deliquescent,  and 
readily  decomposes  the  water  in  the  atmosphere, 
forming  a  muriate  of  gold.  It  has  not  been 
examined  with  precision. 

5.  There  are  no  known  combinations  of  gold 
with  hydrogtne,  azote,  carbon  or  boron. 

6  There  has  been  no  distinct  combination 
made  of  gold  and  sulphur. 

7.  Gold  combines  with  phosphorus:  this 


[448] 

compound  ha^been  recently  made  in  the  labora- 
tory of  the  Royal  Institution  by  Mr.  E.  Davy, 
by  heating  gold,  in  a  minute  state  of  division, 
with  phosphorus  in  an  exhausted  tube.  It  is 
of  a  gray  colour,  and  has  the  metallic  lustre. 
It  is  readily  decomposed  by  the  heat  of  a  spirit 
lamp;  and  contains  about  I4  per  cent,  of  phos- 
phorus. 

8.  The  metals  of  the  alkalies  combine  with 
gold;  but  the  alloys  have  not  been  minutely 
examined. 

9.  Gold  forms  alloys  with  the  other  metals ; 
many  of  them  are  brittle,  as  those  of  bismuth, 
antimony,  and  lead.  Others  are  malleable,  as 
those  of  silver,  copper,  and  platina,  The  alloy 
of  gold  and  copper  is  employed  in  coin. 

The  applications  of  gold  to  the  useful  and 
ornamental  arts,  8cc.  are  too  well  known  to 
need  particular  delail.  The  purple  oxide  of 
gold  is  employed  for  colouring  glass  and  por- 
celain. 

36.  Platinum, 

1.  The  ores  of  platinum  are  very  rare  ;  they 
have  been  found  only  in  South  America  and  in 
Spain.  The  ores  from  South  America  consist 
of  small  roundish  flattened  grains.  The  ore 
found  in  Spain  is  in  a  vein  principally  consist- 
ing of  silver.  The  only  places  ia  South  America 


L  449  ] 

in  which  grains  of  the  ore  of  platlna  have  been, 
discovered  are  at  Choco  in  Peru,  Santa  Fe  near 
Carthagena,  and  a  district  in  the  Brazils. 

Plalinum  is  procuredfrora  the  South  American 
ore  by  dissolving  it  in  aqua  regia,  and  dropping 
into  it  a  solution  of  sal-ammoniac;  a  yellow 
powder  fall^  down,  which  must  be  redissolved 
in  nitromuriatic  acid,  and  again  precipitated  by 
sal-ammoniac;  and  after  this  second  process, 
when  ignited  to  whiteness,  it  is  pure  platinum. 
The  particles  may  be  made  to  unite  into  one 
mass  by  hammering  them  in  a  state  of  ignition, 

2.  Platinum  was  first  described  as  a  peculiar 
metal  by  Dr.  Lewis,  in  1754. 

Platinum  is  of  a  white  colour,  but  much  less 
brilliant  than  silver;  it  is  not  quite  so  hard  as 
malleable  iron:  its  specific  gravity  after  being- 
hammered  is  21,3,  that  of  water  being  1.  It  is 
very  ductile,  and  malleable;  may  be  easily  drawn 
into  wires  about  the  -^^^  of  an  inch  in  diameter^ 
and  hammered  into  very  thin  plates :  its  tenacity 
is  such,  that  a  wire  0.078  of  an  inch  in  diameter 
is  capable  of  supporting  a  weight  of  274. 3 libs, 
avoirdupois  without  breaking.  It  is  not  fusible 
by  the  heat  of  a  forge;  and  requires  either  the 
intense  heat  of  the  concentrated  solar  rays,  of 
Voltaic  electricity,  or  of  a  flame  produced  by 
the  agency  of  oxygene  gas. 

3.  Platinum  combines  with  oxygene  only 
VOL.  I.  G  g 


[  450  ] 

with  great  clifEculty.    When  intensely  ignited 
by  Voltaic  electricity  it  fuses,  and  throws  off 
sparks,  and  a  fume  rises  from  it,  which  is  pro- 
bably the  oxide  of  platinum. 

When  solutions  of  platinum  are  precipitated 
by  alkalies,  or  alkaline  earths,  the  precipitate 
always  appears  to  be  a  compound  of  platinum, 
oxygene,  and  the  earth  or  alkali  employed; 
yet  Mr.  Chenevixhas  stated,  that  by  dissolving 
the  precipitate  from  the  nitromuriatic  solution 
by  lime  water  in  nitric  acid,  and  driving  off  the 
acid  by  heat,  a  brown  powder  is  formed,  which 
is  an  oxide  of  platinum,  and  which  contains  I3 
per  cent,  of  oxygene.  The  same  ingenious 
chemist  stales  that  there  is  another  oxide  of 
platinum  of  a  green  colour,  made  by  healing 
the  brown  oxide,  and  which  he  believes  contains 
7  per  cent,  of  oxygene.  I  have  seen  several 
experiments  made  by  Mr.  E.  Davy,  in  which  no 
precipitate  was  produced  by  the  action  of  lime 
water  on  the  nitromuriatic  solution  :  the  lime 
water  was  used  in  various  proportions,  but 
without  success. 

When  an  alloy  of  potassium  and  platinum 
is  heated,  exposed  to  air,  both  metals  burn,  and 
a  yellow  powder  is  formed,  which  gives  off 
oxygene  gas  by  ignition  ;  but  this  powder,  after 
being  long  washed,  reddens  turmeric,  so  that 
it  is  not  pure  oxide  of  platinum. 


[  451  ] 


4.  A  bright  brown  powder  may  be  obtained 
by  evaporating  to  dryness  the  nitromuriatic 
solution  of  platinum.  This  powder,  when 
heated  to  whiteness,  is  resolved  into  platinum 
and  chlorine,  and  the  chlorine  gas  may  be  col- 
lected in  a  proper  apparatus.  From  some  ex- 
periments made  on  this  powder,  at  my  request, 
by  Mr.  E.  Davy,  it  appears  to  contain  about 
18. 5  per  cent,  of  chlorine;  but  this  esliraate 
can  be  considered  only  as  an  approximation, 
for  there  are  many  difficulties  in  gaining  accu- 
rate results  on  a  substance  so  easily  decomposed. 

5.  Sulphur  combines  with  platinum  when 
they  are  heated  together  in  exhausted  tubes. 
The  sulphuret  is  an  infusible  black  powder,  de- 
composable by  a  white  heat.  According  to 
Mr.  E.  Davy,  who  first  made  it  in  the  laboratory 
of  the  Royal  Institution,  it  contains  about  16 
per  cent,  of  sulphur.  He  supposes  that  there 
is  another  combination  of  sulphur  and  platina, 
which  may  be  made  by  heating  the  precipitatie 
from  the  nitromuriatic  solution  by  sal-ammoniac 
and  sulphur  together,  and  which  contains  28 
per  cent,  of  sulphur. 

6.  Phosphorus  and  platinum  combine  with 
great  energy,  when  the  phosphorus  is  made  to 
act  in  vapour,  in  exhausted  tubes,  on  platina, 
heated  to  dull  redness;  the  combination  is  so 
violent  that  the  mass  becomes  vividly  ignited. 


[  452  ] 

The  phosphoret  oFplatina  is  an  infusible  blueisfi 
gray  powder  with  little  lustre.  According  td 
Mr.  E.  Davy,  it  contains  more  than  17  per  cent, 
of  phosphorus.  He  believes  that  there  is  a 
superphosphorei  of  platina  containing  30  per 
cent,  of  phosphorus,  made  by  heating  the  yel- 
low powder  procured  by  sal-ammoniac  with 
phosphorus;  but  new  experiments  are  wanting 
on  this  result,  as  well  as  on  the  results  of  the 
action  of  sulphur  on  platinum.  The  quantities 
do  not  correspond  with  the  theory  of  definite 
proportions ;  and  as  neither  the  metal  nor  the 
compounds  made  can  be  fused  under  the  cir- 
cumstances of  the  experiment,  it  is  not  possible 
to  say  that  the  combination  is  perfect ;  and  as  ail 
such  combinations  are  decomposable  by  a  strong 
heat,  part  of  the  compound  first  formed  may 
be  decomposed  before  other  parts  of  the  mass 
enter  into  union. 

7.  From  the  experiments  of  M.  Descotils  it 
is  probable  that  platinum  is  capable  of  combin- 
ing with  boron;  it  has  never  been  united  to 
hydrogene,  azote,  or  carbon. 

8.  Platinum  readily  unites  to  potassium  and 
sodium;  their  combination  takes  place  with 
ignition,  and  a  bright  brittle  mass  is  obtainedj 
from  which  the  alkaline  metals  are  readily  sepa- 
rated by  the  action  of  air  or  water.  Plati- 
imm  combines  with  most  of  the  other  metals; 


I  453  ] 


but  the  properties  oF  its  alloys  have  been  very- 
little  studied.  To  the  fusible  metals  it  cominuni- 
cates  difficult  fusibility.  It  amalgamates  with 
mercury  when  heated  with  that  metal  in  a  finely 
divided  state.  It  combines  with  gold,  and  ren- 
ders its  colour  pale ;  even  —  of  platinum  can 
be  detected  in  union  in  gold,  from  the  colour. 

9.  Platinum  is  a  most  valuable  metal;  as  it  is 
notoxidable,  nor  fusible  under  common  circum- 
stances, and  only  difficultly  combinable  with 
sulphur,  and  not  acted  upon  by  common  acids, 
it  is  admirably  adapted  for  the  uses  of  the  philo- 
sophical chemist,  and  may  be  advantageously 
employed  in  all  cases  where  gold  is  applied, 
unless  the  use  is  connected  with  the  colour  or 
malleability  of  the  metaL  The  general  applica- 
tion of  platinum  as  a  manufactured  metal  to 
the  purposes  of  the  laboratory  is  one  of  the  many 
benefits  which  chemistry  and  the  useful  arts  owe 
to  Dr.  WoUaston. 

37.  Arsenic  or  Arsenicum. 

1.  Arsenic  may  be  easily  procured  by  heat- 
ing tlie  substance  knovvn  by  the  name  of  white 
arsenic  in  powder  with  charcoal,  in  a  Florence 
flask,  or  a  glass  tube ;  before  the  mixture  be^ 
comes  red  hot,  a  metal  sublimes,  and  condenses 
in  tile  upper  part  of  the  vessel,  which  is  arsenic. 

%.  Arsenic  is  of  a  blueish  white  colour,  not 


[  454  ] 

unlike  that  of  steel.  Its  specific  gravity  is 
8.51.  It  is  very  brittle:  its  point  of  fusion  has 
not  been  ascertained ;  but  it  is  the  most  volatile 
of  all  the  metals,  rising  in  vapour  at  about  356* 
of  Fahrenheit's  scale.  When  a  part  of  it  is  sud- 
denly ignited,  it  burns  with  a  pale  blueish  light, 
sending  off  dense  white  fumes.  It  burns  spon- 
taneously in  chlorine. 

3.  There  are  two  known  combinations  of 
arsenic  and  oxygene ;  both  of  which  are  pos- 
sessed of  several  of  the  properties  of  acids. 
The  first  is  the  substance  formed  by  combustion, 
and  this  contains  the  smallest  quantity  of  oxy- 
gene ;  the  compound  containing  the  largest 
quantity  of  oxygene  may  be  formed  by  distill- 
ing nitrous  acid,  mixed  with  -Jg-  of  its  weight 
of  muriatic  acid  from  the  other  compound. 
The  compound  formed  by  combustion  has  been 
called  arsenious  acid,  and  likewise  white  oxide 
of  arsenic.  When  procured  by  precipitation 
from  acid  solutions,  it  exists  as  a  Ivydrat :  it  is 
fusible  by  a  strong  heat  suddenly  applied,  but 
sublimes  slowly  at  3S3  Fahrenheit;  after  fusion 
it  appears  as  a  white  vitreous  substance,  of 
specific  gravity  5.  It  is  soluble  in  80  parts  of 
water  at  60°,  and  in  15  parts  at  212°.  Its  taste 
is  acrid,  leaving  an  impression  of  sweetness. 
Wiien  heated  its  smell  is  like  that  of  garlic. 
-The  compound  of  arsenic  with  the  largest  pro- 


[  455  j 


portion  of  oxygene  is  called  arsenic  acid.  It 
is  much  more  fixed  in  the  fire  than  arsenious 
acid,  is  very  soluble  in  water,  and  has  an  intense 
sour  taste.  From  experiments  on  the  quantity 
of  oxygene  absorbed  by  arsenic  during  its  con- 
version into  these  two  compounds,  made  by 
Proust  and  by  myself,  I  conclude  that  the  arseni- 
ous acid  consists  of  about  25  of  oxygene,  and  75 
of  metal ;  and  the  arsenic  acid  of  33  of  oxygene 
and  67  of  metal.  Hence  it  appears  that  the 
quantity  of  metal  being  the  same,  the  oxygene  in 
the  arsenic  acid  is  to  that  in  the  arsenious  nearly 
as  3  to  2 ;  and  if  the  arsenious  acid  be  supposed 
to  contain  two  proportions  of  oxygene,  the 
number  representing  arsenic  will  be  90;  and 
those  representing  arseoious  and  arsenic  acids 
will  be  120  and  135. 

4.  The  only  compound  of  chlorine  and 
arsenic  known,  is  made  by  the  combustion  of 
the  metal  in  chlorine,  or  by  distilling  a  mixture 
of  arsenic  and  corrosive  sublimate  together :  it 
is  a  heavy  limpid  fluid,  capable  of  being  easily 
rendered  gaseous,  forming  a  liquid  muriate  of 
arsenic  by  the  action  of  a  small  quantity  oFwater, 
and  affording  a  precipitate  of  arsenious  nearly 
acid  by  the  action  of  a  large  quantity.  From 
my  experiments  it  appears  that  the  compound 
of  chlorine  and  arsenic,  which  may  be  called 
arsenicane^  consists  of  AO  melal  to  60  of  chlorine  ; 


[  456  ] 


tlierefore  it  may  be  regarded  as  composed  of 
two  proportions  of  chlorine,  and  one  of  metal. 

5.  Arssnic  combines  with  hydrogene.  The 
best  known  substance  containing  the  two  bodies 
is  arseniuretted  hydregene  gas.  This  elastic 
fluid,  which  was  discovered  by  Scheele,  may  be 
procured  by  dissolving  an  alloy  of  14  parts  of 
tin  and  1  of  arsenic  in  muriatic  acid.  This 
substance  has  an  extremely  fetid  smell ;  it  burns 
when  brought  near  an  inflamed  taper  in  the 
atmosphere;  its  flame  is  blue;  and  if  the  vessel 
in  which  it  is  burnt  have  a  narrow  neck,  it  de- 
posits arsenic.  It  inflames  spontaneously  when 
acted  upon  by  chlorine :  it  is  soluble  only  to  a 
very  slight  extent  in  M'ater.  It  is  probable  that 
the  gas  called  arseniuretted  hydrogene  is  always 
a  mixture  of  a  true  gaseous  compound  of  arsenic 
and  hydrogene,  with  common  hydrogene.  Its 
specific  gravity  varies,  as  I  have  found,  from 
5  to  8,  that  of  hydrogene  being  1.  When 
decomposed  by  attracting  the  arsenic  from  it, 
by  the  action  of  ignited  metals,  there  is  an  ex- 
pansion of  volume.  M.Gay  Lussacand  Thenard 
lound  100  parts  of  it  decomposed  by  tin  be- 
come 140  parts.  M.  Stromeyer  states  that  he 
analysed  a  gas  consisting  of  106  parts  arsenic, 
and  2.19  hydrogene.  This  would  agree  with 
the  idea  that  the  pure  gas  is  composed  of  2  pro- 
portions of  hydrogene,  and  one  of  metal ;  hut 


[  457  1 


"such  a  gas  must  be  more  than  twice  as  heavy  as 
any  specimen  that  has  been  weighed ;  and  this 
circumstance  leads  me  to  doubt  of  the  correct-i 
ness  of  M.  Stromeyer's  results. 

There  is  likewise  a  solid  compound  of  hy« 
drogene  and  arsenic :  it  may  be  procured  by 
acting  on  water  by  an  alloy  of  potassium  and 
arsenic  in  great  excess :  it  is  a  brown  powder, 
which  burns,  when  gently  heated  in  the  atmos- 
phere, and  which  gives  off  arseniuretted  hy- 
drogene,  when  heated  in  close  vessels.  The 
same  substance  is  procured  when  arsenic  is 
made  the  negative  surface  in  contact  with  water 
in  Voltaic  combinations.  No  experiments  have 
as  yet  been  made  on  the  proportions  of  its  ele- 
ments. 

6.  Sulphur  and  arsenic  readily  unite  by  fusion, 
and  form  a  red  vitreous  semitransparent  mass^ 
The  same  substance  is  found  native  in  different 
parts  of  Europe,  and  is  called  realgar;  it  is  often 
crystallized  in  transparent  prisms:  its  specific 
gravity  is  3.225.  If  Thenard's  account  of  its 
composition  be  considered  as  accurate,  it  must 
consist  of  two  proportions  of  arsenic,  and  three 
of  sulphur,  180  and  90.  If  sulphuretted  hy- 
drogene  gas  be  made  to  act  upon  a  solution  of 
arsenious  acid  in  muriatic  acid,  a  fine  yellow 
powder  falls  to  the  bottom.  This  powder  is 
usually  called  oi'phnent.   It  may  be  formed  like- 


[  458  ] 

%vise  by  subliming  arsenic  and  sulphur  together 
in  a  heat  not  sufficient  to  produce  a  fusion  of 
the  mass.  It  is  composed  of  thin  plates,  which 
have  a  considerable  degree  of  flexibility.  Ac- 
cording to  Thenard  it  contains  more  sulphur 
than  realgar ;  but  Mr.  Proust  states  that  by 
fusion  it  becomes  realgar. 

7.  Arsenic  readily  combines  with  phospho- 
rus, and  they  form  together  a  black  powder  j 
the  proportions  of  its  elements  have  not  yet 
been  accurately  ascertained. 

8.  Arsenic  has  not  been  combined  with  azote, 
boron  or  carbon. 

9.  Arsenic  combines  with  most  metallic 
substances.  It  renders  the  metals  of  the  fixed 
alkalies  less  fusible  by  uniting  to  them,  but  its 
alloys  with  the  common  metals  are  usually  very 
fusible.  It  renders  gold  and  platina  brittle, 
and  gives  whiteness  to  copper :  none  of  the 
alloys  containing  it  in  any  considerable  quantity 
are  malleable, 

10.  Arsenic  is  not  much  used  in  the  arts* 
Realgar  and  orpiment  are  employed  as  pig- 
ments. The  solutions  containing  arsenious,  or 
arsenic  acids,  are  extremely  poisonous.  The 
arsenious  acid  in  very  small  doses,  has  been 
employed  in  medicine,  particularly  for  the 
cure  of  intermittent  fevers. 


[  459  ] 


38.  Molfhdenum. 

1.  There  is  an  ore  found  in  different  parts  of 
Europe,  particularly  in  Sweden,  not  unlike 
plumbago,  from  which  Scheele,  in  1778,  pro- 
cured a  white  powder;  and  from  this  powder, 
Hielm,  in  1782,  obtained  a  metal,  which  he 
called  molybdenum. 

Pure  molybdenum  may  be  obtained  either 
from  the  ore  like  plumbago,  or  from  another 
ore  found  in  Carinthia,  called  the  molybdat  of 
lead  ;  by  digesting  them  in  powder  in  nitric 
acid,  and  boiling  the  mass  in  sulphuric  acid  ; 
by  lixiviation  with  water  a  liquor  is  obtained, 
which  v/hen  acted  on  by  solution  of  ammonia 
passed  through  a  filter  and  mixed  with  nitric 
acid  deposits  a  white  powder,  and  this  powder 
intensely  ignited  in  a  charcoal  crucible  mixed 
with  linseed  oil  affords  the  metal. 

2.  Molybdenum,  according  to  the  observa- 
tions of  Bucholz,  is  brittle  ;  its  specific  gravity  is 
8.6l  1.  Its  colour  is  white  It  burns  when  placed 
on  ignited  charcoal  and  acted  on  by  a  current 
ofoxygene  gas,  and  gives  off  a  white  smoke 
which  collects  in  small  needle-formed  crystals. 

3.  There  are  two  well  defined  combinations 
of  molybdenum  and  oxygene.  One  is  blue, 
the  other  is  pale  yellow  ;  they  both  possess  acid 
properties,  and  therefore  may  be  distinguished 
by  the  names  nudybdous  and  molybdic  acids. 


[  460  ] 

The  moljhdic  acid  is  easily  obtained  from  the 
ores  of  the  metal  by  treatment  with  acids 
3nd  ammonia  :  the  white  powder  described  in 
the  last  page  is  this  substance  combined  with 
water,  and  it  may  be  procured  pure  by  ignition. 
Its  specific  gravity  is  3.4  ;  its  taste  is  sour  ;  it  is 
fusible  in  a  strong  heat,  and  volatilized  by  in- 
tense ignition  :  it  is  soluble  in  about  1000  times 
its  weio-ht  of  water. 

The  blue  acid,  or  the  molybdous  acid,  is  formed 
by  triturating  together  in  boiling  water,  one 
part  of  molybdenum  in  powder,  and  two 
parts  of  molybdic  acid.  The  solution  is  to  be 
p^issed  through  a  iiltre,  and  evaporated  in  a 
temperature  not  exceeding  120  ;  the  blue  acid 
remains  in  the  state  of  a  fine  powder.  This 
acid  is  more  soluble  in  water  than  the  molybdic 
scid,  andactsmore  intensely  on  vegetable  blues, 
converting  them  to  red.  According  to  Bucholz 
the  blue  acid  consists  of  100  parts  of  metal  to 
34  of  oxygene,  and  the  yellow  acid  of  100  parts 
of  metal  to  50  of  oxygene.  On  these  data  it 
seems  probable  that  moiybdous  acid  consists  of 
2  proportions  of  oxygene  and  one  of  metal; 
and  molybdic  acid  of  3  proportions  of  oxygene 
and  1  of  m.etal;  and  assuming  the  composition 
the  molybdous  acid  as  the  foundation  of  cal- 
culation, the  number  representing  molybdenum 
will  be  88.2.    Mr.  Bucholz  supposes  that  there 


[  461  ] 


are  oxides  of  molybdenum,  containing  smaller 
quantities  of  oxygene  than  the  two  acids.  It  iS 
probable  that  there  is  a  brown  oxide  containing 
a  single  proportion  of  oxygene  obtained  by  ex- 
posing the  metal  to  a  red  heat ;  but  what  Buchol^; 
considers  as  a  violet  brown  oxide  produced  by 
heating  the  brown  oxide,  is  probably  only  a 
mixture  of  the  brown  oxide  and  the  blue  acid. 

4.  No  direct  experiments  have,  I  believe,  been 
made  on  the  action  of  clilorine  on  molybdenum  ; 
but  when  the  molybdic  acid  is  dissolved  in 
muriatic  acid,  and  the  residue  heated  to  redness, 
chlorine  rises,  and  the  blue  acid  remains  behind  ; 
but  a  grayish  sublimate  is  likewise  formed,  ia' 
which  chlorine  is  indicated  by  the  action  of 
nitrat  of  silver. 

5.  Molybdenum  combines  readily  with  sul- 
phur by  fusion,  or  by  heating  strongly  together 
molybdic  acid  and  sulphur.  The  sulphuret  of 
molybdenum  is  a  black  shining  powder,  the 
same  as  the  native  mineral  from  which  Scheele 
first  procured  the  acid.  According  to  Bucholz  it 
contains  60  of  metal  and  40  of  sulphur  per 
cent,  and  therefore  may  be  considered  as  con- 
sisting of  one  proportion  of  metal  and  two  of 
sulphur. 

6.  Phosphorus  combines  with  molybdenum  ; 
but  the  properties  and  constitution  of  the  phos' 
ptioret  have  not  been  investigated. 


t  462  ] 

7.  Hydrogene,  azote,  carbon,  and  boron, 
have  not  been  combined  with  molybdenum. 

8.  It  unites  to  several  of  the  metals  ;  one 
of  the  most  perfect  of  its  alloys  is  with  iron. 
With  lead  it  forms  an  alloy  somewhat  mal- 
leable. Most  of  its  other  alloys  break  under 
the  hammer;  from  the  diflBcuit  fusibility  of  the 
metal  it  is  not  easy  to  make  them  uniform  in 
their  constitution. 

Molybdenum  has  not  yet  been  applied  to 
any  of  the  purposes  of  the  arts. 

39.  Chromium, 

1.  There  are  two  ores  from  which  chromium 
may  be  procured  ;  one  is  the  read  lead  ore  of 
Siberia,  the  cbromat  of  lead,  the  other  is  the 
chromat  of  iron,  which  has  been  found  in 
France  and  in  North  America. 

Chromium  was  discovered  by  Vauquelin,  in 
1797.  To  obtain  chromium,  chromat  of  lead 
in  fine  powder  is  to  be  digested  with  moderately 
strong  muriatic  acid,  till  its  power  of  action  is 
exhausted.  The  fluid  produced  is  to  be  passed 
through  a  fillre,  and  a  little  oxide  of  silver,  such 
as  is  procured  by  precipitation  from  nitric  acid 
by  potassa,  very  gradually  added  to  it  till  the 
whole  solution  becomes  of  a  red  tint.  This 
liquor  by  slow  evaporation  deposits  small  ruby 


t  463  ] 


red  crystals,  which,  when  intensely  ignited, 
mixed  with  a  little  charcoal  powder,  afFord 
chromium.  Chromat  of  lead  may  be  procured 
from  chromat  of  iron,  by  decomposing  it  by 
liydrat  of  potassa,  making  a  solution  in  nitric 
acid,  and  adding  solution  of  nitrate  of  lead  ; 
the  chromat  of  lead  falls  down  as  a  beaiitifiat 
orange  powder. 

Chromium  is  a  white  brittle  metal,  requir- 
ing an  intense  heat  for  its  fusion  ;  it  is  very  dif- 
ficultly acted  on  by  acids.  It  does  not  readily 
enter  into  combustion.  Its  specific  gravity  is 
5.9. 

3.  Very  few  experiments  have  been  made  ©n 
the  combinations  of  chromium.  The  red  crys- 
tals procured  from  chromate  of  lead  by  muriatic 
acid  appear  to  be  a  hydrated  acid;  they  are 
soluble  in  water,  have  a  sour  taste,  and  coiii- 
bine  with  alkalies. 

The  red  crystals  strongly  heated  become  a 
green  powder,  which  is  considered  as  an  oxids 
of  chTOmium.  It  is  said  that  from  100  parts  of 
the  red  crystals  6/  parts  of  metal  may  be  pro« 
cured.  The  acid  of  chromium,  when  combined 
with  alkalies,  precipitates  most  of  the  metallic 
solutions.  In  solutions  of  mercury  it  produces 
a  vermilion  red  precipitate  ;  in  those  of  silver,  a 
carmine  red  ;  in  those  of  tin,  a  green.  The  name 


[  464  ] 

chromium  has  been  given  to  the  metal  from  its 
remarkable  colouring  powers.* 

4.  The  artificial  chromate  of  lead  forms  a 
beautiful  and  permanent  pigment.  I  have  found 
the  orange  colour  most  pure  when  the  nitrate 
of  lead  used  for  the  precipitation  contained  an 
excess  of  acid.  The  oxide  of  chromium  has  been 
employed  for  giving  an  emerald  green  colour 
to  glass  and  enamel.  Chromic  acid  is  the  colour- 
ing matter  of  the  spinelie  ruby;  and  oxide  of 
chromium  gives  its  beautiful  colour  to  the 
emerald.  The  oxide  of  chromium  has  been 
lately  found  in  some  meteoric  stones 

*  From  Xfft)/A«. 


[  465  ] 


DIVISION  VI. 

OF  SOME  SUBSTANCES,  THE  NATURE  OF 
WHICH  IS  NOT  YET  CERTAINLY  KNOWN. 

1.  Preliminary  Observations, 

The  bodies  to  be  examined  in  this  division 
have  been  arranged  into  a  distinct  class,  because 
they  present  some  extraordinary  and  anoma- 
lous results,  and  because  as  yet  the  knowledge 
obtained  respecting  their  nature  is  imper- 
fect ;  many  of  the  facts  ascertained  respecting 
them  harmonize  with  the  general  doctrines  of 
the  science,  and  some  of  them  offer  new  views 
respecting  the  arrangements  and  properties  of 
matter ;  they  are  therefore  amongst  the  most 
interesting  objects  of  chemical  enquiry. 

2.  Of  the  Fluoric  Principle, 

1.  There  is  a  substance  found  abundantly  in 
nature  called  jluor  spar,  it  is  usually  either  blue 
green,  yellow,  or  white,  transparent,  and  crys- 
tallized in  cubes.  It  is  a  common  product  of 
the  mines  in  Derbyshire. 

2.  When  this  substance,  in  fine  powder,  is 
mixed  with  oil  of  vitriol  and  distilled  in  retorts 

VOL,  I,  Hh 


I 


[  466  ] 


of  Sliver  or  lead,  connected  with  receivers  of 
the  same  metal  artificially  cooled  ;  an  intensely- 
active  fluid  is  produced.  It  has  the  appearance 
of  sulphuric  acid,  but  is  much  more  vola- 
tile, and  sends  olF  white  fumes  when  exposed  to 
air.  It  must  be  examined  with  great  caution,  for 
when  applied  to  the  skin  it  instantly  disorganizes 
it,  and  produces  very  painful  wounds.  When 
potassium  is  introduced  into  it,  it  acts  with 
intense  energy  upon  it,  and  produces  hydro- 
gene  gas,  and  a  neutral  salt :  when  lime  is  made 
to  act  upon  it  there  is  a  violent  heat  produced, 
water  is  given  off,  and  the  same  substance  as 
fluor  spar  is  produced.  When  it  is  dropped 
into  water  a  hissing  noise  is  produced  with  much 
heat,  and  an  acid  fluid  not  disagreeable  to  the 
taste  is  formed  if  the  water  be  in  sufficient 
quantity.  It  instantly  corrodes  and  dissolves 
glass 

3.  Ifj  instead  of  being  distilled  in  metallic 
vessels,  the  mixture  of  fluor  spar  and  oil  of 
vitriol  be  distilled  in  glass  vessels,  little  of  the 
corrosive  liquid  will  be  obtained;  but  the  glass 
wall  be  acted  upon,  and  a  peculiar  gaseous  sub- 
stance will  be  produced,  which  must  be  col- 
lected over  mercury.  The  best  mode  of  pro- 
curing this  gaseous  body  is  to  mix  the  fluor 
spar  with  powdered  glass  or  powdered  quartz, 
and  in  this  case  the  retort  may  be  preserved 


[  467  ] 


From  corrosion,  and  the  gas  obtained  in  greater 
quantities.  This  gas,  which  is  called  silicated 
fluoric  gas^  is  possessed  of  very  extraordinary- 
properties. 

It  is  very  heavy  ;  100  cubical  inches  of  it 
weigh  110.77  grains,  and  hence  its  specific 
gravity  is  to  that  of  hydrogene  nearly  as  48  to 
J.  When  it  is  brought  in  contact  with  water  it 
instantly  deposits  a  white  gelatinous  substance,- 
which  is  hydrat  of  silica,  and  the  water  becomes 
an  acid  solution  of  silica  ;  it  produces  white 
fumes  when  suffered  to  pass  into  the  atmosphere. 
It  is  not  affected  by  any  of  the  common  com- 
bustible bodies,  but  when  potassium  is  strongly 
heated  in  it,  it  takes  fire  and  burns  with  a  deep 
red  light ;  the  gas  is  absorbed,  and  a  fawn 
coloured  substance  is  formed,  which  yields 
alkali  to  water  with  slight  effervescence,  and 
contains  a  combustible  body,  and  the  washings 
afford  potassaand  a  salt,  from  which  the  strong 
acid  fluid  mentioned  in  the  last  section  may 
be  procured  by  sulphuric  acid. 

4.  If  instead  of  glass  or  silica  the  fluor  spar 
be  mixed  with  dry  vitreous  boracic  acid,  and  dis- 
tilled in  a  glass  vessel  with  sulphuric  acid,  the 
proportions  being  one  part  boracic  acid,  two 
fluor  spar,  and  12  oil  of  vitriol  %  the  gaseous  sub- 
stance formed  is  of  a  different  kind,  and  is  called 
the  Jluoboric  gas.  100  cubical  inches  of  it  weigh 


[  468  ] 


73.5  grains,  so  that  its  specific  gravity  is  rather 
more  than  32  times  that  of  hydrogene.  Wlien 
a  little  of  it  is  suffered  to  pass  into  the  atmos- 
phere it  produces  fumes  much  more  dense  than 
those  produced  by  the  gas  described  in  the  last 
section,  and  which  appear  white,  and  almost 
opaque.  It  is  absorbed  rapidly  by  water,  and 
forms  with  it  a  dense  fluid  like  sulphuric  acid 
in  appearance  and  consistence;  and  when  water 
is  saturated  with  it  at  50°  Fahrenheit,  it  contains 
700  times  its  volume  of  gas,  and  is  of  specific 
gravity  1.7  7.  When  potassium  is  heated  in 
this  gas,  it  takes  fire,  and  burns  with  a  red  light ; 
the  gas  is  destroyed,  if  the  metal  be  in  suffi- 
eient  quantity,  and  an  olive  coloured  substance 
is  produced,  which  seems  to  be  principally 
boron,  and  a  neutral  salt,  which  by  the  action 
of  oil  of  vitriol,  affords  the  dense  fluoric  acid, 
and  sulphat  of  soda. 

5.  It  appears  extremely  probable,  from  all 
the  facts  known  respecting  the  fluoric  combina- 
tions, that  fluor  spar  contains  a  peculiar  acid 
matter;  and  that  this  acid  matter  is  united  to 
lime  in  the  spar  seems  evident  from  the  circum- 
stance that  gypsum,  or  sulphate  of  lime,  is 
the  residuum  of  the  distillation  of  fluor  spar 
and  sulphuric  acid:  the  results  of  experiments 
on  the  decomposition  of  fluor  spar,  have  been 
differently  stated  by  different  chemists  ;  the 


[  469  ] 


maximum  of  sulphate  of  lime  obtained  from  100 
grains  in  some  experiments  made  in  the  labora- 
tory of  the  Royal  Institution,  was  174.2  grains,; 
and  from  this  result  fiuor  spar  may  be  supposed 
to  consist  of  55  lime,  and  about  20.7  fluoric  acid, 
and  this  last  number  will  represent  the  acid- 

6.  The  dense  acid  fluid  described  in  2  must, 
on  the  same  idea,  be  supposed  to  be  a  compound 
of  an  acid  unknown  in  a  separate  state,  and 
water;  and  may  be  called  hfdrojluoric  acid; 
and  supposing  all  the  water  in  oil  of  vitriol 
transferred  to  it,  it  will  consist  of  ^0.7  fluoric 
acid,  and  17  water. 

7.  The  gas  formed  by  the  action  of  hydro- 
sulphuric  acid  on  a  mixture  containing  silica  and 
fluor  spar,  silicated  fluoric  gas  must  be  regarded 
as  a  kind  of  neutrosaline  gaseous  compound 
consisting  of  fluoric  acid  and  silica,  and  it  has 
been  found  to  afford,  when  decomposed  by  so- 
lutions of  ammonia,  61.4  per  cent,  of  silica; 
it  may  therefore  be  supposed  to  consist  of 
two  proportions  of  acid  41.4,  and  one  of  silica 
61.  According  to  this  view  of  its  compo- 
sition, the  number  representing  it  is  about 
102  ;  1  volume  ©f  it  condenses  two  volumes  of 
ammonia,  and  they  form  together  a  peculiar 
saline  substance  which  is  decomposed  by  water. 
The  composition  of  this  salt  is  easily  recon- 
ciled to  the  numbers  above  given,  as  represent- 
ing silica  and  fluoric  acid,  on  the  supposition 


[  470  ] 

that  it  contains  one  proportion  of  ammoma, 
and  one  of  silicated  fluoric  acid ;  and  calculating 
the  number  of  silicated  fluoric  acid  on  this  sup- 
position it  would  be  about  99. 

There  is  great  reason  to  believe  that,  when 
potassium  burns  in  this  gas,  it  is  the  acid  matter 
which  is  decomposed,  and  that  it  consists  of 
oxygene  united  to  an  inflammable  basis ;  for  if 
it  were  the  silica  alone  which  is  decomposed,  or 
if  a  mere  combination  were  formed  between  the 
potassium  and  the  acid  gas,  the  same  quantity  of 
fluate  of  lime  or  fluor  spar  ought  to  be  formed 
from  equal  quantities  of  silicated  fluoric  acid, 
acted  upon  by  potassium,  and  afterwards  ex- 
posed to  solution  of  ammonia,  and  the  other 
absorbed  by  water,  and  acted  on  by  solution  of 
ammonia ;  which  I  have  found  is  not  the  case,  for 
in  the  first  instance  there  is  considerably  less 
produced.  In  the  experiment,  it  seems  likely 
that  the  potassium  acquires  oxygene  principally 
from  acid  matter  combined  with  the  silica,  and 
that  the  inflammable  basis  of  the  acid  partly 
combines  with  the  potassa,  and  partly  with  the 
silica,  or  with  silicum  ;  and  forms  with  the  first 
a  compound  that  eflervesces,  and  is  partly  de- 
composed by  water;  and  with  the  second  an 
insoluble  substance,  which  affords  silicated  fluO' 
ric  acid  by  absorption  of  Oxygene. 

8.  It  is  extremely  likely  that  fluoboric  acid 
gas  is  composed  of  the  peculiar  acid  which  is 


[  471  ] 

supposed  to  consist  of  oxygene  and  an  inflam- 
mable basis,  and  boracic  acid;  but  it  appears 
that  in  the  combustion  of  potassium  in  this  gas 
it  is  the  boracic  acid  alone  that  is  decomposed, 
and  that  the  fluoric  acid  combines  with  the 
potassa  formed. 

9.  It  is  a  peculiar  circumstance  with  respect 
to  the  fluoric  principle,  that  silicated  fluoric  gas, 
and  fluoboric  gas  combine  with  bodies  without 
decomposition.    Thus  they  both  form  peculiar 
compounds  with  the  alkalies  ;  and  though  silica 
is  deposited  by  the  action  of  silicated  fluoric 
gas  on  water,  and  on  other  oxidated  bodies,  yet 
the  new  compound  formed  always  appears  to 
contain  part  of  the  earth,  which  is  supposed  to 
be  a  constituent  of  the  gas.    In  general,  silica 
and  boracic  acid  can  only  be  procured  from  the 
two  gases  by  the  intervention  of  bodies  that 
contain  water  or  oxygene :  this  circumstance, 
if  it  were  not  opposed  by  the  results  of  the  ex- 
periments on  the  action  of  potassium  on  silicated 
fluoric  gas, which,  however,  ought  to  be  repeated, 
might  lead  to  the  suspicion,  that  the  fluoric  {>;ases 
are  compounds  of  a  principle  unknown  in  the 
separate  state,  but  analogous  to  chlorine,  with 
silicum  and  boron  ;  that  the  hydrofluoric  acid 
is  a  compound  of  the  same  principle  with 
hydrogene  and  water,  and  Huor  spar  a  com- 
pound of  the  same  principle  with  calcium. 


[  472  ] 


10.  If  50.7  be  really  the  number  representing 
fluoric  acid,  it  can  be  supposed  to  contain  only- 
one  proportion  of  oxygene,  and  the  fluoric 
basis  will  be  represented  by  5.7)  and  it  will  be 
the  only  known  acid  so  constituted. 

11.  Silicated  fluoric  gas,  when  absorbed  by 
water,  affords  an  acid  fluid,  which,  when  acted 
upon  by  ammonia,  deposits  silica;  and  in  glass 
vessels  pure  hydrofluoric  acid  cannotbe  obtained. 
Silicated  fluoric  gas  seems  to  form  only  one 
combination  with  ammonia,  which  deposits 
silica  by  the  action  of  water;  but  fluoboric  gas 
forms  three  combinations  with  ammonia,  one 
volume  of  it  condenses  1.2  and  3  volumes  of 
ammonia.  The  saline  compound  containing 
the  least  quantity  of  ammonia  is  solid,  the  other 
two  compounds  are  fluids  at  the  common  tem- 
perature of  the  atmosphere. 

12.  The  only  use  to  which  the  fluoric  com- 
binations have  as  yet  been  applied  is  for  etching 
on  glass;  for  this  pupose  the  hydrofluoric  acid, 
or  the  fluate  of  ammonia,  should  be  used ;  the 
gasses  have  no  action  on  glass. 

13.  Silicated  fluoric  gas,  and  diluted  hydro- 
fluoric acid  were  discovered  by  Scheele,  in  1771. 
Margraaf,  three  years  before,  had  pointed  out 
some  of  the  results  of  the  action  of  acids  on 
fiuor  spar;  concentrated  hydrofluoric  acid,  and 
fluoboric  gas  were  made  known  by  some  ela- 


V 


[  473  ] 

borate  researches  of  Gay  Lussac  and  Thenard, 
in  1 809.  My  brother,  Mr.  John  Davy,  in  1810 
and  1811,  extended  the  knowledge  of  the 
properties  of  these  bodies,  and  the  modes  of 
procuring  them  pure,  ascertained  the  specific 
gravity  of  fluoboric  and  silicated  fluoric  gasses, 
and  the  proportions  in  their  ammoniacal  com- 
binations. The  action  of  potassium  on  silicated 
fluoric  gas,  and  fluoboric  gas  was  investigated  by 
M.  M.  Gay  Lussac  and  Thenard,  in  1809;  and 
I  made  a  number  of  experiments  on  the  same 
subject  about  the  same  time. 

3.  Of  the  Amalgam  procured  from  ammomacal 

Compounds. 

1.  When  a  globule  of  pure  mercury  is  ne- 
gatively electrified  by  a  Voltaic  apparatus  of 
100  pair  of  plates,  it  being  in  contact  with 
solution  of  ammonia  in  a  cavity  made  in  a  piece 
of  muriate  of  ammonia,  or  any  ammoniacal  salt, 
moistened  in  such  a  manner,  and.  so  placed  on 
a  disc  of  platina,  that  the  circuit  is  completed  ; 
the  globule  rapidly  increases  in  volume,  the 
quicksilver  loses  its  fluidity,  and  at  length  be>- 
comes  of  the  consistence  of  soft  butter,  and 
arborescent  crystallizations  shoot  from  it,  which 
are  quite  solid.  The  amalgam  so  formed  has 
perfectly  metallic  characters.  It  efTervesces  copi- 
ously when  throv/n  into  v/ater,  hy'drogene  gas 
is  given  off,  and  a  solution  of  ammonia  is  found 


[  474  ] 

in  the  water.  When  exposed  to  the  air  it  gra- 
dually loses  its  consistence ;  it  emits  a  strong 
odour  of  ammonia,  and  reddens  paper  tinged 
with  turmeric  held  above  it;  and  at  last  is  found 
merely  quicksilver. 

This  curious  experiment  was  made  about 
'  the  same  time  by  Dr.  Zeebeck  of  Jena,  and  by 
M.  Kissinger  and  Berzelius  of  Stockholm, 
before  the  middle  of  the  year  18o8  ;  and-  they 
were  led  to  make  it  in  consequence  of  my  ex- 
periments on  potassa  and  soda. 

£.  I  found  a  still  more  easy  mode  of  making 
the  amalgam  by  employing  mercury  combined 
with  a  minute  quantity  of  potassium,  sodium, 
or  barium.  When  a  compound  of  this  kind  is 
placed  in  contact  with  a  solution  of  ammonia,  or 
any  moistenedammoniacal  salt, it  enlarges  toeiffht 
or  ten  times  its  bulk,  and  becomes  a  soft  solid, 
and  may  be  preserved  for  a  much  longer  time 
than  the  amalgam  formed  by  electrical  powers  ; 
it  changes  very  slowly  even  under  water. 

3.  Different  opinions  have  been  formed,  and 
may  still  be  formed,  concerning  the  nature  of 
this  extraordinary  substance.  M.  Berzelius 
supposes  that  ammonia  consists  of  a  peculiar 
metal  combined  with  oxygene,  and  of  which 
metal  hydrogene  and  azote  are  both  peculiar 
oxides ;  this  idea  was  one  tlsat  I  started  likewise 
soon  after  the  discovery  of  the  amalgam. 

4.  Another  view  of  the  subject  is,  that  the 


[  475  ] 

amalgam  consists  of  mercury  united  to  azote 
and  liydrogenp,  the  hydrogene  being  in  larger 
proportion  than  in  ammonia  ;  and  this  view  has 
been  embraced  and  defended  by  M.  M.  Gay 
Lussac  and  Thenard  ;  but  the  subject  is  still 
obscure  and  mysterious,  and  the  true  theory  of 
the  experiment  can  only  be  developed  in  con- 
sequence of  new  facts. 

5.  Soon  after  the  discovery  of  the  amalgam, 
I  attempted  to  procure  a  peculiar  metallic  sub- 
stance from  it  by  distillation  out  of  the  contact 
of  air,  but  without  success  ;  whether  I  used  the 
amalgam  formed  by  electricity,  or  that  procured 
by  the  intervention  of  the  alkaline  metals ; 
on  the  application  of  heat,  hydrogene  and  am- 
monia were  always  evolved,  and  the  mercury 
recovered  its  former  state.  On  the  idea  of  the 
basis  of  ammonia  being  a  peculiar  metal,  oF 
which  azote  and  hydrogene  are  oxides,  these 
results  can  only  be  explained  by  supposing  that 
the  amalgam  being  formed  from  moist  substances, 
sufficient  water  adheres  to  it,  to  afibrd  oxygene, 
and  to  produce  the  gaseous  matter;  and  the 
most  perfect  amalgam  does  not  yield  a  quantity 
of  gaseous  matter  equal  to  more  than  -^-^  of  its 
weight. 

I  procured  ammonia  and  hydrogene  by  heat- 
ing the  amalgam,  however  in  cases  in  which  it 
was  carefully  wiped  with  bibulous  paper,  and 


[  476  1 

in  which  there  was  no  appearance  of  adhering 
moisture ;  and  similar  results  have  been  ob- 
tained by  M.  M.  Gay  Lussac  and  Thenard. 

In  the  most  accurate  experiments  the  propor- 
tions of  ammonia  and  hydrogene  were  two  to 
©ne  in  volume. 

6.  There  is  no  instance  known  of  mercury 
retaining  its  metallic  characters  in  combination 
with  any  other  substance  than  a  metal ;  and  it 
seems  very  probable  that,  if  the  matter  existing 
in  the  amalgam  from  ammonia  could  be  pro- 
cured in  its  perfect  form,  and  could  be  exhibited 
as  a  solid  under  pressure,  and  at  a  very  low 
temperature,  it  would  appear  as  an  extremely 
light  metallic  substance.  On  the  idea  of  its 
being  a  compound  of  azote  and  hydrogene  it 
will  consist  of  one  proportion  of  azote  26,  and 
§  of  hydrogene  8  ;  and  the  number  represent- 
ing it  will  be  34. 

It  is  very  difficult,  but  not  however  altoge- 
ther impossible  to  reconcile  the  idea  of  the  sub- 
stance in  the  amalgam  being  elementary,  with 
analogies  belonging  to  the  general  series  of 
,  definite  proportions.  On  such  a  supposition 
azote  must  necessarily  contain  more  than  four 
times  as  much  oxygene  as  hydrogene ;  and  if 
1  of  basis  to  5  of  oxygene,  be  supposed  in  hy- 
drogene, then  there  will  be  1  to  25  in  azote, 
and  1  to  40  in  nitrous  oxide,  1  to  55  in  nitrous 


[  477  ] 


gas,  1  to  85  in  nitrous  acid,  and  1  to  IB  in 
ammonia;  and  5,  15,  25,  40,  55,  and  85,  form 
a  series  of  numbers  having  definite  relations  to 
each  other. 

If  the  hypothesis  of  the  elementary  nature  of 
the  substance  in  the  amalgam  be  adopted,  water 
must  be  supposed  to  be  constituted  by  1  basis, 
and  50  of  oxygene. 

It  is  extremely  unlikely  that  siich  proportions 
should  exist,  and  the  general  tenor  of  our 
knowledge  of  chemistry,  as  well  as  the  results 
of  the  experiments,  render  it  much  more  pro- 
bable that  the  amalgam  is  composed  of  quick- 
silver, azote,  and  hydrogene. 


[  478  ] 


DIVISION  VII. 

ON  THE  ANALOGIES  BETWEEN  THE  UNDE- 
COMPOUNDED SUBSTANCES;  SPECULA- 
TIONS RESPECTING  THEIR  NATURE;  ON 
THE  MODES  OF  SEPARATING  THEM,  AND 
ON  THE  RELATIONS  OF  THEIR  COM- 
POUNDS. 

1.  Of  the  Analogies  between  the  undecompounded 
Substances ;  Ideas  respecting  their  nature, 

1.  The  undecompounded  substances  most 
analogous  to  each  other,  are  certainly  to  be 
found  amongst  the  metals ;  some  of  these  are 
so  similar  that  it  requires  refined  observation, 
and  sometimes  experiment  to  distinguish  them. 
There  is  likewise  a  chain  of  gradations  of  re- 
semblance which  may  be  traced  thoughoul  the 
whole  series  of  metallic  bodies,  at  the  same 
time  that  certain  similar  and  characteristic  pro- 
perties are  found  to  belong  to  metals  in  other 
respects  most  unlike  each  other. 

Silver  and  palladium,  antimony  and  tellu- 
rium, agree  in  a  great  number  of  qualities.  Pot- 
assium and  platinum,  if  we  except  their  lustre, 
colour,  and  power  of  conducting  electricity,  are 
bodies  extremely  dissimilar  ;  yet,  by  arranging 


[  479  ] 


the  metals  in  the  order  of  their  natural  resem- 
blances, these  two  subtances  may  be  made  parts 
of  one  chain  of  natural  bodies:  potassium, 
sodium,  and  barium  are  very  like  each  other ; 
barium  approaches  to  manganesum,  zinc,  iron, 
tin,  and  antimony.  Platinum  is  analogous  to 
gold,  silver,  and  palladium ;  and  palladium 
is  connected  by  distinct  analogies  with  tin, 
zinc,  iron,  and  manganesum.  Arsenic  and  chro- 
mium, though  amongst  the  most  dissimilar  of 
the  metals  in  other  respects,  agree  in  the  pro- 
perty of  forming  acid  matter  by  combination 
with  oxygene. 

Amongst  the  inflammable  bodies  not  metallic 
there  are  analogies,  but  not  a  similar  series.  Sul- 
phur and  phosphorus  agree  in  many  respects ; 
carbon  and  boron  are  likewise  analogous,  and 
are  connected  by  distinct  relations  with  the 
metallic  substances.  Azote,  whilst  it  agrees 
with  the  other  combustible  bodies  that  have  been 
named  in  forming  an  acid  by  saturation  with 
oxygene,  is  analogous  to  carbon  in  its  incapacity 
of  uniting  to  chlorine. 

Chlorine  and  oxygene  are  separated  from  the 
inflammable  bodies  by  a  number  of  marked  dis- 
tinctions ;  yet  sulphur  agrees  with  chlorine  in 
forming  an  acid  by  combining  with  hydrogene; 
and  has  a  weak  attraction  for  chlorine  and  a 
strong  attraction  for  metallic  substances. 


I  480  ] 


2,  As  far  as  our  knowledge  of  the  nature  of 
compound  bodies  has  extended,  analogy  of  pro- 
perties is  connected  with  analogy  of  compo- 
sition; if  one  of  the  inflammable  solids  or  metals 
j[s  proved  to  be  compound,  there  would  be 
strong  evidence  for  supposing  that  the  others 
.were  likewise  compounded.  It  has  been  already 
.mentioned  that  sulphur  and  phosphorus,  when 
Voltaic  electrical  sparks  are  taken  in  them  in  a 
state  of  fusion,  afford  hydrogene  gas.  1  found 
likewise  that  when  an  alloy  of  tellurium  and  pot- 
assium was  acted  upon  by  melted  sulphur, 
telluretted  and  sulphuretted  hydrogene  equal 
to  at  least  80  times  the  volume  of  the  sulphur 
were  disengaged.    I  have  made  many  experi- 
ments of  this  kind  with  similar  results,  the  sul- 
iphur  being  recently  sublimed  in  azote,  and 
moisture  being  excluded  with  the  greatest  care. 
In  the  experiments  of  Voltaic  electrization,  it 
might  be  supposed  that  the  hydrogene  being 
only  in  very  small  quantity  might  belong  to  an 
accidental  admixture  in  the  sulphur  and  the 
phosphorus  ;  but  the  proportion  is  too  large  in 
the  experiments  on  the  action  of  tellurium 
potassium  and  sulphur,  to  allow  of  a  similar 
inference,  and  it  seems  more  probable  that  it 
arises  either  from  the  decomposition  of  the 
sulphur,  or  of  the  metals,  or  all  of  these  bodies. 
3.  We  know  nothing  of  the  true  elements 


[  4§I  1 

belonging  to  nature;  but  as  far  as  we  canreasoli 
from  the  relations  of  the  properties  of  matter ; 
hydrogeue  is  the  substance  which  approaches 
nearest  to  what  the  elements  may  be  supposed 
to  be.  It  has  energetic  powers  of  combination^ 
its  parts  are  highly  repulsive  as  to  each  other, 
and  attractive  of  the  particles  of  other  mattefj 
it  enters  into  combination  in  a  quantity  very 
much  smaller  than  any  other  substance,  and  in 
this  respect  it  is  approached  by  no  known  body. 

After  hydrogene  oxygene  partakes  most  of 
the  elementary  character ;  it  has  perhaps  a 
greater  energy  of  attraction,  and  next  to  hydro- 
gene  is  the  body  that  enters  into  combination 
in  the  smallest  proportion. 

4.  I  have  already  hinted  at  the  idea  that  all  in- 
flammable matters  may  be  similarly  constituted, 
and  may  contain  hydrogene.  And  on  this 
suppositioil  they  may  be  conceived  to  owe  their 
powers  of  combining  both  with  oxygene  and 
chlorine,  to  the  attractive  energies  of  their  com* 
bined  hydrogene. 

On  the  most  probable  view  of  the  nature  of 
the  amalgam  from  ammonia,  as  I  have  men- 
tioned, it  must  be  supposed  to  be  composed  of 
hydrogene,  azote,  and  quicksilver ;  and  it  may 
be  regarded  as  a  kind  of  type  of  the  com- 
position of  the  metals  ;  and  by  supposing  them 
and  the  inflammable  bodies  different  combiria- 

fOL.  I.  1  i 


[  482  ] 

tions  of  hydrogene  with  another  principle  as 
yet  unknown  in  the  separate  form  ;  all  the  phe- 
nomena may  be  easily  accounted  for,  and  will 
be  found  in  harmony  with  the  tlieory  of  definite 
proportions. 

The  metal  of  ammonia  or  ammonium  must  he 
supposed  to  be  constituted  by  8  of  hydrogene, 
and  26  of  azote ;  and  as  azote  unites  to  five 
proportions  five  times  15  of  oxygene,  it  may 
be  supposed  lo  contain  ten  proporlions  of 
hydrogene;  and  its  constitution  may  be  thus 
expressed,  10  proportions  of  hydrogene  and  16 
proportions  of  an  unknown  basis.  Ammonium, 
on  the  same  hypothesis,  will  consist  of  16  un- 
known basis,  and  18  hydrogene.  Potassium, 
the  number  representing  which  is  75  ;  as  it 
combines  with  3  proportions  of  oxygene,  may  / 
be  supposed  to  consist  of  69  uiJknown  basis, 
and  6  hydrogene.  Sodium,  which  is  represented 
by  88,  and  which  likewise  combines  with  three 
proportions  of  oxygene,  may  be  considered  as 
consisting  ef  82  basis,  and  6  hydrogene.  Tin, 
the  number  of  which  is  110,  and  which  com- 
bines with  two  proportions  of  oxgene  may  be 
supposed  to  be  constituted  by  I06  ofbasisand4 
hydrogene  ;  and  silver,  which  is  represented  by 
£05,  of  203  of  basis,  and  2  hydrogene.  Amongst 
the  acidifiable  bodies,  sulphur,  which  is  repre- 
sented by  30,  may  be  supposed  to  consist  of 


6  hydrogene,  and  24  basis;  Phosphorus  of  4 
hydrogene,  and  16  basis  ;  and  charcoal  of  4 
h)  drogene  and  hi  basis.  It  will  be  unnecessary 
to  supply  any  more  of  these  estimations,  the 
principles  of  which  are  obvious  ;  and  in  an  ele» 
mentary  book  it  would  be  improper  to  dwell 
upon  matters  of  mere  speculation;  even  these 
transient  views  have  been  developed  merely  for 
the  sake  of  pointing  out  a  promising  path  of 
enquiry. 

5-  In  supposing  the  quantity  of  liydrogene  in 
the  inflammable  solids  and  metals  denoted  by 
the  quantity  of  oxygene  or  of  chlorine  they 
absorb,  it  is  taken  for  granted  that  the  hydro- 
gene  forms  only  water  or  muriatic  acid  in  the 
new  combination,  but  it  is  possible  that  hydro- 
gene  may  combine  with  oxygene  and  chlorine 
in  many  different  proportions,  and  that  its 
union  with  a  peculiar  basis  may  modify  its 
power  of  attraction  ;  so  that  even  allowing  the 
general  hypothesis,  no  confidence  can  be  placed 
in  the  numerical  expressions  of  the  proportions 
of  hydrogene  and  basis  ;  they  are  offered  merely 
as  possible  circumstances. 

6.  The  probabilities  that  the  metals  and  in- 
flammable sohds  may  be  constituted  by  different 
and  various  proportions  of  hydrogene  and  an 
unknown  basis,  are  however  strengthened  by 


[  4^  1 

the  Fact,  tliat  the  metals  in  which  hydrogene  is 
supposed  to  be  attracted  by  the  largest  quantity 
of  other  matter  are  the  least  disposed  to  combine 
with  oxygene  and  chlorine ;  and  those  that  are 
supposed  to  contain  the  largest  quantity  of  hy- 
drogene  to  the  smallest  quantity  of  other  matter, 
are  the  most  combustible,  and  likewise  those 
supposed  to  contain  the  largest,  and  conse* 
quently  the  least  attracted  quantity  of  hydro- 
gene,  have  the  lowest  specific  gravity. 

7.  When  the  analogy  of  the  oxides  to  many  of 
the  hydrats,  and  that  of  the  combinations  of  chlo- 
rine to  many  of  the  neutral  salts,  is  considered, 
bodies  so  much  alike  that  till  lately  they  have 
been  confounded  together ;  the  view  that  the 
inflammable  bodies  contain  hydrogene  becomes 
still  more  likely.  W ater  cannot  be  separated 
from  the  hydrats  of  potassa  or  soda  by  heat ; 
and  the  hydrat  of  lime  is  extremely  analogous 
to  the  pure  earth  ;  and  supposing  the  oxides  to 
be  compounds  of  unknown  bases  and  water,  it 
might  be  expected  that  the  water  would  adhere 
to  them  with  great  energy,  and  would  only  be 
separated  in  consequence  of  the  bases  entering 
into  a  new  combination. 

Common  salt  is  very  analogous  to  sulphat  of 
■potassa  and  other  bodies  known  to  consist  of 
acid  matter  and  alkaline  matter  ;  and  if  sodinExi 


[  485  ] 

consist  of  a  basis  combined  with  hydrogene,  then 
common  salt  may  be  considered  as  composed  of 
the  same  basis  united  to  muriatic  acid. 

8.  Chlorine  and  oxygene  agree  in  many  of 
their  characters  ;  but  the  weight  of  chlorine,  its 
colour,  its  absorbability  by  water  are  all  in 
favour  of  its  being  a  compound.  The  number 
representing  chlorine  is  so  high  that  it  may  in- 
clude four  proportions  of  oxygene  ;  and  if  this 
body  be  supposed  to  consist  of  oxygene  united 
to  an  unknown  basis,  the  analogy  of  the  com- 
binations of  chlorine,  both  to  the  oxides  and  the 
salts,  might  be  easily  explained.  The  evidences 
in  favour  of  such  an  idea  of  the  constitution 
of  chlorine  are,  however,  much  inferior  to  those 
which  render  it  probable  that  the  inflammable 
solids  contain  hydrogene  ;  and  this  speculation 
on  the  composition  of  chlorine  must  not  be 
confounded  with  the  notion  that  chlorine  is  a 
compound  of  oxygene  and  muriatic  acid  free 
from  water;  for  supposing  a  basis  to  exist  in 
chlorine,  it  does  not  follow  thatit  will  be  acid 
in  its  nature.  Th^  characteristic  acid  belonging 
to  the  combinations  of  chlorine  is  formed  by  the 
union  of  that  body  with  hydrogene  ;  and  sul- 
phur likewise  forms  gn  acid  by  combining  with 
hydrogene.. 

9.  I  have  mentioned,  page  172,  that  in  the 
electrization  of  a  globule  qf  mercury  in  wat^r^. 


I 


[  486  1 

oxygene  appears  lo  be  combined  wilU  the  metal, 
and  yet  no  hydrogene  evolved.    I  have  made  a 
number  of  experiments  on  this  subject,  and  have 
ascertained  that,  in  the  process  described,  oxide 
is  formed,  without  any  apparent  compensation 
in  the  production  of  inflammable  matter;  nor 
was  I  able  to  detect  any  combination  into  which 
the  hydrogene  could  have  entered;  so  that  these 
experiments,  as  they  now  stand,  would  induce 
the  belief  that  water  is  the  ponderable  basis 
of  both  oxygene  and  hydrogene,  and  that  these 
two  forms  of  matter  owe  their  peculiar  proper- 
ties either  to  the  agency  of  imponderable  sub- 
stances, or  to  peculiar  arrangements  of  the 
particles  of  the  same  matter;  but  such  a  for- 
midable conclusion  as  this  must  not  be  hastily 
adopted,  for  in  all  other  cases  oxygene  and 
hydrogene  appear  as  perfectly  inconvertible 
substances,  and  in  no  other  instance  can  one  be 
procured  from  water  without  the  correspondent 
quantity  of  the  other,  or  without  some  product 
in  which  the  other  may  be  supposed  to  enter. 
In  all  cases  in  which  the  circuit  appears  to  be 
interrupted,  even  this  is  the  case.    When  the 
linger  is  plunged  in  a  glass  of  water  connected 
with  a  wire  of  platina  positively  electrified  fi  cm 
the  battery  of  £000  double  plates  of  the  Royal 
Institution,  oxygene  is  produced,  and  there  is 
no  appearance  gf  hydrogene;  but  in  this  case 


« 


[  4S7  ]r 

the  body  is  connected  with  a  floor  containing 
moisture,  ami  at  tlie  extreme  point  of  the  moist 
surrace,  wliere  it  is  in  contact  with  a  metallic 
body,  hyclrogene  must  be  disengaged;  and  the 
same  chansjes  occur  if  a  circuit  be  made  throusih 
eight  persons,  their  hands  being  in  contact, 
the  two  forasing  the  extremity  of  the  chain, 
having  their  fingers  plunged  in  two  glasses 
connected  by  wires  of  platinum  with  the  two 
poles  of  the  battery ;  hydrogene  is  produced 
from  one  wire,  and  oxygene  from  the  other. 
Till  1  ascertained  that  even  acids,  and  alka- 
lies could  be  attracted  from  a  central  vessel 
in  the  Voltaic  circuit  to  the  two  extremities  of 
the  positive  and  negative  metallic  surfaces,  it 
appeared  very  mysterious  that  oxygene  and 
hydrogene  should  be  separately  produced  in  the 
Voltaic  electrization  of  water;  but  if  it  be  pos- 
sible for  lime  to  be  attracted  through  sulphuric 
acid  to  the  negative  surface,  it  seems  equally  pos- 
sible that  hydrogene  maybe  attracted  through 
the  moisture  in  a  living  body;  or  a  series  of 
decompositions  and  recompositions  may  be 
simultaneously  produced  throughout  the  whole 
extent  of  the  moist  surface,  by  which,  whilst  a 
particle  of  oxygene  is  produced  atone  extremity 
of  the  chain,  a  particle  of  hydrogene  is  evolved 
at  ihe  other. 

10.  There  is,  however,  no  impossibility  in  the 


supposition  that  the  same  ponderable  matter  in 
different  electrical  states,  or  in  different  arrange- 
ments, may  constitute  substances  chemically 
different:  there  are  parallel  cases  in  the  different 
states  in  which  bodies  are  found,  connected  with 
their  different  relations  to  temperature.  Thns 
steam,  ice,  and  water,  are  the  same  ponderable 
matter;  and  certain  quantities  of  ice  and  steam 
mixed  together  produce  ice-cold  water.  Even  if 
it  should  be  ultimately  found  that  oxygene  and 
hydrogene  are  the  same   matter  in  different 
states  of  electricity,  or  that  two  or  three  elements 
in  different  proportions  constitute  all  bodies, 
the  great  doctrines  of  chemistry,  the  theory  of 
definite  proportions,  and  the  specific  attractions 
of  bodies  must  remain  immutable;  the  causes 
of  the  difference  of  form  of  the  bodies  supposed 
to  be  elementary,  if  such  a  step  were  made, 
must  be  ascertained,  and  the  only  change  in 
the  science  would  be,  that  those  substances  now 
considered  as  primary  elements  must  be  consi- 
dered as  secondary  ;  but  the  numbers  representr 
ing  them  would  be  the  same,  and  they  would 
probably  be  all  found  to  be  produced  by  the 
additions  of  mulljpies  of  some  simple  numbers 
pr  fractional  parts, 

1 1.  That  the  forms  of  natural  bodies  may  de- 
pend upon  different  arrangements  of  the  same 
particles  of  matter  has  been  a  favourite  h  ypothesis 


[  489  I 

advanced  in  the  earliest  era  of  physical  research, 
and  often  supported  by  the  reasonings  of  the 
ablest  philosophers.  This  sublime  chemical 
speculation  sanctioned  by  the  authority  of 
Hooke,  Newton,  and  Boscovich,  must  not  be 
confounded  with  the  ideas  advanced  by  the 
alchemists  concerning  the  convertibility  of  the 
elements  into  each  other.  The  possible  trans- 
mutation of  metals  has  generally  been  reasoned 
upon,  not  as  a  philosophical  research,  but  as 
an  empirical  process.  Those  who  have  asserted 
the  actual  production  of  the  precious  metals 
from  other  elements,  or  their  decomposition, 
or  who  have  defended  the  chimera  of  the  phi- 
losopher's stone,  have  been  either  impostors,  or 
ynen  deluded  by  impostors.  In  this  age  of 
rational  enquiry  it  will  be  useless  to  decry 
the  practices  of  the  adepts,  or  to  caution  the 
public  against  confounding  the  hypothetical 
views  respecting  the  elements  founded  upon 
distinct  analogies,  with  the  dreams  of  alche- 
mical visionaries,  most  of  whom,  as  an  author 
of  the  last  century  justly  observed,  professed  an 
art  without  principles,  the  beginning  0/ which 
was  deceit,  the  progress  delusion,  and  the  end 
poverty, 


[  490  ] 

Ih  Of  ihe  Analopies  between  ihe  FroperUcs  of  ihe 
primary  Compounds,  and  on  iheir  Chemical 
Eelations. 

I.  Ill  those  compounds,  which  contain  the 
same  element  combined  with  b^ses  that  resem- 
ble each  other,  a  very  great  degree  of  similarity 
Blight  be  expected ;  and  it  is  found  that  a  number 
of  secondary  combinations  are  still  more  analo- 
gous to  each  other  than  any  of  the  undecora- 
ponnded  bodies.  Ittriaalid  glucina,  baryta  and 
strontia,  potassa  and  soda  are  instHDces  of  bodies 
■which,  as  to  many  of  their  properties,  might  be 
mistaken  for  each  other;  and  a  chain  of  anaioeiies 
may  be  traced  through  ail  the  combinations  of 
infiaramable  bodies  and  metals  with  chlorine, 
oxygene,  and  each  other.  All  the  acids,  alkaline 
earths,  alkalies,  and  combinations  of  chlorine  in 
their  pure  states  at  common  temperatures  are 
nonconductors  of  electricity,  by  far  the  greater 
number  possess  a  certain  degreeof  transparency  ; 
in  their  combinations  with  each  other  they 
display  analogous  results ;  most  of  them  form 
liydrats;  they  render  solid  a  certain  quantity 
of  water,  and  are  usually  dissolved  by  a  greater 
quantity  ;  and  even  acids  combine  with  each 
other  in  consequence  of  the  intermedium  of 
water,  as  is  the  case  with  the  sulphureous  and 
nitrous  acid  gasses. 

Libavius's  liquor,  or  stannanea,  is  a  limpid 


[  491  ] 


fluid  ;  iF  mixed  with  a  certain  proportion  of 
water  it  becomes  a  solid  crystalline  body.  The 
glacial  oil  of  vitriol,  and  the  hydrophespho- 
tom  acid  are  instances  of  oxidated  bodies  form- 
ing crystalline  solids  with  water. 

2,  The  earths  and  the  oxides  which  are  inso- 
luble in  water  still  condense  a  certain  quantity 
of  this  fluid,  and  it  gives  a  greater  fusibility  to 
those  which  retain  it  with  sufficient  energy  to 
be  submitted  so  a  strong  heat.  All  oxides  and 
earths  obtained  by  precipitation  from  aqueous 
solution,  that  I  have  examined,  are  hydrats, 
and  such  of  them,  as  I  have  carefully  analyzed, 
I  find  contain  the  water  in  definite  proportions. 
The  combination  of  an  earth,  an  alkali,  or  an 
oxide,  with  water  may  be  considered  as  amongst 
its  weakest  combinations,  for  the  water  is  ex- 
pelled by  carbonic  acid.  The  expulsion  of 
water  from  the  earths  seems  to  be  connected, 
as  I  stated  in  page  73,  with  the  contraction  of 
volume,  which  many  of  them  undergo  by  ig- 
Mition  :  the  particles,  when  the  water  is  driven 
off,  approach  nearer  to  each  other,  and  a  great 
contraction  is  the  result,  and  probably  some- 
times a  semi-fusion.  This  quality  on  which^ 
as  it  has  been  stated,  the  p)  rometer  of  Wedg- 
wood is  founded,  is  elegantly  exemplified  in  an 
experiment  I  have  lately  made  on  the  hydrat 
4)f  zircona.    When  this  bpdy  is  heated,  at  the 


t  492  ] 

snotnent  of  the  expulsion  of  the  water,  there  is 
so  g;reat  and  rapid  a  contraction  of  the  particles 
of  the  earth,  that  they  become  incandescent  in 
the  process;  and,  from  being  as  soft  as  resin, 
become  sufficiently  hard  to  scratch  rock  crystal, 

3.  In  general  those  compounds  of  oxygene, 
the  bases  of  which  combine  with  most  energy, 
likewise  exert  the  greatest  force  of  attraction  on 
each  oiher  ;  suph,  for  instance,  are  the  nietals  of 
the  fixed  alkalies  in  their  relations  to  sulphur, 
phosphorus,  arsenic,  and  tellurium;  and  pot-r 
assa  and  soda  readily  combine  with  the  acids  ©f 
sulphur,  phosphorus,  and  arsenic,  and  with  the 
oxide  of  tellurium. 

4.  No  refined  experiments  have  as  yet  been 
made  on  the  mutual  action  of  these  compounds 
of  chlorine  and  oxygene,  which  are  capable  of 
co-existing  ;  but  the  salts  called  hyperoxymuri- 
ates  are  substances  in  which  chlorine  and  oxy- 
gene exist  combined  with  metals ;   and  the 
facility  with  which  they  are  decomposed  de- 
pends upon  the  tendency  of  the  metal  to  unite  to 
chlorine,  so  as  to  form  a  binary  compound,  a 
circunrtstance  connected  with  the  expulsion  of 
the  oxygene.   The  hyperoxymuriate  of  potassa, 
when  it  was  first  formed  by  Dr.  Higgins,  was 
supposed  by  him  to  be  a  species  of  nitre,  from 
the  similarity  of  its  obvious  properties  :  and  it  is 
remarkable  that  its  composition  is  the  same  as 
that  of  nitre,  except  that  in  the  first  salt  there 


[  493  i 


is  a  proportion  of  chlorine^  and  in  the  second 
one  of  azote.  Hyperoxy muriate  of  potassa 
consists  of  1  proportion  of  potassium  75,  6  of 
oxygene  90,  and  1  of  chlorine  67.  Nitre  con- 
sists of  1  of  potassium  75,  6  of  oxygene  90, 
and  1  of  as^ote  26.  The  combinations  of  am- 
monia with  the  compounds  of  chlorine,  offer 
a  class  of  curious  bodies  to  the  chemical  en- 
quirer, the  properties  of  which  have  never 
been  investigated  ;  that  formed  by  phosphorana, 
and  referred  to  page  291,  is  a  most  extraordinary 
substance,  and  its  elements  are  combined  with 
a  degree  of  energy  which  renders  it  analogous 
to  a  primary  compound. 

5.  In  the  combinations  of  ammonia  with  acids 
and  oxides  the  hydrogene  of  the  ammonia  is 
always  in  sonie  definite  proportion  to  the  oxy- 
"gene  of  the  acid  or  oxide,  so  that  water  may  be 
formed  by  the  decomposition  of  the  compound  | 
this  is  obvious  from  the  decomposition  of  the 
fulminating  ammoniacal  metallic  compounds. 
If  a  solution  of  ammonia  be  poured  into  a  solu- 
tion of  gold,  a  brown  powder  falls  down,  which 
when  washed  and  dried,  explodes  by  a  gentk 
heat.  I  caused  it  to  detonate  in  small  quantities 
in  exhausted  glass  retorts,  and  I  found  that 
the  products  were  water,  azote,  and  gold. 

Fulminatitig  silver  is  a  compound  in  which 
the  elements  seem  to  be  in  similar  relations  lo 


i  494  ] 

each  other  ;  it  was  discovered  hy  M.  Berthollet, 
and  may  be  made  by  dissolving  the  oxide  of 
silver,  procured  from  the  nitrous  solution  by 
lime  water  in  solution  of  ammonia  at  common 
temperatures,  and  exposing  the  mixture  to  spon- 
taneous evaporation  ;  black  crystals  form,  which 
must  be  examined  with  great  caution,  and  only 
in  small  quantities,  as  they  explode  by  the  mere 
contact  of  a  soft  body. 

6.  The  extensive  class  of  bodies  called  neutral 
salts  are  formed  by  the  mutual  action  of  acids, 
and  oxides,  alkalies  and  earths ;  and  in  general 
thoseoxidated  bodies  that  contain  least  oxygene, 
are  such  as  most  readily  enter  into  combination 
with  acids ;  thus  the  peroxides  generally  are 
either  insoluble  in  acids,  or  require  the  abstrac- 
tion of  a  portion  of  oxygene  to  become  soluble; 
and  in  general  two  inflammable  bodies  in  coai- 
bining  with  oxygene,  unite  to  less  than  the  added 
sums  oi  the  quantity  they  would  separately  com- 
bine with  to  saturation.  Many  of  the  neutral 
salts  may  be  considered  either  as  combinations 
of  peroxides  with  inflammable  bases  or  as  alka- 
lies united  to  acids,  or  as  peroxides  united  to 
oxides;  for  instance,  the  compound  formed  from 
sulphureous  acid  gas  and  potassa  consists  of  pot- 
assium and  sulphur,  with  three  proportions  of 
oxygene,  and  may  be  regarded  as  a  compound 
of  peroxide  of  potassium  and  sulphur.  Sulphate 


[  495  ] 


of  potassa  contains  four  proportions  of  oxy* 
gene,  and  might  be  regarded  as  a  compound  of 
peroxide  of  potassium,  and  oxide  of  sulphur. 
They  are  in  fact  all  compounds  of  oxygene  with 
double  bases ;  and  when  one  fixed  alkali,  or 
earth,  or  oxide,  separates  another,  it  may  be 
supposed  that  the  basis  only  is  changed;  tluis, 
where  hydrat  of  potassa  separates  lime  from  its 
nitric  solution,  it  may  be  conceived  that  the 
potassium  only  takes  the  place  of  calcium.  And 
th  at  the  oxygene  and  water  of  the  hydrat  of  pot- 
assa unite  to  this  metal,  and  that  the  potassium 
unites  to  the  oxygene,  nitrous  acid  and  water 
of  the  solution. 

7.  It  is  very  easy  to  estimate  the  compositiofi 
of  any  of  the  combinations  of  alkalies,  earths,  or 
oxides  with  acids,  by  adding  together  the  num- 
bers representing  their  elements  ;  thus  sulpljate 
of  soda  is  composed  of  60  sulphur,  90  oxygene, 
which  make  two  proportions  of  sulphuric  acid; 
and  88  of  sodium,  and  30  of  oxygene,  whick 
make  one  proportion  of  soda.  Carbonate  at 
lead  is  composed  of  two  proportions  of  carbonic 
acid,  equal  to  82.8,  two  proportions  of  oxygene 
SO,  and  one  of  lead  39S.  Sulphate  of  kad  is 
composed  of  two  proportions  of  sulphuric  acid 
150,  two  of  oxygene  30,  and  one  of  lead  39^  : 
§ulphate  of  nickel  of  two  proportions  of  ?,iilphii- 
ricacid  I50,  and  one  of  Qxide  of  nickel  141;  and 


[496] 

these  proportions  agree  almost  precisely  with 
the  best  analysis. 

8.  it  appears  that  in  the  neutrosaline  com- 
pounds in  which  there  is  a  perfect  harmony  be* 
tween  the  proportions  of  the  elements,  the  result 
IS  neutralization  ;  and  in  this  case  a  crystal- 
line compound,  or  an  insoluble  compound  is 
usually  formed.  Thus  in  the  instances  above 
mentioned,  in  the  sulphates  of  soda  and  lead;  the 
sulphur  is  a  binary  proportion,  and  the  oxygene 
a  binary  proportion,  or  a  multiple  of  a  binar  y 
proportion  ;  and  in  the  carbonate  of  lead,  the 
carbon  is  a  binary  proportion,  and  the  oxygene 
a  multiple  of  a  binary  proportion  ;  and  to  give 
another  instance,  in  the  sulphate  of  barytes  the 
sulphur  is  a  single  proportion,  and  the  oxygene 
a  single  proportion,  or  a  multiple. 

When,  on  the  contrary,  there  is  a  want  of 
harmony  in  the  proportions,  the  excess  either 
of  acid  or  basis  seems  to  be  shewn  in  the  pro- 
perties of  the  result ;  and  it  is  seldom  a  crys- 
tallized body.  Thus  in  the  soluble  red  sulphat 
of  iron,  the  number  of  proportions  of  oxygene 
in  the  oxide  are  three,  and  those  of  the  sulphur 
in  the  acid  are  four :  and  this  body  is  strongly 
acid  and  uncrystallizable. 


C  4^7  ] 

III.  On  the  relative  Attractions  of  the  undecomposed 
Substances  for  each  other. 

1.  The  attractions  oF  the  undecompounded 
substances  vary  with  the  temperature,  probably, 
chiefly  in  consequence  of  their  different  degrees 
of  volatility  ;  for  although  freedom  of  motion  in 
the  parts  of  bodies  wonderfully  promotes  com- 
bination, yet  the  disposition  in  bodies  to  assume 
the  aeriform  state  at  high  temperatures,  enables 
decompositions  to  take  place  in  an  order  which 
would  not  be  expected  from  the  known  agencies 
of  the  substances  under  common  circumstances. 

2.  The  bodies  that  follow  are  arranged  in  the 
order  of  their  attractions  for  oxygene,  at  the 
lowest  temperature  of  visible  ignition,  after  the 
results  of  ray  own  observation.  Potassium, 
sodium,  barium,  boron,  carbon,  manganesura, 
zinc,  iron,  tin,  phosphorus,  antimony,  bismuth, 
lead,  sulphur,  arsenic,  tungstenum,  azote,  palla- 
dium, mercury,  silver,  gold,  platinum. 

3.  The  attractions  of  bodies  for  chlorine  follow 
an  order  very  different,  though  with  some  ex- 
ceptions ;  potassium,  sodium,  zinc,  iron,  lead, 
Sliver,  antimony,  bismuth,  phosphorus,  copper, 
sulphur,  mercury,  platinum,  gold. 

4.  The  attractions  of  the  undecompounded 
bodies  for  sulphur  have  not  been  determined 
to  any  extent.    Potassium  and  sodium  seem  to 

VOL.  I  K  k 


[  498  3 

have  the  highest  attraction  of  any  substances: 
then  iron,  copper^  antimony,  palladium,  lead, 
and  silver. 

5.  No  bodies  combine  with  phosphorus  with 
more  energy  than  the  metals  of  the  fixed  alkalies; 
and  after  them  platinum,  zinc,  antimony,  and 
sulphur,  appear  to  have  the  stron^iest  attractions ; 
but  no  very  definite  knowledge  has  been  as  yet 
obtained  on  the  relations  of  the  phosphurets. 

6.  The  general  phen  imena  of  the  decompo- 
sition of  the  binary  compounds,  by  undecom- 
pounded  bodies,  can  require  no  illustration.  Pot- 
assium separates  chlorine  and  oxygene  from  all 
Jknown  bodies  ;  usually  it  produces  potassa,  but 
sometimes  by  acting  on  compounds  containing 
abundance  of  oxygene,  it  forms  the  peroxide  of 
potassium.  Carbon,  in  reducing  metallic  oxides, 
forms  either  carbonic  acid,  or  gaseous  oxide  of 
carbon,  according  as  the  oxygene  is  more  or 
less  strongly  attracted  by  the  basis^  When 
oxides  are  decomposed  by  sulphur,  sulphu- 
reous gas,  and  sulphurets  are  almost  always 
formed. 

7.  Some  of  the  instances  which  were  formerly 
supposed  instances  of  single  attractions  are 
now  known  to  be  connected  with  double  attrac- 
tions. This  is  remarkably  the  case  in  the  pro- 
duction of  potassium  by  iron.  The  wiiter  in  the 
hydrat  of  potassa,  and  the  potassa  seem  to  be 


C  499  3 

decomposed  at  the  same  time  ;  the  Iron  unites  to 
the  oxygene  of  both  ;  the  hydrogene  and  potassa 
eorabine  ;  and  their  gaseous  compound  deposits 
potassium  on  cooling. 

IV.  On  ihe  Methods  of  separating  the  undecomposed 
Bodies  from  each  other, 

1.  General  methods  of  separating  the  unde- 
corapounded  bodies  from  each  other  may  be 
learnt  from  a  consideration  of  the  processes  by 
which  they  are  procured;  but  there  are  other 
modes  which  apply  to  many  of  their  compounds, 
and  which  are  still  more  simple. 

2.  As  all  the  undecomposed  bodies  differ  in 
the  manner  in  which  they  are  affected  by  heat, 
many  of  them  may  be  separated  from  com- 
pounds, by  exposing  them  to  different  tem- 
peratures. Thus  oxygencj  chlorine,  mercury, 
phosphorus,  and  sulphur  may  be  detached  from 
many  bodies  by  the  process  of  ignition. 

3.  In  most  cases,  however,  complicated  me- 
thods are  necessary,  particularly  in  cases  when 
the  bodies 'are  united  to  oxygene  and  acids  or 
to  chlorine;  the  compounds  of  chlorine  differ 
very  much  in  volatility,  and  in  cases  when  they 
are  mixed  together,  they  appear  to  act  upon 
each  other  with  very  little  energy  only  :  hence, 
if  it  is  possible  to  combine  all  the  elements  of  a 
compound  with  chlorine,  by  the  action  of  th« 


t  500  ] 

gas,  or  of  muriatic  acid,  or  nitro-muriatic  acid, 
they  may  be  easily  separated  by  the  application 
of  a  heat  gradually  increased.  Amongst  the 
metallic  combinations,  that  of  tin  when  saturated 
with  chlorine  rises  first,  then  those  of  arsenic, 
antimony,  tellurium,  iron,  zinc,  bismuth,  in  the 
order  in  which  they  have  been  named. 

Silver  is  easily  separated  from  solutions  in 
which  it  exists  by  muriatic  acid,  with  the  chlo- 
rine of  which  it  forms  an  insoluble  compound; 
and  in  the  same  way  chlorine  is  separated,  and 
its  quantity  in  any  substance  ascertained  by 
means  of  solution  of  silver. 

Oxide  of  iron  is  separated  from  solutions  by 
succinate  of  ammonia,  with  which  it  forms  an 
insoluble  salt.  The  oxides  of  copper,  nickel,  and 
cobalt,  are  all  soluble  in  ammonia.  Those  of 
zinc,  tellurium,  tin,  and  platinum,  in  solution  of 
potassa.  Acids  are  separated  by  alkalies  ;  and 
alumina,  silica,  zircona,  ittria,  glucina,  and  the 
alkaline  earths,  may  with  facility  be  detached 
from  their  combinations  by  the  action  of  acids, 
alkalies,  and  carbonates.  Oxide  of  lead  and 
baryta  may  be  easily  separated  from  other 
bodies,  in  consequence  of  their  forming  inso- 
ble  compounds  with  sulphuric  acid. 

4.  The  order  in  which  metals  precipitate  each 
other  from  solutions,  is  nearly  in  the  ratio  of 
their  attraction  for  oxygene ;  and  in  all  cases  of 


lielitral Compounds,  the  precipitating  metal  takes 
the  oxygene  and  acid  of  the  metal  thrown 
down.  Iron  readily  precipitates  copper ; — zinc 
readily  throws  down  tin,  lead,  tellurium^  bis- 
muth, 8cc.  and  in  general  the  metallic  substances, 
as  has  been  stated  page  14 8,  attract  oxygene,  and 
^tecipitate  each  other  in  a  ratio  connected  with 
their  electrical  relations  ;  those  that  are  positive 
with  respect  to  others  having  the  highest  attrac- 
tive powers  for  oxygene  and  acids. 

By  Voltaic  electricity  all  substances  are  sepa- 
rated from  their  compounds  with  oxygene  and 
chlorine;  or  alkalies,  earths,  and  oxides  are 
separated  from  acids ;  as  has  been  mentioned 
page  161,  and  that  in  an  uniform  order  and  in 
definite  proportions,  so  that  Voltaic  electricity 
offers  general  methods  of  decomposing  all  com- 
pounds soluble  in  water  ;  and  for  most  experi- 
ments of  this  kind  very  small  combinations  only 
are  necessary :  if  small  quantities  of  the  materials 
are  employed,  two  or  three  double  plates  are 
sufficient  for  decomposing  most  metallic  solu- 
tions. The  energies  of  small  powers  in  acting 
upon  bodies  by  diminishing  the  quantities  ex. 
posed  to  their  agency,  has  been  happily  shewn 
by  Dr.  Wollaston,  in  the  decomposition  of 
water  by  a  common  small  electrical  machine, 
hy  passing  the  electricity  from  surfaces  of  about 
^^^ncsVo        square  inch  ;  and  the  same  philo- 


[  502  ] 

sopher  has  produced  the  ignition  of  platinum 
in  leaf  of  -j—^  of  an  inch  in  thickness,  by  a 
single,  series  of  double  metals  of  a  few  inches 
square:  the  zinc  is  circular,  forming  a  small 
hollow  tube,  and  surrounded  by  copper  opposed 
to  each  side  of  it,  and  bent  so  as  to  correspond 
to  the  form  ol  the  zinc  ;  when  the  two  metals  are 
exposed  to  the  action  of  an  acid,  and  connected 
by  the  leaf  of  platinum,  the  effect  is  produced. 

V.  General  Observalions,  and  Conclusion  of  Pari 

First. 

1.  Few  of  the  undecompounded  bodies,  or  even 
of  the  primary  compounds,  as  is  evident  from 
what  has  been  said,  are  found  in  an  uncombined 
stale  on  our  globe  ;  their  tendency  to  unite  with 
each  other  is  constantly  exerted;  and  a  series 
of  decompositions  and  recombinations  are  con- 
stantly occurring  in  the  phenomena  of  nature, 
and  in  the  operations  of  art.  The  compounds 
containing  more  than  two  elements,  will  form 
the  subjects  of  consideration  for  the  second 
part  of  this  work,  and  their  arrangements  in 
the  mineral,  vegetable,  and  animal  kingdoms  ^ 
when  the  principles  that  have  been  advanced 
in  the  preceding  pages,  will  be  applied  to  the 
elucidation  of  an  important  series  of  changes 
belonging  to  inorganic  and  to  organic  matter. 
As  far  as  our  investigations  have  extended,  the 


[  503  ] 

same  elements  belong  to  the  same  parts  of  the 
system.  The  composition  of  the  atmosphere 
and  the  ocean  are  analogous,  as  far  as  the  heights 
of  one,  and  the  depths  of  the  other  have  been 
examined.  The  matters  thrown  out  by  volcanoes 
are  earthy  or  stony  aggrep;ates,  and  they  may 
owe  their  origin  to  the  action  of  air  and  water 
upon  the  metallic  bases  of  the  earths  and  alka- 
lies ;  an  action  which  may  be  supposed  to  be 
connected  with  the  production  of  subterraneous 
fires.  Even  the  substances  that  fall  from  meteors, 
though  differing  in  their  form  and  appearance 
from  any  of  the  bodies  belonging  to  our  earth, 
yet  contain  well  known  elements,  silica,  mag- 
nesia, sulphur,  and  the  two  magnetic  metals, 
iron  and  nickel. 

5.  A  few  undecompounded  bodies,  which  may 
perhaps  ultimately  be  resolved  into  still  fewer 
elements,  or  which  may  be  different  forms  of 
the  same  material,  constitute  the  whole  of  our 
tangible  universe  of  things.  By  experiment 
they  are  discovered,  even  in  the  most  compli- 
cated arrangements ;  and  experiment  is  as  it  were 
the  chain  that  binds  down  the  Proteus  of  nature, 
and  obliges  it  to  confess  its  real  form  and  divine 
origin. 

The  laws  which  govern  the  pha?nomena  of 
chemistry,  produce  invariable  results  ;  which 
may  be  made  the  guide  of  operations  in  the  arts  ; 


1 


[  504  ] 


and  \vhich  ins^ure  the  uniforniity  of  the  systens" 
of  nature,  the  arrangements  of  which  are 
marked  by  creative  intelligence,  and  made  con- 
stantly subservient  to  the  production  of  life, 
and  the  increa&e  of  happiness. 


London  :  Printed  by  W.  Bulmcrand  Co. 
Clc* eland-row,  St.  James's. 


[  505  ] 


On  the  Mode  of  calculating  the  JYumbers  repre* 
senting  the  Elements. 

Note  referring  to  page  107- 

The  smallest  quantity  bearing  a  definite  rela 
tion  to  another  quantity  or  quantities,  is  always 
the  datura,  whether  it  is  the  first,  second,  third, 
fourth,  or  any  other  added  quantity  in  the 
Combination.  Potassium  forms  two  combinations 
with  oxygene  ;  page  323,  1»0  of  potassium  in 
weight  unite  to  20,1  of  oxygene  to  form  pure 
potassa,  and  to  57  8  to  form  the  orange  oxide  of 
potassium.  20.1,  the  smallest  number  is  taken, 
and  as  20.1:  100::  15,  the  number  representing 
oxygene  to  74.99;  or  adding  the  minute  frac- 
tional part  to  75  ;  and  57-8  is  nearly  3  times  20  : 
and  the  difference  may  be  easily  explained  by 
supposing  that  in  experiments  on  the  peroxide, 
it  is  scarcely  possible  to  convert  the  whole  of 
the  metal  into  potassium. 

To  give  another  instance  in  which  the  datum 
is  taken  from  the  peroxide:  The  peroxide  of 
lead  contains  from  3  to  3,5  per  cent,  more  oxy- 
gene, than  minium  ;  and  the  first  oxide  known, 
Massicot,  consists  of  about  100  of  lead  to  7.52 
of  oxygene  ;  minium  of  J  00  to  between  10  and 
12;  and  llie  puce  coloured  oxide  of  100  of 
metal  to  about  15  ;  and  the  smallest  proportion 
amongst  these  is  3.76  of  oxygene,  and  3.76: 
100::  15  is  to 39s,  the  number  representing  lead; 
and  massicot  is  supposed  to  contain  twice  this 
quantity  of  oxygene,  398:  50  :  :  100  is  to  7.53. 
VOL.  I.  L  i 


APPENDIX. 


Since  the  last  sheet  has  been  sent  to  the  press, 
M.  Berzelius  has  had  the  goodness  to  commu- 
nicate to  me  the  following  estimates,  some  of 
■which  agree  very  nearly  with  those  given  in 
the  preceding  pages  ;  others  are  new,  and  all 
afford  evidences  of  the  truth  of  the  theory  of 
definite  proportions.  It  is  peculiarly  satis- 
factory to  me,  to  be  able  to  state  the  coincidence 
of  so  many  of  the  conclusions  of  this  distin- 
guished chemist  with  my  own  results,  obtained 
usually  by  very  different  methods  of  operation. 


Of  the  Oxides  of  Antimony. 

Metal.  Oxygene.  Metal. 

First  Oxide    100         4,65  96,826 

Second  —  18,6  84,817 

Third  —  27,9  78,19 

Fourth  —  37,2  72,85 


Oxygene. 
3,174^4 
15,683 
21,81 
27,15 


The  Sulphwet  of  Antimony,  is  composed  of  100  parts 
of  Metal,  and  of  37,25  parts  of  Sulphur. 


Oxides  of  Tin. 
Metal.     Oxygene.  Metal. 
First  Oxide    100       13,6  88,03 
Second  —       20,4  83,13 

Third  —       27,2  78,61 

The  Sulphurets  of  Tin, 

Metal.  Oxygene.  Metal. 

First  100  27,234  78,6 

Second  —  40,851  71,8 

Third  —  54,468 


Oxygene. 
11,97  1 
16,87 
21,39  . 


If 


Oxygene. 
21,4 
28,2 


The  Oxide  of  Tellurium, 
100  parts  of  Metal,  with  24,83  parts  of  Oxygene, 

Telluretted  Hydrogene, 
Tellurium  100  parts.  Hydrogene  1,948. 


APPENDI5C. 


First 
Second 


First 
Second 


The  Oxides  of  Gold. 

Metal.       Oxygene.  Metal. 
100        11,026  96,13 
12,077  89,225 

The  Oxides  of  Platinum. 

Metal.      Oxygeae.  Metal. 
100         8,287  92,35 
—       16,574  85,9 


Oxygene. 
3,87  jl 
10,775  i  3 


Oxygene. 
7,65 
14,1 


)  2 


First 

Second 

Third 

Fourth 

Fifth 


The  Oxide  qf  Palladium. 
Metal  100.  Oxygene  14,055 

Sulphuret  of  Palladium. 
Metal  100.  Sulphur  28,15. 

The  Oxides  of  Manganesum. 
Oxygene 


Metal. 
100 


7,0266 
14,0533 

28,1077 

42,16 

56,215 


Metal. 
93,435 
87,68 
78,1 
72,25 
64 


Oxygene. 
6,565-^ 

2 
•4 

27,75  Is 

36       J  8 


12,32  i 
21,9 


Metallic  Oxides  examined  by  other  Swedish  Chemists* 

Oxides  of  Mercury,  bvM.  Sefstrom. 
First,  Metal  100.  Oxygene  3,95  7  1 


Second,  100. 


7,9 


.  Oxide  of  Bismuth,  by  M.  de  Lagerhielm. 
Metal  100.  Oxygene  11,275. 

Oxide  of  Nickel,  by  M.  de  RolholF. 
First,  Metal  100.         Oxygene  27,3  7  1 

il^ 


Second, 


40,95 


Oxide  of  Cobalt,  by  the  same. 

First,  Metal  100.         Oxygene  27,3 
Second,  .  —  40,95 

Oxide  of  Cerium,  by  M.  de  Hisinger. 

First,  Metal  100.         Oxygene  i  7,41  7  1 
Second,  .  — ■■        26, 1 1 5  i  If 


rUite  I . 


J.ou-rv  Sadp! 

Piih^June  j^hSj'j.  bvXJohiu-on.^CSSraiiLr  Church.  YMondon. 


Plate  II. 


'     Zo^v}y  Sculp*. 

Piiblf  Jiuiei-^}i8v2.  by  J  Johnson, &r  C^S^hutU  QmrchJ'^lQndon. 


riate  IF. 


I 


mtc.  r. 


Tiff.  26. 


9 


Zowry  soiip. 


1 


9 


i 


1 


[  507  ] 


To  face  Plate  VII. 


Plate  VII.  Fig.  27,  represents  a  furnace  for 
the  general  purposes  of  experiments.  The 
upper  part  of  the  furnace  is  a  sand  batli;  The 
lower  part  may  be  employed  for  fusion  or 
distillation,  or  for  igniting  tubes.  It  may  be 
used  in  any  room  where  there  is  a  flue,  and  it 
serves  the  purpose  of  a  stove. 

Plate  VIII.  Fig.  28,  represents  the  mercurial 
apparatus.  The  tube  in  the  frame  represents 
the  apparatus  for  detonating  mixtures  of  gasses  i 
it  is  connected  with  a  spiral  spring. 

Fig.  30,  represents  another  apparatus  for 
detonation. 


[  509  1 


1 

To  face  Plate  IX. 


The  opposite  Plate  represents  an  apparatus 
for  minute  experiments  ;  the  instruments  are 
delineated  of  their  real  siie.  The  cups  should 
should  be  of  platinum,  the  tubes  and  small 
retorts  of  glass ;  the  blow  pipe  may  be  of 
silver,  with  an  extremity  of  platinum.  By  the 
help  of  these  instruments,  and  a  little  wooden 
trough  holding  a  few  pounds  of  mercury,  an 
electrophorus  for  giving  a  spark  to  act  upon 
mixtures  of  gasses,  or  compound  gasses  ;  and 
a  few  bottles  containing  acids,  alkalies,  and  pre- 
cipitants,  a  number  of  useful  experiments  may 
be  made.  Boxes  containing  the  apparatus  on 
a  very  small  scale,  are  neatly  made,  and  sold  at 
reasonable  prices,  by  Mr.  Newman,  10,  Old 
Lisle-street,  London. 


London  :  Printed  by  W.'Bulmcr  and  Co, 
CUvelaiui  •roWj  St,  Janies's* 


To  face  Plate  X. 

TflE  opposite  Plate  represents  a  Gasometer, 
fey  which  a  stream  of  oxygene  gas  may  be 
thrown  upon  ignited  charcoal,  for  the  purpose 
of  fusing  or  burning  bodies,  Sec, 


1- 


the  same  Author , 

tn  ihe  year  1800  were  published,  in  one  Volume  8vo. 
price  10s.  6d.  in  boards. 

Researches,  Chemical  and  Philosophical, 
chiefly  concerning  Nitrous  Oxide,  or  Dephlogisticated 
Nitrous  Air,  and  its  Respiration. 


I