Having  prefixed  my  name  to  the  present  edition 
of  Elder's  Algebra,  it  may  be  proper  to  give  some 
account  of  the  Translation  ;  which  I  shall  do  with 
the  greater  pleasure,  because  it  furnishes  a  fa- 
vorable opportunity  of  associating  my  own  labors, 
with  those  of  my  distinguished  pupil,  and  most 
excellent  firiend,  the  late  Francis  Horner,  M*  P. 

When  first  placed  under  my  tuition,  at  the  cri- 
tical and  interesting  age  of  seventeen,  he  soon 
discovered  uncommon  powers  of  intellect,  and  the 
most  ardent  thirst  for  knowledge,  united  with  a 
docility  of  temper,  and  a  sweetness  of  disposition, 
which  rendered  instruction,  indeed,  a  **  delightful 
task/'  His  diligence  and  attention  were  such,  as 
to  require  the  frequent  interposition  of  some  ra- 
tional amusement,  in  order  to  prevent  the  in- 
tenseness  of  his  application  from  injuring  a  con- 
stitution, which,  though  not  delicate,  had  never 
been  robust. 

Perceiving  that  the  natural  tendency  of  his 
mind  led  to  the  exercise  of  reason,  rather  than  to 
the  indulgence  of  fancy  ;  that  he  was  particularly 
interested  in  discussing  the  merits  of  some  specious 
theory,  in  exposing  fallacies,  and  in  forming  legi- 
timate inductions,  from  any  premises,  that  were 

a2 


!▼   '  AOTlBTtSBllBNT. 

supposed  to  rest  on  the  basis  of  truth  :  but  finding 
also,  that,  from  imitation  and  habit,  he  had  been 
led  to  think  too  highly  of  those  metaphysical 
speculations,  which  abound  in  terms  to  which  we 
annex  no  distinct  ideas,  and  which  oflen  require 
the  admission  of  principles,  that  are  either  unintel- 
ligible, or  incapable  of  proof;  I  recommended  to 
his  notice  Euler's  Algebra,  as  affording  an  ad- 
mirable exercise  of  his  reasoning  powers,  and  the 
best  means  of  cultivating  that  talent  for  analysis, 
close  investigation,  and  logical  inference,  which 
he  possessed  at  an  early  period,  and  which  he  after- 
wards displayed  in  so  eminent  a  degree.  At  the 
same  time,  I  was  of  opinion,  that  to  translate  a 
part  of  that  excellent  work  from  the  French  into 
English,  when  he  wished  to  vary  his  studies,  would 
improve  his  iPtiowledge  of  both  languages,  and  be 
the  best  introduction  for  him  to  the  mathematics. 

He  was  soon  delighted  with  this  occasional  em- 
ployment, it^hich  seemed  to  supply  his  mind  with 
food,  that  was  both  solid  and  nutricious  ;  and  he 
generally  produced,  two  or  three  times  a  week,  as 
much  as  I  could  find  time  to  revise  and  correct. 
In  the  course  of  the  first  twelvemonth,  he  had 
translated  so  Itrge  a  portion  of  the  two  volumes, 
that  it  was  determined  to  complete  the  whole,  and 
to  publish  it  for  the  benefit  of  English  students  : 
but  he  returned  to  Scotland  before  the  manuscript 
was  ready  for  the  press  ;  and,  therefore,  the  labor 
of  editing  it  necessarily  devolved  on  me. 

I  wished  to  give  tliis  short  history  of  the  Trans- 


lation  at  first,  without  any  eulogium  on  his  cha« 
nder  and  talents,  while  living,  of  course  ;  but  he 
modestly,  though,  at  the  same  time,  resolutely 
opposed  it,  saying  that  whatever  merit  or  emolu- 
ment might  be  attached  to  the  work,  it  belonged 
to  me.  The  same  proposal  was  made  to  him, 
on  publishing  the  second  edition*;  but  he  still 
persisted  in  his  former  determination. 

From  the  pleasure  and  instruction  which  he  re- 
ceived from  Euler's  Algebra,  it  was  natural  for 
him  to  wish  to  know  something  more  of  the  life 
and  character  of  that  profound  mathematician. 
Having  therefore  in  some  measure  satisfied  his 
curiosity,  and  collected  the  necessary  materials, 
by  consulting  the  ordinary  sources  of  information, 
I  advised  him,  by  way  of  literary  exercise,  to  draw 
up  a  biographical  Memoir  bn  the  iubject.  He 
readily  complied  with  my  wishes  ;  and  this  may 
be  considered  as  one  of  his  earliest  productions. 
Its  merits  would  do  credit,  in  my  opir^on,  to  any 
writer  ;  and  therefore  in  appreciating  them,  the 
reader  will  not  deem  any  apology  necessary  on 
account  of  the  author's  youth. 

I  have  been  led  into  this  short  detail  of  circum- 
stances, first,  because  I  disdain  the  contemptible 
vanity  of  shining  in  what  may  be  thought  bor- 
rowed plumes,  and  because  I  feel  a  melancholy 
pleasure  in  speaking  of  my  highly  valued,  and 

*  The  care  of  correcting  the  press  for  this  edition  was  en- 
trusted to  Mr.  P.  Barlow,  being  engaged  myself,  at  that  time^ 
in  the  laborious  employment  of  editing  the  Bible. 


▼1  «  âDVSaTISBIlSIl«. 


mach  lamented  friend.    The  English  nation  will 
long  remember,  and  ever  estimate,  as  they  ou^t, 
his  manly  eloquence  in  the  senate  ;  his  lofty  spirit 
of  independence,  which  had  no  mixture  of  pride, 
or  affectation;    his  enlarged  views  and  inflexi- 
ble  integrity;  his  vigilance  and  activity  in  the 
discharge  of  public  duties;  his  fairness  and  li- 
berality, his  temperance  and  firmness  in  debate  ; 
his  accurate,  various,  and  extensive  knowledge; 
the  soundness  of  his  argumentation,  and  the  sa- 
gacity with  which  he  unveiled  deception,  without 
coveting  any  triumph,  or  wishing  to  inflict  dis- 
grace;  and   his  calm,  but  dignified  opposition, 
which  often  confuted  the  errors,  and  exposed  the 
misi4>prehensions  of  his  opponents  ;  but  without 
ever  provoking  resentment,  or  making  an  enemy. 
All  these^ualities,  however  rare  when  united, 
it  is  well  known,  he  possessed  ;  and,  on  this  subject, 
many  members  on  both  sides  of  the  House  of  Com- 
mons have  borne  the  most  ample  testimony  :  but 
|j#     those  only  who  enjoyed  the  happiness  of  being  num- 
bered among  his  intinuite  friends,  could  form  any 
adequate  idea  of  the  uncommon  qffècitonateness  of 
his  character;  his  lasting,  disinterested,  and  sincere 
attachments  ;   hb  gentie,  unassuming  manners  ; 
and  his  readiness,  at  all  times,  to  do  good,  and  to 
relieve  the  distressed,  without  the  slightest  tincture 
of  vanity,  or  ostentation.     In  the  discharge  of  his 
duties  BS  a  son  and  a  brother,  it  is  almost  needless 
to  add,  that  his  conduct  was  most  exemplary. 
His  loss  as  a  public  character  will  be  long  felt. 


ADVBBTI8KMKNT.  VU 

and  deplored  ;  and,  in  private  life,  it  has  produced  a 
chasm,  that  can  never  be  filled  up.  To  have  had 
some  share  in  directing  the  studies,  cultivating  the 
talents,  and  forming  the  taste  of  such  a  man,  will 
always  be  to  me  a  source  of  the  greatest  satisfac- 
tion. That  he  should  have  fallen  a  victim  to 
lingering  disease,  in  the  prime  of  manhood,  and 
before  he  had  reached  the  meridian  of  his  bril- 
liant and  useful  career,  is  truly  deplorable  ;  yet 
we  should  be  thankful  for  what  we  once  possessed. 
He  is  indeed  gone  ;  but  ^*  though  dead  he  still 
liveth/^  All  regret  for  his  premature  death  is  vain  ; 
and  it  should  be  remembered,  that  humble  re- 
signation to  the  Divine  Will  is  one  of  the  first 
duties  of  every  human  being. 

^  His  saltern  aocumulem  donis,  et  fungar  inani 
^  Munere."' 


In  this  third  edition,  the  two  volumes  have  been 
compressed  into  one;  the  whole  has  been  very 
carefully  revised  and  corrected  ;  the  Notes  will  be 
found  at  the  foot  of  the  pages,  to  which  they 
respectively  belong  ;  the  Questions  ibr  Practice, 
which  were  omitted  in  the  last  edition,  have  been 
restored;  and  though  it  is  scarcely  possible  to 
print  a  mathematical  work,  of  any  extent,  without 
some  errata;  yet  it  is  hoped,  that  few  can  be 
named,  which  will  be  found  more  correct  than  the 
present. 

JOHN  HEWLETT. 

HunUr-Hreei^  March,  1822. 


0 


MEMOIR 

or  THS 

LIFE  AND  CHARACTER  OF  EÜLER, 

BT  TMK  LATB 

FRANCIS  HORNER,  ESQ^  M.  P. 


"il 


Leonard  Euler  was  the  son  of  a  clergjman  in 
the  neighbourhood  of  Basil,  and  was  born  on  the 
15tli  of  April,  1707*  His  natural  turn  for  mathe- 
matics soon  appeared,  from  the  eagerness  and  fa- 
cility with  which  he  became  master  of  the  elements 
under  the  instructions  of  his  father,  by  whom  he 
was  sent  to  the  university  of  Basil  at  an  early  age. 
There,  his  abilities  and  his  application  were  so 
distinguished,  that  he  attracted  the  particular  no- 
., .  tice  of  John  Bernoulli.  That  excellent  matbe- 
matician  seemed  to  look  forward  to  the  youth's 
future  achievements  in  science,  while  his  own 
kind  care  strengthened  the  powers  by  which  they 
were  to  be  accomplished.  In  order  to  superintend 
his  studies,  which  far  outstripped  the  usual  routine 
of  the  public  lecture,  he  gave  him  a  private  lesson 
regularly  once  a  week  ;  when  they  conversed  to- 
gether on  the  acquisitions,  which  the  pupil  had 
been  making  since  their  last  interview,  considered 
whatever  difficulties  might  have  occurred  in  his 


BULEll.  IX 


progress,  and  arranged  the  reading  and  exercises 
for  the  ensuing  week. 

Under  such  eminent  advantages,  the  capacity 
of  Euler  did  not  fail  to  make  rapid  improvements; 
and  in  his  seventeenth  year,  the  degree  of  Master 
of  Arts  was  conferred  on  him.  On  this  occasion, 
he  received  high  applause  for  his  probationary  /  . 
discourse,  the  subject  of  which  was  a  comparison  <f  ]/l,.f^ 
between  the  Cartesian  and  Newtonian  systems. 

His  father,  having  all  along  intended  him  for 
his  successor,  enjoined  him  now  to  relinquish  his 
mathematical  studies,  and  to  prepare  himself  by 
those  of  theology,  and  general  erudition,  for  the 
ministerial  functions.  After  some  time,  however, 
had  been  consumed,  this  plan  was  given  up.  The 
father,  himself  a  man  of  learning  and  liberality, 
abandoned  his  own  views  for  those,  to  which  the 
inclination  and  talents  of  his  son  were  of  them- 
selves so  powerfully  directed  ;  persuaded,  that  in 
thwarting  the  propensities  of  genius,  there  is  a 
sort  of  impiety  against  nature,  and  that  there 
would  be  real  injustice  to  mankind  in  smothering 
those  abilities,  which  were  evidently  destined  to 
extend  the  boundaries  of  science.  Leonard  was 
permitted,  therefore,  to  resume  his  favorite  pur-  ^ 
suits;  and,  at  the  age  of  nineteen,  transmitting '. J"  **^ 
two  dissertations  to  the  Academy  of  Sciences  at^  •''^ 
Paris,  one  on  the  masting  of  ships,  and  the  other  v'^f' 
on  the  philosophy  of  sound,  he  commenced  that 
splendid  career,  which  continued,  for  so  long  a 
period,  the  admiration  and  the  glory  of  Europe. 

About  the  same  time,  he  stood  candidate  for  a 


r*  * 


BOLXS. 


vacant  professorship  in  the  university  of  Basil; 
but  having  lost  the  election,  he  resolved»  in  con- 
sequence of  this  disappointment,  to  leave  his  na- 
tive country;  and  in  I727  he  set  out  for  Peters- 
burg» where  his  friends,  the  young  Benioullis,  had 
settled  about  two  years  before,  and  where  he 
flattered  himself  with  prospects  of  literary  success 
under  the  patronage  of  Catherine  L  Those  pro» 
spects,  however,  were  not  immediately  realised  ; 
nor  was  it  till  after  he  had  been  frequently  and 
long  disappointed,  that  he  obtained  any  prefer- 
ment His  first  appointment  appears  to  have  been 
to  the  chair  of  natural  philosophy;  and  when 
Daniel  Bernoulli  removed  from  Petersburg,  Euler 
succeeded  him  as  professor  of  mathematics. 

In  this  situation  he  remained  for  several  years, 
engaged  in  the  most  laborious  researches,  enrich- 
ing the  academical  collections  of  the  continent 
with  papers  of  the  highest  value,  and  producing 
almost  daily  improvements  in  the  various  branches 
of  physical,  and,  more  particularly,  analytical 
science.  In  IT^^lt  he  complied  with  a  very  press- 
ing invitation  from  Frederic  the  Great,  and  re- 
sided at  Berlin  till  I766.  Throughout  this  pe- 
riod, he  continued  the  same  literary  labors,  di- 
rected by  the  same  wonderful  sagacity  and  com- 
prehension of  intellect  As  he  advanced  with  his 
own  discoveries  and  inventions,  the  field  of  know- 
ledge seemed  to  widen  before  his  view,  and  new 
subjects  still  multiplied  on  him  for  further  specula- 
tion. The  toik  of  intense  study,  with  him,  seemed 
only  to  invigorate  his  future  exertions.    Nor  did 


EUUEÊ.  XI 

the  energies  of  Euler^s  roind  give  way,  even  when 
the  organs  of  the  body  were  overpowered  :  for  in 
the  year  17S5,  having  completed,  in  three  days, 
certain  astronomical  calculations,  which  the  aca- 
demy called  for  in  haste  ;  but  which  several  ma- 
thematicians of  eminence  had  declared  could  not 
be  performed  within  a  shorter  period  than  some 
months,  the  intense  application  threw  him  into  a 
fever,  in  which  he  lost  the  sight  of  one  eye. 

Shortly  after  his  return  to  Petersburg,  in  1766f 
he  became  totally  blind.  His  passion  for  science, 
however,  suiSered  no  decline  ;  the  powers  of  his 
mind  were  not  impaired,  and  he  continued  as  in- 
defatigable as  ever.  Though  the  distresses  of  age 
likewise  were  now  crowding  fast  upon  him,  for  he 
had  passed  his  sixtieth  year  ;  yet  it  was  in  this 
latter  period  of  his  life,  under  infirmity,  bodily 
pain,  and  loss  of  sight,  that  he  produced  some  of 
bis  most  valuable  works;  such  as  command  our 
astonishment,  independently  of  the  situation  of 
the  author,  from  the  labor  and  originality  which 
they  display.  In  fact,  his  habits  of  study  and 
composition,  his  inventions  and  discoveries,  closed 
only  with  his  life.  The  very  day  on  which  he 
died,  he  had  been  engaged  in  calculating  the  orbit 
of  Herschel's  planet,  and  the  motions  of  aerostatic 
machines.  His  death  happened  suddenly  in  Sep- 
tember 1783,  from  a  fit  of  apoplexy,  when  he  was 
in  the  seventy-sixth  year  of  his  age. 

Such  is  the  short  history  of  this  illustrious  man» 
The  incidents  of  his  life,  like  that  of  most  other 


XU  lULXE. 

laborious  students»  affi>rd  very  scanty  materials  for 
biography  ;  little  more  than  a  journal  of  studies 
and  a  catalogue  of  publications  :  but  curiosity  may 
find  ample  compensation  in  surveying  the  charac- 
ter of  his  mind.  An  object  of  such  magnitude» 
so  far  elevated  above  the  ordinary  range  of  human 
intellect»  cannot  be  approached  without  reverence» 
nor  nearly  inspected,  perhaps,  without  some  de- 
gree of  presumption.  Should  an  apology  be  ne- 
cessary» therefore,  for  attempting  the  following 
estimate  of  Euler's  character,  let  it  be  considered» 
that  we  can  neither  feel  that  admiration,  nor  offer 
that  homage,  which  is  worthy  of  genius,  unless» 
aiming  at  something  more  than  the  dazzled  sensa- 
tions of  mere  wonder,  we  subject  it  to  actual  ex- 
amination» and  compare  it  with  the  standards  of 
human  nature  in  general. 

Whoever  is  acquainted  with  the  memoirs  of 
those  great  men,  to  whom  the  human  race  is  in- 
debted for  the  progress  of  knowledge»  must  have 
perceived»  that»  while  mathematical  genius  is  di- 
stinct from  the  other  departments  of  intellectual 
excellence»  it  likewise  admits  in  itself  of  much  di- 
versity. The  subjects  of  its  speculation  are  become 
so  extensive  and  so  various,  especially  in  modem 
times»  and  present  so  many  interesting  aspects»  that 
it  is  natural  for  a  person»  whose  talents  are  of  this 
cast»  to  devote  his  principal  curiosity  and  attention 
to  particular  views  of  the  science.  When  this  hap- 
pens» the  faculties  of  the  mind  acquire  a  superior 
facility  of  operation,  with  respect  to  the  objects 


EULEA.  XIU 


towards  which  they  are  most  frequently  directed, 
and  the  invention  becomes  habitually  most  active 
and  most  acute  in  that  channel  of  inquiry. 

The  truth  of  these  observations  is   strikingly 
Qlustrated  by  the  character  of  Euler.     His  studies 
and  discoveries  lay  not  among  the  lines  and  figures 
of  geometry,  those  characters,  to  use  an  expres- 
sion of  Galileo,  in  which  the  great  book  of  the 
universe  is  written  ;  nor  does  he  appear  to  have 
had  a  turn  for  philosophising  by  experiment,  and 
advancing  to  discovery  through  the  rules  of  in- 
ductive investigation.     The  region,  in  which  he 
delighted  to  speculate,  was  that  of  pure  intellect. 
He   surveyed    the   properties  and  affections   of 
quantity  under  their  most  abstracted  forms.   With 
the  same  rapidity  of  perception,  as  a  geometrician 
ascertains  the  relative  position  of  portions  of  exten- 
sion, Euler  ranges  among  those  of  abstract  quan- 
tity, unfolding  their  most  involved  combinations, 
and  tracing  their  most  intricate  proportions.    That 
admirable  system  of  mathematical  logic  and  lan- 
guage, which  at  once  teaches  the  rules  of  just 
inference,  and  furnishes  an  instrument  for  prose- 
cuting deductions,  free  from  the  defects  which 
obscure  and  often  falsify  our  reasonings  on  other 
subjects  ;  the  different  species  of  quantity,  whether 
formed  in  the  understanding  by  its  own  abstrac- 
tions, or  derived  from  modifications  of  the  repre- 
sentative system  of  signs  ;  the  investigation  of  the 
various  properties  of  these,  their  laws  of  genesis, 
the  limits  of  comparison  among   the  different 


species,  and  the  method  of  applying  all  this  to  the 
solution  of  physical  problems  ;  these  were  the  re* 
searches  on  which  the  mind  of  Euler  delighted  to 
dwell,  and  in  which  he  never  engaged  without 
finding  new  objects  of  curiosity,  detecting  sources 
of  inquiry,  which  had  passed  unobserved,  and  ex^ 
ploring  fields  of  speculation  and  discovery,  which 
before  were  unknown. 

The  subjects,  which  we  have  here  slightly  enu* 
merated,  form,  when  taken  together,  what  is  called 
the  Modem  Analysis  :  a  science  eminent  for  the 
profound  discoveries  which  it  has  revealed;  for 
the  refined  artifices  that  have  been  devised,  in 
order  to  bring  the  most  abstruse  parts  of  mathe- 
matics within  the  compass  of  our  reasoning  powers, 
and  for  applying  them  to  the  solution  of  actual 
phenomena,  as  well  as  for  the  remarkable  degree 
of  systematic  simplicity,  with  which  the  various 
methods  of  investigation  are  employed  and  com- 
bined, so  as  to  confirm  and  throw  light  on  one 
another.  The  materials,  indeed,  had  been  coU 
Iccting  for  years,  from  about  the  middle  of  the 
seventeenth  century;  the  foundations  had  bee» 
laid  by  Newton,  Leibnitz,  the  elder  Bemoullis, 
and  a  few  others  ;  but  Euler  raised  the  superstruc- 
ture :  it  was  reser>'ed  for  him  to  work  upon  the 
materials,  and  to  arrange  this  noble  monument  of 
human  industry  and  genius  in  its  present  sym- 
metry. Through  the  whole  course  of  his  scientific 
labors,  tlie  ultimate  and  the  constant  aim  on  which 
he  set  his  mind,  was  the  perfection  of  Calculus 


EULEK.  XV 


and  Analysis.  Whatever  physical  inquiry  he  be- 
gan with,  this  always  came  in  view,  and  very  fre- 
quently received  more  of  his  attention  than  that 
which  was  professedly  the  main  subject.  His 
ideas  ran  so  naturally  in  this  train,  that  even  in 
the  perusal  of  Virgil's  poetry,  he  met  with  imites 
tbat  would  recall  the  associations  of  his  more  fa- 
miliar studies,  and  lead  him  back,  from  the  fairy 
scenes  of  fiction,  to  mathematical  abstraction,  as 
to  the  element,  more  congenial  to  his  nature. 

That  the  sources  of  analysis  might  be  ascertained 
in  their  full  extent,  as  well  as  the  various  modifica- 
tions of  form  and  restrictions  of  rule  that  become 
necessary  in  applying  it  to  difierent  views  of 
nature  ;  he  appears  to  have  nearly  gone  through  a 
oomplete  :  course  of  philosophy.  The  theory  of 
^oiial  mechanics,  the  whole  range  of  physical 
Ibtronomy,  the  vibrations  of  elastic  fluids,  as  well 
as  the  movements  of  those  which  are  incom- 
pnessible,  naval  architecture  and  tactics,  the  doc- 
tliae  of  chances,  probabilities,  and  political  arith- 
metic, were  successively  subjected  to  the  analytical 
aietho4  ;  and  all  these  sciences  received  from  him 
^h  cQiifirmation  and  further  improvement  *. 
;  It  cannot  be  denied  that,  in  general,  his  at- 
tc^KtiQQ  is  more  occupied  vrith  the  analysis  itself, 

*  A  complete  edition  of  his  works,  comprising  the  nimierous 
papers  which  he  sent  to  the  academies  of  St.  Petersburg, 
Berlin,  Paris,  and  other  public  societies,  his  separate  Treatises 
oil  Curvet,  the  Analysis  of  Infinites,  the  differential  and  integral 
ÇpddiluB,  4ec.  would  occiq)yj  at  least,  forty  quarto  volumes. 


XTl  XVLEB. 

than  with  the  subject  to  which  he  is  applying  it  ; 
and  that  he  seems  more  taken  up  with  his  instru* 
ments,  than  with  the  work,  which  they  are  to  assist 
him  in  executing.  But  this  can  hardly  be  made  a 
ground  of  censure,  or  regret,  since  it  is  the  very 
circumstance  to  which  we  owe  the  present  per- 
fection of  those  instruments  ;  a  perfection  to  which 
he  could  never  have  brought  them,  but  by  the  un* 
remitted  attention  and  enthusiastic  preference 
which  he  gave  to  his  favorite  object.  If  he  now 
and  then  exercised  his  ingenuity  on  a  phjrsical,  or 
perhaps  mcftaphysical,  hypothesis,  he  must  have 
been  aware,  as  well  as  any  one,  that  his  conclusions 
would  of  course  perish  with  that  from  which  they 
were  derived.  What  he  regarded,  was  the  proper 
means  of  arriving  at  those  conclusions  ;  the  new 
views  of  analysis,  which  the  investigation  might 
€^n  ;  and  the  new  expedients  of  calculus,  to  which 
it  might  eventually  give  birth.  This  was  his  uni- 
form pursuit  ;  all  other  inquiries  were  prosecuted 
with  reference  to  it;  and  in  this  conûsted  the 
peculiar  character  of  his  mathematical  genius. 

The  faculties  that  are  subservient  to  invention 
he  possessed  in  a  very  remarkable  degree.  His 
memory  was  at  once  so  retentive  and  so  ready, 
that  he  had  perfectly  at  command  all  those  nu- 
merous and  complex  formulae,  which  enunciate 
the  rules  and  more  important  theorems  of  analysis. 
As  is  reported  of  Leibnitz,  he  could  also  repeat 
the  .£neid  from  banning  to  end;  and  could 
trust  his  recollection  for  the  first  and  Ust  lines  in 


EULEB««  XVII 

every  page  of  the  edition,  which  he  had  been  ac- 
customed to  use.  These  are  instances  of  a  kind 
of  memory,  more  frequently  to  be  found  where 
the  capacity  is  inferior  to  the  ordinary  standard, 
than  accompanying  original,  scientific  genius. 
But  in  Euler,  they  seem  to  have  been  not  so  much 
the  result  of  natural  constitution,  as  of  his  most 
wonderful  attention }  a  faculty,  which,  if  we  con- 
sider the  testimony  of  Newton*  sufficient  evi- 
dence, is  the  great  constituent  of  inventive  power- 
It  is  that  complete  retirement  of  the  mind  within 
itself,  during  which  the  senses  are  locked  up; 
that  intense  meditation,  on  which  no  extraneous 
idea  can  intrude  ;  that  firm,  straight-forward  pro- 
gress of  thought,  deviating  into  no  irregular  sally, 
which  can  alone  place  mathematical  objects  in  a 
light  sufficiently  strong  to  illuminate  them  fully, 
and  preserve  the  perceptions  of  **  the  mind's  eye*' 
in  the  same  order  that  it  moves  along. 

Two  of  Euler's  pupils  (we  are  told  by  M .  Fussr 
a  pupil  himself)  had  calculated  a  converging 
series  as  far  as  the  seventeenth  term  ;  but  found, 
on  comparing  the  written  results,  that  they  dif- 
fered one  unit  at  the  fiftieth  figure:  they  com- 
municated this  difference  to  their  master,  who 
went  over  the  whole  calculation  by  head,  and  his 
decision  was  found  to  be  the  true  one. — For  the 
purpose  of  exercising  his  little  grandson  in  the 
extraction  of  roots,  he  has  been  known  to  form  to 

*  Thii  opinion  of  Sir   Isaac  Newton   is  recorded  by  Dr. 
Pemberton. 


XVIII  EULER. 


himself  the  table  of  the  six  first  powers  of  all  num- 
bers, from  1  to  100,  and  to  have  preserved  it 
actually  in  his  memory. 

The  dexterity  which  he  had  acquired  in  analysis 
and  calculation,  is  remarkably  exemplified  by 
the  manner  in  which  he  manages  formula?  of  the 
greatest  length  and  intricacy.  He  perceives, 
almost  at  a  glance,  the  factors  from  which  they 
may  have  been  composed  ;  the  particular  system 
of  factors  belonging  to  the  question  under  present 
consideration  ;  the  various  artifices  by  which  that 
system  may  be  simplified  and  reduced  ;  and  the 
relation  of  the  several  factors  to  the  conditions  of 
the  hypothesis.  His  expertness  in  this  particular 
probably  resulted,  in  a  great  measure,  from  the 
ease  with  which  he  performed  mathematical  in- 
vestigations by  head.  He  had  always  accustomed 
himself  to  that  exercise  ;  and  having  practised  it 
with  assiduity,  even  before  the  loss  of  sight,  which 
afterwards  rendered  it  a  matter  of  necessitv,  he  is 
an  instance  to  what  an  astonishing  degree  of  per* 
fection  that  talent  may  be  cultivated,  and  how 
much  it  improves  the  intellectual  powers.  No 
other  discipline  is  so  effectual  in  strengthening 
the  faculty  of  attention  ;  it  gives  a  facility  of  ap- 
prehension, an  accuracy  and  steadiness  to  the 
conceptions;  and,  what  is  a  still  more  valuable 
acquisition,  it  habituates  the  mind  to  arrangement 
in  its  reasonings  and  reflections. 

If  the  reader  wants  a  further  commentary  on 
its  advantages,  let  him  proceed  to  the  work  of 


EULEK«  MX 


Euler,  of  which  we  here  offer  a  Translatiop  ;  and 
if  he  has  any  taste  for  the  beauties  of  method, 
and  of  what  is  properly  called  composition^  we 
venture  to  promise  him  the  highest  satisfaction 
and  pleasure.  The  subject  is  so  aptly  divided, 
the  order  is  so  luminous,  the  connected  parts 
seem  so  truly  to  grow  one  out  of  the  other,  and 
are  disposed  altogether  in  a  manner  so  suitable  to 
their  relative  importance,  and  so  conducive  to 
their  mutual  illustration,  that,  when  added  to  the 
precision,  as  well  as  clearness  with  which  every 
thing  is  explained,  and  the  judicious  selection  of 
example«,  we  do  not  hesitate  to  consider  it,  next 
to  Euclid's  Geometry,  the  most  perfect  model  of 
elementary  writing,  of  which  the  scientific  world 
is  in  possession. 

When  our  reader  shall  have  studied  so  much 
of  these  volumes  as  to  relisli  their  admirable  style, 
he  will  be  the  better  qualified  to  reflect  on  the 
circumstances  under  which  they  were  composed. 
They  were  drawn  up  soon  after  our  author  was 
deprived  of  sight,  and  were  dictated  to  his  ser- 
vant, who  had  originally  been  a  tailor's  apprentice  i 
and,  without  being  distinguished  for  more  than 
ordinary  parts,  was  completely  ignorant  of  mathe-. 
matics.  But  £uler,  blind  as  he  was,  had  a  mind 
to  teach  his  amanuensis,  as  he  went  on  with  the 
subject.  Perhaps,  he  undertook  this  task  by  way 
o£  exercise,  with  the  view  of  conforming  the 
operation  of  his  faculties  to  the  change,  which  the 
loss  ^  sight  had  produced.     Whatever  was  the 

b  2 


motive,  bis  Treatise  had  the  advantage  of  being 
composed  under  an  immediate  experience  of  the 
method  best  adapted  to  the  natural  progress  of  a 
learner's  ideas  :  from  the  want  of  which,  men  of 
the  most  profound  knowledge  are  oflen  awkward 
and  unsatisfactory,  when  they  attempt  elementary 
instruction.  It  is  not  improbable,  that  we  may 
be  farther  indebted  to  the  circumstance  of  our 
Author's  blindness  ;  for  the  loss  of  this  sense  is 
generally  succeeded  by  the  improvement  of  other 
faculties.  As  the  surviving  organs,  in  particular, 
acquire  a  degree  of  sensibility,  which  they  did  not 
previously  possess  ;  so  the  most  charming  visions 
<^  poetical  fancy  have  been  the  o&pring  of  minds, 
on  which  external  scenes  had  long  been  closed. 
And  perhaps  a  philosopher,  familiarly  acquainted 
with  Euler's  writings,  might  trace  some  improve- 
ment in  perspicuity  of  method,  and  in  the  flowing 
progress  of  his  deductions,  after  this  calamity  had 
befallen  him  ;  which,  leaving  *'  an  universal  blank 
of  nature's  works,''  favors  that  entire  seclusion  of 
the  mind,  which  concentrates  attention,  and  gives 
liveliness  and  vigor  to  the  conceptions. 

In  men  devoted  to  study,  we  are  not  to  took  for 
those  strong,  complicated  passions,  which  are  con- 
tracted amidst  the  vicissitudes  and  tumult  of  public 
life.  To  delineate  the  character  of  Euler,  requires 
no  contrasts  of  coloring.  Sweetness  of  disposition, 
moderation  in  the  passions,  and  simplicity  of  man- 
ners, were  his  leading  features.  Susceptible  of  the 
domestic  affections,  he  was  open  to  all  their  amiable 


KULER.  XXI 


impressions,  and  was  remarkably  fond  of  children. 
His  manners  were  simple,  without  being  singular, 
and  seemed  to  flow  naturally  from  a  heart  that 
could  dispense  with  those  habits,  by  which  many 
must  be'  trained  to  artificial  mildness,  and  with  the 
forms  that  are  often  necessary  for  concealment. 
Nor  did  the  equability  and  calmness  of  his  temper 
indicate  any  defect  of  energy,  but  the  serenity  of  a 
soul  that  overlooked  the  frivolous  provocations, 
the  petulant  caprices,  and  jarring  humours  of 
ordinary  mortals. 

Possessing  a  mind  of  such  wonderful  compre- 
hension, and  dispositions  so  admirably  formed  to 
virtue  and  to  happiness,  Euler  found  no  difficulty 
in  being  a  Christian  :  accordingly,  *^  his  faith  was 
unfeigned,"  and  his  love  '^  was  that  of  a  pure  and 
undefiled  heart."  The  advocates  for  the  truth  of 
revealed  religion,  therefore,  may  rejoice  to  add  to 
the  bright  catalogue,  which  already  claims  a  Bacon» 
a  Newton,  a  Locke,  and  a  Hale,  the  illustrious 
name  of  Euler.  But,  on  this  subject,  we  shall 
permit  one  of  his  learned  and  grateful  pupils  *  to 
sura  up  the  character  of  his  venerable  master. 
**  His  piety  was  rational  and  sincere  ;  his  devotion 
"  was  fervent.  He  was  fully  persuaded  of  the 
"  truth  of  Christianity  ;  he  felt  its  importance  to 
the  dignity  and  happiness  of  human  nature; 
and  looked  upon  its  detractors,  and  opposers,  as 
the  most  pernicious  enemies  of  man." 
The  length  to  which  this  account  has  been  ex* 

*  M.  Fuss,  Eulogy  of  M.  L.  Euler. 


i€ 
i€ 


XXU  F.rLKE. 


tended  may  require  some  apology  ;  but  the  cha- 
racter of  Eulcr  is  an  object  so  interesting«  that* 
when  reflections  are  once  indulged,  it  is  difficult 
to  prescribe  limits  to  them.  One  is  attracted  by 
a  sentiment  of  admiration,  that  rises  almost  to  the 
emotion  of  sublimity  ;  and  curiosity  becomes  eager 
to  examine  what  talents  and  qualities  and  habits 
belonged  to  a  mind  of  such  superior  power.  We 
hope,  therefore,  the  student  will  not  deem  this  an 
improper  introduction  to  the  work  which  he  is 
about  to  peruse  ;  as  we  trust  he  is  prepared  to 
enter  on  it  with  that  temper  and  disposition,  which 
will  open  his  mind  both  to  the  perception  of  ex* 
cellencet  and  to  the  ambition  of  emulating  what 
he  cannot  but  admire. 


ADVERTISEMENT  BY  THE  EDITORS  OF 
THE  ORIGINAL,  IN  GERMAN. 


Wk  present  to  the  lovers  of  Algebra  a  work,  of  which  a 
Russian  translation  appeared  two  years  ago.  The  object 
of  the  celdbrated  author  was  to  compose  an  Elementary 
Treatise,  by  which  a  beginner,  without  any  other  assistance, 
might  make  himself  complete  master  of  Algebra.  The  loss 
of  âght  bad  suggested  the  idea  to  him,  and  his  activity  of 
mind  did  not  suffer  him  to  defer  the  execution  of  it.  For 
this  purpose  M.  Euler  pitched  on  a  young  man,  whom  he 
had  engaged  as  a  servant  on  his  departure  from  Berlin,  suf- 
ficiently master  of  arithmetic,  but  in  other  respects  without  ' 
the  least  knowledge  of  mathematics.  He  had  learned  the 
trade  of  a  tailor  ;  and,  with  regard  to  his  capacity,  was  not 
above  mediocrity.  This  young  man,  however,  has  not  only 
ret^ned  what  his  illustrious  master  taught  and  dictated 
to  him,  but  in  a  short  time  was  able  to  perform  the  most 
diiScuU  algebraic  calculations,  and  to  resolve  with  readiness 
whatever  analytical  questions  were  proposed  to  him. 

This  fact  must  be  a  strong  recommendation  of  the  man- 
ner in  which  this  work  is  composed,  as  the  young  man  who 
wrote  it  down,  who  performed  the  calculations,  and  whose 
proficiency  was  so  striking,  received  no  instructions  whatever 
but  from  this  master,  a  superior  one  indeed/  but  deprived  of 
nght 

Independently  of  so  great  an  advantage,  men  of  science 
will  perceive,  with  pleasure  and  admiration,  the  manner  in 
which  the  doctrine  of  logarithms  is  explained,  and  its  con- 
nexion with  other  branches  of  calculud  pointed  out,  as  well 


XXIV  ADVEKTJbKMENT. 

ai  the  methodi  which  aru  given  for  resolving  équations  of 
the  third  and  fourth  degrees. 

Lastly,  those  who  are  fond  of  DiophanHne  problems  will 
be  pleased  to  find,  in  the  last  Section  of  the  Second  Partial! 
these  proUems  reduced  to  a  system,  and  all  the  processes  of 
calculation,  which  are  necessary  for  the  solution  of  them» 
fully  explained. 


ADVERTISEMENT  BY  M.  BERNOULLI,  THE 

FRENCH  TRANSLATOR. 


Tub  Treatise  €£  Algebra,  which  I  have  undertaken  to 
translate,  was  published  in  German,  1770,  by  the  Royal 
Acadany  of  Sciences  at  Petersburg.  To  pndse  its  merits, 
would  almost  be  injurious  to  the  celebrated  name  of  its 
author  ;  it  is  sufficient  to  read  a  few  pages,  to  perceive,  from 
the  perspicuity  with  which  every  thing  is  explained,  what 
advantage  bq;inners  may  derive  from  it.  Other  subjects 
are  the  purpose  of  this  advertisement 

I  have  departed  from  the  divimon  which  is  followed  in 
the  original,  by  introducing,  in  the  first  volume  of  the 
French  translation,  the  first  Section  of  the  Second  Volume 
of  the  original,  because  it  completes  the  analyris  of  de- 
terminate quantities.  The  reason  for  this  change  is  obvious: 
it  not  only  fieivours  the  natural  division  of  Algebra  into  de- 
terminate and  indeterminate  analysis;  but  it  was  necessary 
to  preserve  some  equality  in  the  âze  €£  the  two  volumes,  on 
account  €£  the  additicms  which  are  sulgoined  to  the  Second 
Part. 

The  reader  will  easily  perceive  that  those  additions  come 
from  the  pen  oE  M.  De  la  Grange  ;  indeed,  they  formed  one 
of  the  principal  reasons  that  engaged  me  in  this  translation. 
I  am  happy  in  being  the  first  to  shew  more  generally  to 
mathematicians,  to  what  a  pitch  of  perfection  two  of  our 
most  illustrious  mathematicians  have  lately  carried  a  brandi 
of  analjTsis  but  littk  known,  the  reseoidies  of  which  are  at^ 
tended  with  many  «fifficulties,  and,  on  the  confession  even  of 
theae  great  men,  preKot  the  most  difikult  problems  that 
they  have  ever  resolved. 


XXVI  ADVKKTIiiKMRST. 


I  have  endeavoured  t»  traiiitlate  thiit  algebra  in  the  style 
best  suited  to  works  of  the  kind.  My  chief  anxiety  was  to 
enter  into  the  sense  of  the  original,  and  to  render  it  with  the 
greatest  perspicuity.  Perhap  I  may  presume  to  give  my 
translation  some  superiority  over  the  original,  because  that 
work  having  been  dictateil,  and  admitting  of  no  revision  from 
the  author  himself,  it  is  easy  to  conct*ive  that  in  many  pas- 
sages it  would  stand  in  need  of  correction.  If  I  have  not 
submitted  to  translate  literallv«  I  have  not  failed  to  follow 
my  author  step  i)y  step  ;  I  have  preser\'ed  the  same  divisions 
in  the  articles,  and  it  is  only  in  so  few  places  that  I  have 
taken  the  liberty  of  suppres-sing  some  details  of  calculation, 
and  inserting  one  or  two  lines  of  illustration  in  the  text,  that 
I  believe  it  unnecessary  to  enter  into  an  explanation  of  the 
rcmsons  by  which  I  was  justified  in  doing  so. 

Nor  sliall  I  take  any  more  notice  of  the  notes  which  I 
have  added  to  the  first  part.  They  are  not  so  numerous  as  to 
make  me  fear  the  reproach  of  having  unnecessarily  in- 
creased the  volume  ;  and  they  may  throw  light  on  several 
points  of  mathematical  history,  as  well  as  make  known  a 
great  number  of  Tables  that  are  of  subsidiary  utility. 

With  respect  to  tlie  correctness  of  the  press,  I  believe  it 
will  not  yield  to  tlmt  of  the  original.  I  have  carefully  aim- 
pared  all  the  calculations,  and  having  repeated  a  great  num- 
ber of  them  myself,  have  by  those  means  been  enabled  to 
correct  several  faults  befidc  those  which  are  indicated  in  the 
Errata. 


CONTENTS. 


Part  I.     Containing  the  Analysis  ^Determinate  Quantities. 

SECTION  I. 

Of  ike  Different  Methods  of  calculating  Simple  Quantities. 

Page 

Cbap.  I.  Of  Mathematics  in  general            -            -        -  1 

IL  Explanation  of  the  signs  4-  plus  and  ^  minus    •  S 

III.  Of  the  Multiplication  of  Simple  Quantities          -  6 

IV.  Of  the  -nature  of  whole  Numbers,  or  Integers  with 

respect  to  their  Factors            -            -           -  10 

V.  Of  the  Division  of  Simple  Quantities        -          -  18 
VI.  Of  the  properties  of  Integers,  with  respect  to  their 

Divisors            -             -             -             -         -  16 

VII.  Of  Fractions  in  general            -              -             -  20 

VIII.  Of  the  Properties  of  Fractions              -              -  24 

IX.  Of  the  Addition  and  Subtraction  of  Fractions    -  27 

X.  Of  the  Multiplication  and  Division  of  Fractions  30 

XI.  Of  Square  Numbers           -            i            -         -  36 

XII.  Of  Square  Roots,  and  of  Irrational  Numbers  ré^ 

suiting  from  them            -            -            -        -  88 

XIII.  Of  Impossible,  or  Imaginary  Quantities^  which 

arise  from  the  same  source             -                -  42 

XIV.  Of  Cubic  Numbers            -            -            -        -  45 
XV.  Of  Cube  Roots^  and  of  Irrational  Numbers  re- 
sulting from  them              -              -               -  46 

XVL  Of  Powers  in  general              -                -            -  48 

XVII.  Of  the  Calculation  of  Powers        -         -            -  52 

XVIII.  Of  Roots  with  relation  to  Powers  in  general       -  54 
XIX.  Of  the  Method  of  representing  Irrational  Num- 

bers  by  Fractional  Exponents             -            *  56 
XX.  Of  the  different  Methods  of  Calculation,  and  of 

their  Mutual  Connexion            -              -        •  60 

XXI.  Of  Logarithms  in  general            -            -           -  63 

XXII.  Of  the  Logarithmic  Tables  that  are  now  in  use  -  66 

'  XXIII.  Of  the  Method  of  expressing  Logarithms            -  69 

SECTION  IL 

Oftht  different  Methods  0/ calculating  Compound  Quantities. 

Chap.  I.  Of  the  Addition  of  Compound  Quantities           -  76 

II.  Of  the  Subtraction  of  Compound  Quantities       -  78 

III.  Of  the  Multiplication  of  Compound  Quantities   -  79 

IV.  Of  the  Division  of  Compound  Quantities             -  84 

V.  Of  the  Resolution  of  Fractions  into  Infinite  Series  88 

VI.  Of  the  Squares  of  Compound  Quantities            -  97 


XSVIU  CONTENTS. 

Chap.  VII.  Of  the  Extraction  of  RooU  applied  to  Com- 
pound Quantities  ...  IQO 
VIII.  Of  the  Calculation  of  Irrational  Quantities      -  1(H 
IX.  Of  Cubes,  and  o(  the  Extraction  of  Cube  RooU  107 
X.  Of  the  higher  Powers  of  Compound  Quantities   1 10 
XI.  Of  the  Transposition  of  the  Letters,  on  which 
the  demonstration  of  the  preceding  Rule  is 
founded              •  •  •  -  115 
XII.  Of  the  Expression  of  Irrational  Powers  by  In* 

finite  Series  ....  m 

XIII.  Of  the  Resolution  of  Negative  Powen  •  123 

SECTION  III. 

(y  Ratios  atid  Proportions. 

Chap.  I.  Of  Arithmetical  Ratio,  or  the  Difference  be- 

tween  two  Numbers  •  -  -  126 

II.  Of  Arithmetical  IVoportion  -  -  129 

III.  Of  Arithmetical  Progressions         -        -         -  ISl 

IV.  Of  the  Summation  of  Arithmetical  Progressions  1S5 
V.  Of  Figurate,  or  Polygonal  Numbers        -        -  139 

VI.  OfOeometrialRatio  -  -  •         -146 

VIL  Of  the  greatest  Common  Divisor  of  two  given 

Numbers  -  -  -  «148 

VIII.  Of  Geometrical  Proportions  •  •  152 

IX.  Observations  on  the  Rules  of  Proportion  and 

their  Utility  -  -  -  -  155 

X.  Of  Compound  Relations        -       *       -       -159 

XI.  Of  Geometrical  Progressions  -  -  164> 

XII.  Oflnfinite  Decimal  Fractions  -^      -  171 

XIII.  Of  the  Calculation  of  Interest         -  -  177 

SECTION  IV. 

Q/*  Algebraic  Equations,  and  qftÂê  Resolution  oftkoêe 

Equations. 

Chap.  I.  Of  the  Solution  of  IVoblems  in  General  -  186 

II.  Of  the   Resolution  of  Simple  Equations,   or 

Equations  of  the  Firet  Degree  •         -  180 

III.  Of  the  Solution  of  Questions  relating  to  the  pre- 

ceding Chapter  -  -  -  194 

IV.  Of  thi*  liesolution  of  two  or  more  Equations  of 

the  Firbt  Degree  ...  <J0(> 

V.  Of  tht*  HiMK>lütion  of  Pure  Quadratic  Equations  216 
VI.  Of  the  lies4>Iution  of  .Mixed  Equations  of  the 

Second  Degree  .  -  -  .  222 

VII.  Of  the  Extraction  of  the  RooU  of  Polygonal 

Numbers        -         -  .         .        1         .  230 

VllL  Of  the  Exuaction  of  Square  RooU  of  Bioc 

mials  •  ...  *i34 


CONTENTS.  XXIX 

Page 

Chap.  IX.  Of  the  Nature  of  Equations  of  the  Second 

Degree  -  -  -  244 

X.  Of  Pure  Equations  of  the  Third  Degree        -  248 
XI.  Of  the  Resolution  of  Complete  Equations  of 

the  Third  Degree  -  -  -  253 

XII.  Of  the  Rule  of  Cardan,  or  that  of  Sävio  Ferreo.262 
XJII.  Of  the  Resolution  of  Equations  of  tne  Fourth 

Degree  -  -  -  -  272 

XIV.  Of  the  Rule  of  Bombelliy  for  reducing  the  Re- 
solution of  Equations  of  the  Fourth  Degree 
to  that  of  Equations  of  the  Tliird  Degree  -  278 
XV.  Of  a  new  Method  of  resolving  Equations  of 

the  Fourth  Degree  -  -        -  282 

XVL  Of  the  Resolution  of  Equations  by  Approxi- 
mation -,      -  -  -  289 


PART  II. 

PART  n.,  Containing  the  Analysis  £^ Indeterminate  Quantities. 

Chap.  I.  Of  the  Resolution  of  Equations  of  the  First  De- 
gree, which  contain  more  than  one  unknown 
Quantity  -  '  :  "  299 

II.  Of  the  Rule  which  is  called  Regula  Cœciy  for  de- 
termining, by  means  of  two  Equations,  three 
or  more  Unknown  Quantities  •  «312 

III.  Of  Compound  Indeterminate  Equations,  in  which 

one  of  the  Unknown  Quantities  does  not  ex- 
ceed the  First  Degree  -  -  -317 

IV.  Of  the  Method  of  rendering  Surd  Quantities,  of 

the  form  {^a  +  <7x  -f  cx^).  Rational  -  322 

V.  Of  the  Cases  in  which  the  Formula  a  -H  ^x  +  ex' 

can  never  become  a  Souare  -  -  335 

VI.  Of  the  Cases  in  Integer  Numbers,  in  which  the 

Formula  or'  +  6  becomes  a  Square  -  -  342 
VII.  Of  a  particular  Method^  by  which  the  Formula 

an'  -f  1  becomes  a  Square  in  Integers  -  351 

VUI.  Of  the  Method  of  rendering  the  Irrational  Formula 

{y/a  +  ix  4  ex*  +  djfi)  Rational  -  361 

IX.  Of  the  Method  of  rendering  rational  the  incom- 
mensurable Formula(v^x-f /^x+cx^+dlx'+ex^)  368 
X.  Of  the  Method  of  rendering  rational  the  irrational 

Formula  (^/a  +  6xr  +  ex*  +  dx^)  -        -  379 

XI.  Of  the  Resolution  of  the  Formula  ax*'^bjry'{-cy* 

into  its  Factors  ...  397 

XII.  Of  the  Transformation  of  the  Formula  i74r*+cy* 

into  Squares  and  higher  Powers  -        -  396 

XIII.  Of  some  Expressions  of  the  Form  ax^  -|-  by^, 

which  are  not  reducible  to  Squares       -        -  405 


XXX  roNTX!rrt. 

Chap.  XIV.  Solution  of  some  Questions  thti  belong  to  this 

Part  of  Algebra        -  •  -        -413 

XV.  Solutions  of  some  Questions  in  which  Cubes  are 

required  .  -  •  .  449 

ADDITIONS  BY  M.  DE  LA  GRANGE. 

Advertisement  -  -  -  -  463 

Chap.   I.  or  Continued  Fractions  •  •         -  465 

II.  Solution  of  some  New  and  Curious  Arithmetical 

Problems  -  ...  495 

III.  Of  the  Resolution  in  Integer  Numbers  of  Eaua- 

tions  of  the  First  Degree  containing  two  Un- 
known Quantities  •  -  -  530 

IV.  General  Method  for  resolving  in  Integer  Equa- 

tions of  two  Unknown  Quantiti«f(,  one  of 
which  does  not  exceed  the  First  Degree  •  534 
V.  A  direct  and  general  Metliod  for  finding  tlic 
values  of  x,  that  will  render  Rational  Quan- 
tities of  the  fonu  ^[a  4-Âx-|-rjr^),  and  for  re- 
solving» in  Rational  Nunibers  the  indeter- 
minate Equations  of  the  second  Degree, 
whidi  have  two  Unknown  Quantities,  when 
they  admit  of  Solutions  of  this  kind  -  •  537 
Resolution  of  the  Equation  a^*  4-  nq'^  s  z^  in 
Integer  Numbers  •  •  -  539 

VI.  Of  Double  and  Triple  Equalities  •         -  547 

VII.  A  direct  and  general  Method  for  finding  all  the 
values  OÏ  Iß  expressed  in  Integer  Numbers,  by 
which  we  may  render  Quantities  of  the  form 
^^(fy'  +  b)*  rational  ;  a  and  a  l>eing  given 
Integer  Numbers  ;  and  also  for  tinding  all  tlu* 
possible  Solutions,  in  Integer  Numbers,  of  in- 
determinate Quadratic  Equations  of  two  un- 
known Quantities.  -  -  -  550 

Resolution  of  the  Equation  cy*  —  ^nyz  +  as*  s  1 
in  Integer  Numbers  -  •  •  552 

First  Meiliod  -  -  •         -     ib. 

Second  Method  ...  553 

Of  the  Mannner  of  finding  all  the  posüible  So- 
lutions of  the  Equations  cy'  *  !6iy:  +  ax^B  1, 
when  we  know  only  one  oi  them  •         •  559 

Of  the  Manner  of  hnding  all  the  possible  So- 
lutions, m  whole  Numbers,  of  Indeterminate 
Quadratic  Equations  of  two  Unknown  Quan- 
tities -  ...  jfi5 
VIII.  Renrwrks  on  Equation«  of  the  Form  p'asA^^-l-l, 
and  on  the  common  Method  of  revolving  them 
in  whole  Niuubers  -  -  •  IC^ 
IX.  Of  thr  Manner  of  finding  Algebraic  Functioiu 
<tf  all  Degrees,  which,  «hen  multiplied  to- 
gether, may  alway»  produce  similar  Functions  5So 


ELEMENTS 


OF 


ALGEBRA- 


PART  I. 

Containing  the  Analysis  ^Determinate  Quantities, 


SECTION  I. 
()fthe  different  Methods  ofcaladaiing  Simple  Quantities« 


CHAP.  I. 
(y*  Mathematics  in  general. 

ARTICLE  L 

tV  HâTEVER  is  capable  of  increase  or  diminution,  is 
called  magnitnde^  or  miantity. 

A  sum  of  money  ttierefore  is' a  quantity,  since  we  may 
increase  it  or  diminish  it.  It  is  the  same  with  a  weight,  and 
oCber  things  of  this  nature. 

&  From  this  definition,  it  is  evident,  that  the  different 
kinds  of  magnitude  must  be  so  various,  as  to  render  it  dif- 
ficult to  enumerate  them  :  and  this  is  the  ori^n  of  the  dif- 
fèrent branches  of  the  Mathematics,  each  bemg  employed 
on  a  particular  kind  of  magnitude.  Mathematics^  in  general, 
is  the  science  of  quantity;  or,  the  science  which  investigates 
the  means  of  measuring  quantity. 

8.  Now,  we  cannot  measure  or  determine  any  quantity, 
except  by  considering  some  other  quantity  of  the  same  kind 
as  known,  and  pointing  out  their  mutual  relation.  If  it 
were  proposed,  for  example,  to  determine  the  quantity  of  a 
sum  of  money^  we  shoula  take  some  known  piece  of  money, 

B 


ELEMKKT9  8RC7.  U 


as  a  louis,  a  crown,  a  ducat,  or  ionic  other  coin,  and  shew 
how  many  of  these  pieces  are  contained  in  the  given  sum. 
In  tlie  Mune  manner,  if*  it  were  proposed  to  determine  the 

Îiuantity  of  a  weight,  wc  should  take  a  certain  known  weight; 
ur  example,  a  ix>uiid,  an  ounce,  &c.  and  then  sliew  now 
many  times  one  of  these  weight:»  is  contained  in  that  which 
we  ore  endeavouring  to  ascertain.  If  we  wished  to  meaj^urc 
any  length  or  extension,  we  sliould  make  use  of  some  known 
length,  such  as  a  foot. 

4.  So  tliat  the  determination,  or  the  measure  of  mag* 
nitude  of  all  kinds,  is  reduced  to  this:  fix  at  pleasure  upon 
any  one  known  magnitude  of  the  same  s|)ei*ies  with  tnat 
which  is  to  be  determined,  and  consider  it  as  the  meoitirc  or 
unit:  then,  determine  the  pro(X)rtion  of  the  proposed  mag- 
nitude to  this  known  measure.  This  proportion  is  alwavs 
expressed  by  numbers  ;  so  tliat  a  numl)er  is  notliing  but  tne 
pn>iiortion  of  one  magnitude  to  anotlier  arbitrarily  assumed 
as  the  unit. 

5.  From  this  it  appears,  tliat  all  magnitudes  may  be  ex- 

Sressed  by  numbers;  and  that  the  foundation  of  all  the 
f  athematical  Sci<^noes  must  be  laid  in  a  complete  treatiae 
on  the  science  of  Numbers  and  in  an  accurate  examinatioo 
of  the  different  (XMsible  methods  of  calculation. 

This  fundamental  part  of  mathematics  is  called  Analysis, 
or  Algebra  *. 

(>.  In  Algebra  then  we  consider  only  numbers,  which 
represent  quantities,  without  regarding  the  different  kinds 
of  ijuantity.  These  are  the  subjects  of  other  branches  of 
the  mathematics. 

7«  Arithmetic  treats  of  numliers  in  particular,  and  is  the 
»cicnce  of  numbers  properly  êo  ealled;  but  this  science  ex* 
tends  only  to  certain  methods  of  calculation  which  occur  in 
common  practice:  Algebra,  on  tlie  contrary,  oomprehenda 
in  gi*neral  all  the  cases  that  can  exist  in  tne  doctrine  and 
calcuUtion  of  numbers. 

*  SeviTsI  mathematical  trriters  make  a  distinction  between 
Anaiyth  and  Ai^rhra,  Hy  the  term  Analifëi*^  they  understand 
the  method  o(  di*terminin):  those  geuiTsl  rules,  which  assist  the 
uiidcT»tanding  in  all  matiietiiatical  luvesiigations  {  and  by  Algebrmf 
the  i:iftir anient  which  this  method  employs  for  accomplishing 
tlut  end.  llii»  is  the  detinition  given  by  M.  Bezout  in  the 
preface  to  his  Algebra.     F.  T. 


CHAP.  Tl.  OF   AL6SBRA. 


CHAP.   II. 

Explanation  qftl%e  Signs  +  Plus  and  —  Minus. 

8.  When  we  have  to  add  one  given  number  to  another^ 
diis  is  indicated  by  the  sign  +,  which  is  placed  before  the 
second  number,  and  is  read  plus.  Thus  5  +  8  signifies 
that  we  must  add  3  to  the  number  B^  in  whidi  case,  every 
one  knows  that  the  result  is  8;  in  the  same  manner  12  +  7 
make  19;  25 +  16  make  41;  the  sum  of  25+41  is  66,  8cc 

9*  We  also  make  use  of  the  same  sign  +  plus,  to  con« 
nect  several  numbers  together  ;  for  example,  7+5+9 
signifies  tliat  to  the  numoer  7  we  must  add  5,  and  also  9, 
wnich  make  21.  The  reader  will  therefore  understand  what 
is  meant  by 

8  +  5  +  13  +  11+1+3  +  10, 
vis.  the  sum  of  all  these  numbers,  which  is  51. 

10.  AU  this  b  evident;  and  we  have  only  to  mention, 
that  in  Algebra,  in  order  to  generalise  numbers,  we  re- 
present them  by  letters,  as  a,  o,  c,  d,  &c.  Thus,  the  ex- 
pression a  +  bf  signifies  the  sum  of  two  numbers,  which  we 
express  by  a  and  %  and  these  numbers  may  be  either  very 
treat,  or  very  small.  In  the  same  manner,,/^  4  m  +  6  +  x, 
ngnifies  the  sum  of  the  numbers  represented  by  these  four 
letters. 

if  we  know  therefore  the  numbers  that  are  represented  by 
letters,  we  shall  at  all  times  be  able  to  find,  by  arithmetic, 
the  sum  or  value  of  such  expressions. 

11.  When  it  is  required,  on  the  contrary,  to  subtract  one 
çwetk  number  from  another,  this  operation  is  denoted  by  the 
ugn  —,  which  signifies  minuSy  and  is  placed  before  the 
number  to  be  subtracted  :  thus,  8  —  5  signifies  that  the 
nomber  5  is  to  be  taken  from  the  number  8  ;  which  being 
done,  there  remain  3.  In  like  manner  12  —  7  is  the  same 
as  5;  and  20  —  14  is  the  same  as  6,  &c. 

12.  Sometimes  also  we  may  have  several  numbers  to 
subtract  from  a  single  one  ;  as,  for  instance,  50  —  1  »  3  — 
5  —  7  —.  9.  This  signifies,  first,  take  1  from  50,  and  there 
remain  49  ;  take  3  from  that  remainder,  and  there  will  re- 
main 46  ;  take  away  5,  and  41  remain  ;  take  away  7,  and 
34  remain  ;  lastly,  from  that  take  9«  and  there  ranain  25  : 
this  last  remainder  is  the  value  of  the  expression.  But  as 
the  numbers  1,  3,  5,  7,  %  are  all  to  be  subtracted,  it  is  the 

b2 


r. 


/ 
I 


4  F.LKMKifTs  serr.  r. 

nine  thing  if  we  sulHraet  their  mim,  which  i^  25,  at  on» 
from  50,  and  the  remainder  will  Ik»  Si5  an  hefiwe. 

18.  It  is  also  easy  to  determine  the  value  of  similar  cx- 

i »restons,  in  which  l>oth  the  signs  +  plus  and  —  minus  are 
bfund.     For  example  ; 

12  —  3  —  5  +  2  —  1  is  the  same  as  ff. 
We  hare  only  to  collect  8e|)arately  the  sum  of  the  numbers 
that  have  the  mm  +  before  them,  and  subtract  from  it  the 
«im  of  those  that  have  the  tiga  — .  Thus,  the  sum  of  IS 
and  2  is  14;  and  that  of  3,  5,  and  1,  is  9;  hence 9  being 
taken  from  14,  there  remain  5. 

14.  It  will  lie  perceived,  from  these  examples,  that  the 
order  in  which  we  write  the  numbers  is  perfectly  indifferent 
and  arbitrary,  provided  the  proper  si^  ot  each  be  preserved^ 
We  might  with  equiJ  propriety  have  arranged  the  cxpresMi 
in  the  preceding  article  thun;  12f2  — 5  —  8—  I,  or 
a  .  1  -.  8  -  5  +  12,  or  2  +  12  -  S  —  1  -  5,  or  in  ttill 
different  orders  ;  where  it  must  l)e  olMcrvcd,  that  in  the  ar- 
rangement first  proposed,  the  sign  -(-  is  supposed  to  be  placed 
before  the  numner  12. 

15.  It  will  not  be  attended  with  any  more  difRcukv  if,  in 
order  to  generalise  these  operations  we  make  use  of' letters 
instead  otreal  numbers.     It  is  evident,  for  example,  that 

a  —  b  —  f-f-d  —  r, 
ngnifies  that  we  have  numbers  expressed  by  a  and  </,  and 
that  fnvai  these  numbers,  or  from  their  sum,  we  must  sub» 
tnict  the  numbers  expressed  by  the  letters  ^,  r,  r,  which 
have  In^fore  them  tlie  sign  — . 

16.  Hence  it  is  absolutely  neccMary  to  amsider  what  ngn 
is  prefixed  to  each  number  :  for  in  Algebra,  simple  quaiw 
titles  are  numlx^rs  considered  with  regard  to  the  signs  which 
precede,  or  affect  them.  Farther,  we  call  those  poeiiire 
^aa#i7înr,  before  which  the  sign  >  is  found;  and  thoae 
are  callett  negative  q^santiiieê^  wliicii  are  affected  by  the 
sign  -. 

17.  The  manner  in  which  we  ^çenerally  calculate  a  per* 
son's  property,  is  an  ant  illustration  of  what  has  just  been 
said.  For  we  denote  what  a  man  really  pto«M*Hses  by  pwitivc 
numbers,  using,  ivr  understanding  the  sign  4*  «  whereas  his 
debts  are  reprci^mted  by  negative  numbers,  or  by  using  the 
sign  — .  Tlius,  when  it  is  said  of  any  one  that  he  Ium  100 
crowns,  but  owes  50,  this  mean^  that  his  real  possession 
anniunts  to  KM)  »  50;  or,  which  is  tlie  same  thing,  +  100 
^  50,  that  »  to  nay,  50. 

18.  SinosTnegative  numbers  may  lie  considered  as  debts, 
hecaiise  pofitive  oumbors  represent  real  pusayiiionii  we 


CHAP.  il.  OF  ALGEBllA. 


may  say  that  negative  numbers  are  less  than  nothing.  Thus,  \ 
when  a  man  has  nothing  of  his  own,  and  owes  50  crowns^  it  I 
is  certdn  that  he  has  50  crowns  less  than  nothing  ;  for  if 
aay  one  were  to  make  him  a  present  of  50  crowns  to  pay  his  J 
debts,  he  would  still  be  oniy  at  the  point  nothing,  though  | 
really  richer  than  before.  j 

ip.  In  the  same  manner,  therefore,  as  positive  numbers! 
are  incontestably  greater  than  nothing,  negative  numbers  ' 
are  less  than  nothing.     Now,  we  obtain  positive  numbers  by  | 
adding  1  to  0,  that  is  to  say,  1  to  nothing;  and  by  con- 
tinuing always  to  increase  thus  from  unity.     This  is  the 
ùnmn  of  the  scries  of  numbers  called  natural  numbers;  the 
following  being  the  leading  terms  -of  this  scries  : 

0,  +1,  +2,  +3,  +4,  +5,  +6,  +7,  +8,  +9,  +10, 
and  so  on  to  infinity. 

But  if,  instead  of  continuing  this  series  by  successive  ad- 
ditions, we  continued  it  in  the  opposite  direction,  by  per- 
petually subtracting  unity,  we  should  have  the  following 
series  of  negative  numbers  : 

0,-1,  -2,  -S,  -4,  -5,  -6,  -7,  -^8,  -9,-10, 
and  so  on  to  infinity. 

SO.  All  these  numbers,  whether  positive  or  negative, 
have  the  known  appellation  of  whole  numbers,  or  integers, 
which  consequently  are  either  greater  or  less  than  nothing. 
We  call  them  integers^  to  distinguish  them  from  fractions, 
and  from  several  other  kinds  of  numbers,  of  which  we  shall 
hereafter  speak.^  For  instance,  50  being  greater  by  an  entire 
unit  than  49,  it  is  easy  to  comprehend  that  there  may  be, 
between  49  and  50,  an  infinity  of  intermediate  numbers,  all 
greater  than  49,  and  yet  all  less  than  50.  We  need  only 
imagine  two  lines,  one  50  feet,  the  other  49  feet  long,  and  it 
is  evident  that  an  infinite  number  of  lines  may  be  drawn,  all 
knger  than  49  feet,  and  yet  shorter  than  50. 

21.  It  is  of  the  utmost  importance  through  the  whole  of 
Algebra,  that  a  precise  idea  should  be  formed  of  those  ne- 

ave  quantities,  about  which  we  have  been  speaking.     I 
1,  however,  content  myself  with  remarking  here,  tlmt  all 
such  expressions  as 

+  1  —  1,  +  2  —  2,  -h  3  -  3,  -h  4  -  4,  &c 
are  equal  to  0,  or  nothing.     And  that 

-I-  2  —  5  is  equal  to  —  3  : 

for  if  a  person  has  2  crowns,  and  owes  5,  he  has  not  only 

nothing,  but  still  owes  3  crowns.     In  the  same  manner, 

7  —  12  is  equal  to  -^  5,  and  25  —  40  is  equal  to  -  15. 

'  22.  The  same  observations  hold  true,  when,  to  make  the 

expression  more  general,  letters  are  used  instead  of  numbers; 


6  ELEMCMTB  IBCr.  U 

thus  0,  or  nodiinff,  will  alimjs  be  the  nüue  of  4-  a  —  a  ; 
but  if  we  with  to  uow  the  value  of  +  0  —  ^9  two  cases  are 
to  be  considered. 

The  first  is  when  a  is  greater  than  6;  6  must  then  be 
subtracted  from  a,  and  the  remainder  (before  which  is 
pbced,  or  understood  to  be  placed,  the  sign  -f  )  shews  the 
value  sought. 

The  second  case  b  that  in  which  a  is  less  than  b  :  here  m 
is  to  be  subtracted  from  ^,  and  the  remainder  being  made 
negative,  by  placing  before  it  the  sign  — ,  will  be  the  value 

ight 


CHAP.  III. 

Of  the  Multiplication  g/*Stmplc  Qtumtitie». 

SS.  When  there  are  two  or  more  equal  numliers  to  be 
added  together,  the  exprvMicMi  of  their  sum  may  be  abridged  : 
for  example, 
a  4-  tf  Ks  the  same  with  S  x  a, 
fl+a  +  «--.--    Sx  a, 

a  +  tf+ii+tf**-    4x0,  and  so  on  ;  where  x  i»  the 
lagn  of  multiplication*     In  this  manner  we  may  form  an  idea 
or  multiplication  ;  and  it  in  to  Ix?  olMer\*ed  tlui't, 
S  X  a  signifies  S  times,  or  twice  a 
3xii-*--«5  times,  or  thrice  a 
4xa---.4  times  a,  &c« 
S4.  If  therefore  a  number  expressed  by  a  letter  is  to  be 
multiplied  by  any  other  number,  we  simply  put  that  number 
before  the  letter,  thus; 

a  multiplied  by  SiO  is  expresaed  by  2CVi,  and 
b  multiulied  by  30  is  expremed  by  äQ&,  &e. 
It  is  e%'ident,  abo,  that  c  uken  once,  or  ir,  ih  the  Muiie  as  c. 
SiS.  FarthiT,  it  is  extremely  eahv  U)  multiply  such  pru» 
ducts  again  by  other  numlx*»  ;  for  exniiiplc  : 
9,  tinH*is  or  twice  Sa,  makes  di 
;l  time»,  or  thrice  4^,  nudces  \^ 
5  time»  Tx  make»  :ULr. 
and  the»e  firuducU  umy  lie  aill  multi|>licd  by  other  numbers 
at  |ilea»ure. 

9f6.  When  the  number  by  which  we  are  to  multiplv  is 
also  repmented  bv  a  letler.'we  place  it  iinmediatrly  before 
che  otber  letter;  taus,  in  nmltiplyi^g  A  by  #,  the  pmluot  is 


CHAP.  UI/  OF  ALGEBRA.  7 

written  ab  ;  and  pq  will  be  the  product  of  the  niultiplication 
of  the  number  q  oy  p.  Also,  if  we  multiply  this  pq  again 
by  a,  we  shall  obtain  apq, 

27.  It  may  be  farther  remarked  here,  that  the  order  ia 
which  the  letters  are  joined  together  is  indifferent  ;  thus  ai 
is  the  same  thing  as  ba  ;  for  b  multiplied  by  a  is  the  same 
as  a  multiplied  by  b.  To  understand  this,  we  ha^e  only  to 
subftkute^  for  a  aad  by  known  numbers,  as  S  and  4  ;  and 
the  truth  will  be  self-evident  ;  for  S  times  4t  is  the  same  as 

4  times  SL 

28.  It  will  not  he  difficult  to  perceive,  that  when  we  sub- 
stitute numbers  for  letters  joined  together,  in  the  manner  we 
have  described,  they  cannot  be  written  in  the  same  way  by 
putting  them  one  after  the  other.  For  if  we  were  to  write 
S4  for  3  times  4,  we  should  have  34  and  not  12.  When 
therefore  it  is  required  to  multiply  common  numbers,  we 
must  separate  them  by  the  sign  x,  or  by  a  point:  thus, 

5  X  4,  or  3.4,  signifies  3  times  4;  that  is,  12,     So,  1  x  £  is 
equal  to  2;  and  1x2x3  makes  6.     In  like  manner, 
1x2x3x4x56  makes  1344  ;  and  Ix2x3x4x 
5x6x7x8x9xl0is  equal  to  3628800,  &c. 

29-  In  the  same  manner  we  may  discover  thç  value  of  an 
expression  of  this  form,  5.T.8.abcd.  It  shews  that  5  must 
be  multiplied  by  7,  and  that  this  product  is  to  be  again 
multiplied  by  8  ;  that  we  are  then  to  multiply  this  product 
of  the  three  numbers  by  a,  next  by  6,  then  by  c,  and  lasüy 
by  d.  It  may  be  observed,  also,  that  instead  of  5.7.8,  we 
may  write  its  value,  280  ;  for  we  obtain  this  number  when 
we  multiply  the  product  of  5  by  7,  or  35,  by  Ö.  ^— i 

SO.  Tnc  results  which  arise  from  the  multiplication  of    I 
two  or  more  numbers  arc  called  products;  and  the  numbers, 
or  individual  letters,  are  callcd^^tor^. 

31.  Hitherto  we  have  considered  only  positive  numbers, 
and  there  can  be  no  doubt,  but  that  the  products  which  we 
have  seen  arise  are  positive  also  :  viz.  +  a  by  +  ^  must 
necessarily  give  +ab.  But  we  must  separately  examine 
what  the  multiplication  of  +a  by  —6,  and  of  —a  by  — Ä, 
will  produce. 

32.  Let  us  begin  by  multiplying  — a  by  8  or  +3.  Now, 
since  — a  may  be  considered  as  a  debt,  it  is  evident  that  if 
we  take  that  debt  three  times,  it  must  thus  become  three 
limes  greater,  and  consequently  the  required  product  is 
—  3a.  So  if  we  multiply  —a  by  +Ô,  wc  shall  obtain  —bay 
or,  which  is  the  same  thing,  —ab.  Hence  we  conclude, 
that  if  a  positive  quantity  be  multiplied  by  a  negative  quan- 
tity, the  product  will  be  n^;ative  ;  and  it  may  be  laid  down 


ELEMENTS  KECT.  t. 

I  as  a  rule,  that  +  by  +  makes  4-  or  ffhts;  and  that,  oil  the 
Icontrarv»  +  hjr  —,  or  —  l>y  +»  gi^'**  —^  or  minus. 
^"^^M.  it  remainM  lo  resolve  the  case  in  which  —  is  mul- 
tiplied l>y  —  ;  or,  for  example,  —a  by  —  Ä.  It  is  evident, 
at  Hmt  Mght,  with  regarti  to  the  letters,  that  the  product  will 
be  fib  ;  but  it  is  doubtful  whether  the  sipn  +#  or  tlic  sisn  — , 
is  to  lie  pUced  before  it  ;  all  we  know  is,  that  it  mu»t  be  one 
or  the  other  of  t)ief«e  signs.  Now,  I  say  that  it  cannot  be 
tlie  sign  —  :  for  — tf  by  f  b  gives  — «6,  uid  — 1#  by  —A  can- 
not produce  the  same  result  as  ^a  by  +b;  but  must  pro- 
duce a  contrary  result,  that  is  to  sny,  +<?6;  consequently, 
we  have  the  following  rule:  —  nuiltiplied  by  —  produces 
-f ,  that  is,  the  same  an  -f-  multiplied  by  +  •. 

'*  A  further  illustration  of  this  rule  is  generally  given  by 
algebraists  as  follows  : 

First,  we  know  that  -fa  multiplied  by  -f  &  gives  the  product 
-)-a6  ;  and  if -fa  be  multiplied  by  u  (|uantity  les«  than  &,  us  A— c, 
die  product  must  necessarily  be  It*»»  thiui  abi  in  short,  fnMn  ai 
we  must  subtract  the  product  of  a,  multiplied  by  c  -,  hence 
a  X  (6— c)  must  be  expressed  by  nb — ac,  tnereforc  it  follows 
thai  a  X  — c  gives  the  product  — ac. 

If  now  wc  consider  tnc  priuluct  arising  from  the  multiplication 
of  the  two  quantitii*»  (a^b),  and  (c^d),  we  know  that  it  is  les« 
tlum  that  of  (a  —  6)  x  c,  or  of  at  —  6r  ;  in  »hort,  from  this  pro- 
duct we  must  subtract  that  of  (a  —  6)  x  d;  but  the  proauct 
(a  »  ^)  X  (e  ^d)  becomes  ac  —  be  ^  ad^  togeüier  with  the 
product  of  — b  x  ^d  annexed  ;  and  the  question  is  only  what 
sign  we  must  employ  for  this  purpose,  whetlier  -f  or  — .  Now 
we  have  seen  that  trom  the  product  ac  —  be  we  must  subtract 
the  product  of  (a  —  ^)  x  d^  that  is,  we  must  subtract  a  quantity 
less  than  ad^  we  have  therefore  subtracted  already  too  much 
by  the  quantity  bd-,  this  product  mu»t  therefore  be  added; 
that  w,  it  must  have  the  sign  -^  prefixed  ;  hence  we  see  that 
—6  X  — ^  gives  -^bd  for  a  ptoduct  ;  or  —  mimui  multiplied  by 
—  mintu  gives  -|-  ij/m.     See  Art.  27S,  274. 

Multiplication  nas  been  erroneously  called  a  compendious 
method  of  performing  addition  :  whereas  it  is  the  taking,  or  re- 
peating of  one  given  numlK*r  as  many  times,  as  the  numl>er  by 
which  it  is  to  be  multiplied,  contains  unit».  Thu*»,!)  x  H  means 
tluU  9  is  to  bt*  taken  :(  tiuii*«,  or  that  the  measure  of  multiplica- 
tiim  is  H  ;  again,  U  x  i  means  that  ii  i»  to  be  taken  half  a  time| 
or  tliat  the  meavun*  o(  multiplication  is  {.  In  multiplication 
there  are  tmo  factorn,  which  are  sometimes  called  die  mul- 
tiplicand and  the  multiplier.  Tlie»e,  it  is  evident,  may  re* 
eipriKuIly  chanj^e  placets,  and  the  product  will  Ih*  »till  the  same: 
for  9  X  r«  ^-ix  %  and  !»  x  ;  =  f  x  *J  Hence  it  appears,  that 
numbers  may  lir  diminislied  bv  multiplicatioit,  as  well  as  in- 
creased, in  any  given  ratio»  w^h  is  wholly  iocoQaisteot  wkll 


CHAP.  III.  OF  ALGEBRA»  9 

54.  The  rules  which  we  have  explained  are  expressed 
more  briefly  as  follows  : 

Like  signs,  multiplied  together,  give  +  ;  unlike  or  con- 
trary signs  give  — .  Thus,  when  it  is  required  to  multiply 
the  following  numbers  ;  +  j ,  —  6,  —r ,  4.  d  ;  we  have  first 
+a  multiplied  by  —  Ä,  which  makes  —  a6;  this  by  — x^, 
gives  +abc;  and  this  by  +d,  gives  -^abcd. 

55,  The  difRculties  with  respect  to  the  signs  being  re- 
moved, we  have  only  to  shew  how  to  multiply  numbers  that 
are  themselves  products.  If  we  were,  for  instance,  to  mul- 
tiply the  number  ah  by  the  nural>er  cd,  the  product  would 
be  abcd^  and  it  is  obtained  by  multiplying  first  ab  by  c,  and 
then  the  result  of  that  muluplication  by  d.  Or,  if  we  had 
to  multiply  36  by  lîî;  since  12  is  equal  to  3  times  4,  we 

the  nature  of  Addition  j  for  9  x  ï  =  4|,  9  x  t  =  1>  9  X  TyiTr= 
TVT*  &c.  The  same  will  be  found  true  with  respect  to  algebraic 
quantities;  flX^=flô,  — 9x3=  —27,  that  is,  9  negative  in- 
tegers multiplied  by  S,  or  taken  3  times,  are  equal  to  —27,  be- 
cause the  measure  of  multiplication  is  3.  In  the  same  manner, 
by  inverting  the  factors,  3  positive  integers  multiplied  by  —  9, 
or  taken  9  times  negatively,  must  give  the  same  result.  There- 
fore a  positive  quantity  taken  negatively,  or  a  negative  quantity 
taken  positively,  gives  a  negative  product. 

From  tliese  considerations,  we  may  illustrate  the  present  sub- 
ject in*  .a  different  way,  and  shew,  tnat  the  product  of  two  ne- 
gative quantities  must  be  positive.  First,  algebraic  quantities 
mav  be  considered  as  a  series  of  numbers  mcreasing  in  any 
ratio,  on  each  side  of  nothing,  to  infinity.  Let  us  assume  a 
small  part  only  of  such  a  series  for  the  present  purpose,  in 
wliich  the  ratio  is  unity,  and  let  us  multiply  every  term  of  it  by 
-2. 

5,     4,      3,      2,      1,      0,-1,  —2,  —3,  —4,  —5, 
— ~*,  ■"■  ■^f  ""~^>  "~^>  "■"<">  "^  Ä,  -^ii,  "^^,  ~"*^»  — ~^>  "~^# 
-10,  -8,  -6,  -4,  -2,      0,  +2,  +4,  +6,  +8,  +10. 

Here,  of  course,  we  find  the  series  inverted,  and  the  ratio  dou- 
bled. Farther,  in  order  to  illustrate  the  subject,  we  may  con- 
sider the  ratio  of  a  series  of  fractions  between  1  and  0,  as 
indefinitely  sipall,  till  the  last  term  being  multiplied  by  —2,  the 
product  would  be  equal  to  0.  If,  after  this,  the  multiplier 
havine  passed  the  middle  term,  0,  be  multiplied  into  any  negative 
term,  however  small,  between  0  and  — 1,  on  the  other  side  of  the 
scries,  the  product,  it  is  evident,  must  be  positive,  otiierwise  the 
series  could  not  go  on.  Hence  it  appears^  that  the  taking  of  a 
negative  quantity  negatively  destroys  the  very  property  of  ne- 
gation, and  is  the  conversion  of  negative  into  positive  nuipbers. 
So  that  if  +  X  —  = —,it  necessarily  follows  that  —  x  —  must 
give  a  contrary  product,  that  is,  +.     See  Art.  176, 177. 


10  KLEMKNTS  aSCT,  U 

tihoukl  ofil^  multiply  8G  fini  by  A,  and  theo  the  product 
1 08  by  4,  ID  order  to  have  the  whole  product  of  the  mul- 
tiplication of  12  by  86,  which  it  consequently  438. 

86.  But  if  we  wished  to  multiply  6ab  by  3cd^  we  migiit 
write  3cd  x  ôab.  However,  as  in  tlie  present  instance  the 
order  of  the  numbers  to  be  multiplied  is  iudilierent,  it  will 
be  better,  as  is  also  the  custom,  to  place  tlie  common  num- 
bers before  the  letters,  and  to  express  the  product  thus: 
Ù  X  Hübcd^  or  \5abcd'^  since  5  times  8  is  15. 

So  if  we  had  to  multiply  \2/>qr  by  7jy,  we  should  obtain 
12  X  Ipqrxy^  or  Mpqrx^. 


CHAP.  IV. 

()flhe  Nature  of  whole  NuiiiIkts,  or  Integers,  tciih  respect 

to  their  Factors. 

S7.  We  have  olwerved  tliat  a  product  is  gi^nemtcd  bv  tlie 
multiplication  of  two  or  more  numbers  together,  ancf  that 
thi*se  numlx^rH  are  callctl  Jtictnrë,  'I'hus,  the  numbers 
a,  A,  r,  if,  are  the  factors  of  the  product  ahnl. 

«58.  If,  therefore,  we  consider  all  whole  numbers  as  pro- 
tlucts  of  two  or  nK>re  niinilK*rH  iiuilti|)lied  together,  we  snail 
soon  find  that  some  of  tlieni  cannot  result  from  !iuch  a  mul- 
tiplication, and  consequently  have  not  any  factors;  while 
ottiers  may  be  the  prolducts  of  two  or  more  numbers  mul- 
tiplied ti)gether,  ami  may  conse<|uently  have  two  or  more 
factors.  Thus  4  is  jmidiKvd  bv  2  x  2  ;  6  by  2  x  8  ;  8  by 
2  X  2  X  8;  27  by  8  X  ^i  X  :i\  ami  10  by  2x5,  &c. 

.'39.  But  on  the  other  liami,  the  numbers  2,  8,  5,  7,  11, 
18,  17,  &c.  cannot  be  representi*d  in  the  same  manner  by 
lai*tort,  unless  lor  that  puqiom;  we  make  um*  of  unity,  and 
re)ireM*nt  2,  An-  insunci*,  by  1x2.  But  the  nuinliers 
which  arc  multiplied  by  1  n>iiiaining  the  same,  it  is  not 
pmptT  to  reckon  unity  a.^  a  farttir. 

All  numliers,  therefore,  micIi  aa  2,  8,  />,  7,  II,  18,  17, 
&c.  which  cannot  Ik»  repn-M'ntwl  l)v  factiin*,  are  culled 
»im/}le^  or  ptime  numl»crs ;  w hennas ot fur«*,  as  4,  6,  8,  9,  10, 
12,  14,  1.Î,  1(),  18,  \"C.  Hhicli  may  Ih'  rc'|)reM.*nted  by 
factors  are  called  cufnpoéiie  uumU're. 

to.  Simple  or  pr^me  numbern  clemTve  tlieri*f«>re  par- 
iK*ular  attention,  siooe  tln'y  do  not  result  from  the  mul- 


CHAP.  IV.  OP  ALGEBEA.  11 

tiplictttion  of  two  or  more  numbers.     It  is  also  particularly 
wcrtby  of  obeervatioui  that  if  we  write  these  numbers  in  suc- 
cession as  they  follow  each  other,  thus, 
2,  8,  5,  7,  11, 13, 17, 19,  23,  29,  31,  87,  41, 43,  47,  &c.» 
we  can  trace  no  regular  order  ;  their  increments  being  some- 
times greater,  sometimes  less  ;  and  hitherto  no  one  has  been 
able  to  discover  whether  they  follow  any  certain  law  or  not. 
41.  All  composUe  numbers,  which  may  be  represented 
by  fiictors,  result  from  the  prime  numbers  above  mentioned  ; 
tnat  is  to  say,  all  their  factors  are  prime  numbers.     For,  if 
we  find  a  factor  which  is  not  a  prime  number,  it  may  always 
be  deoompbsed  and  represented  by  two  or  more  prime  num- 
bers.    When  we  have  represented,  fbr  instance,  the  number 

*  All  the  prime  numbers  from  1  to  100000  are  to  be  found 
in  the  tables  of  divisors,  which  1  shall  speak  of  in  a  succeeding 
note.  But  particular  tables  of  the  pnme  numbers  from  1  to 
101000  have  been  published  at  Halle,  by  M.  Kruger,  in  a  Ger- 
man work  entitled  "  Tlioughts  on  Algebra  ;*'  ^l.  Kruger  had 
received  them  from  a  person  called  Peter  Jaeger,  who  had  cal- 
culated them.  M.  Lambert  has  continued  these  tables  as  far  as 
109000,  and  republished  them  in  his  supplements  to  the  loga- 
rithmic and  trigonometrical  tables,  printed  at  Berlin  in  1770; 
a  work  which  contains  likewise  several  tables  that  are  of  great 
use  in  the  different  branches  of  mathematics,  and  explanations 
which  it  would  be  too  long  to  enumerate  here. 

The  Royal  Parisian  Academy  of  Sciences  is  in  possession  of 
tables  of  prime  numbers,  j)resented  to  it  by  P.  Mercastel  de 
COraftoire,  and  by  M.  du  Tour  ;  but  they  have  not  been  pub- 
-lished.  They  are  spoken  of  in  Vol.  V.  oi  the  Foreign  Memoirs, 
with  a  reference  to  a  memoir,  contained  in  that  volume,  by  M. 
Rallier  des  Ourmes,  Honorary  Counsellor  of  the  Presidial  Court 
aft  Rennes,  in  which  the  author  explains  an  easy  method  of 
ûadmg  prime  numbers. 

In  Uie  same  volume  we  find  another  method  by  M.  Rallier  des 
Ourmes,  which  is  entitled,/'  A  new  Method  for  Division,  when 
the  Dividend  is  a  Multiple  of  the  Divisor,  and  may  therefore  be 
divided  without  a  Remainder  ;  and  for  the  Extraction  of  Roots 
when  the  Power  is  perfect/'  This  method,  more  curious,  in- 
deed, than  useful,  is  almost  totally  different  from  the  common 
one  :  it  is  very  easy,  and  has  this  singularity,  that,  provided  we 
know  as  many  figures  on  the  right  of  the  dividend,  or  the  power, 
as  there  are  to  be  in  the  quotient,  or  the  root,  we  may  pass  over 
the  figures  which  precede  them,  and  thus  obtain  the  quotient. 
M.  Rallier  des  Ourmes  was  led  to  this  new  method  by  reflecting 
on  the  numbers  terminating  the  numerical  expressions  of  pro- 
ducts or  powers,  a  species  of  numbers  which  I  have  remarked 
also,  on  other  occasions,  it  would  be  useful  to  consider.    F.  T. 


It  CLIMBHTS  SECT.  1« 

90  by  5  X  6,  it  is  evident  that  6  not  being  a  prime  number, 
but  being  produced  by  2  x  S,  we  might  liave  repreaented 
SO  by  5  X  2  X  3,  or  by  2  X  3  X  5;  that  is  to  say,  by  fac- 
tors which  are  all  prime  numbers. 

4/St.  If  we  now  consider  tliose  composite  numbers  which  may 
be  resolved  into  prime  factors,  we  shall  observe  a  great  dif- 
ference among  them;  thus  we  shall  find  that  some  have 
only  two  factors,  that  others  have  three,  and  others  a  still 
greater  number«  We  have  already  seen,  for  example, 
that 


C  is  the  same  as  S  x  3, 

9    -    .    -    -    8x8, 

12    .    -    -    2x8x2, 

15    ....     3x5, 

and  soon. 


4  is  the  same  as  S  x  2, 

8  .  .  -  2x*2x2, 
10  .  -  .  .  2x5, 
It  ...  -  2x7, 
16  .    .    2x2x2x2, 

48.  Hence,  it  is  easy  to  find  a  methtxl  for  analysing  any 
number,  or  resolving  it  into  its  simple  factors.  lA*t  there  lie 
pit>|M)sed,  for  instance,  the  number  860  ;  we  shall  represent 
It  first  by  2  X  180.     Now  180  is  equal  to  2  x  90,  and 

the  same  as  -^  8  x  15,  and  lastly 
(8x5. 

So  that  the  number  860  may  he  represented  by  these 
simple  factors,  2  x2x2x8x8x5;  since  all  these 
numbers  multiprurd  together  |>rodure  860  *. 

44.  Th'u  shews,  tliat  prime  numbers  cannot  be  divided 
by  otlier  numbers;  ami,  on  the  other  hand,  that  tlie  simule 
iactors  of  annpound  numbers  are  found  mcjiit  oonvenicfntiy, 
and  with  the  greatest  certainty,  by  seeking  the  simple,  or 

£ime  numbers,  by  which  tl«osc  compound  numbers  are 
visible.  But  for  this  dîvukm  is  necessary  ;  we  shall  thefv- 
fore  explain  the  rules  of  that  operation  in  the  following 
chapter. 

*  There  is  a  table  at  the  end  uf  a  (irrnmn  book  of  aritlinictic, 
publi]»liitl  at  Lei|i»ic,  by  Poc*tiiis  in  1T2H,  in  which  all  thi* 
number»  from  I  to  1(KX)0  are  rvprcftciitcd  in  this  manner  by 
their  Mniple  factors.     F.  T. 


CHAP.  V.  OF  AI«GEBRA.  13 


CHAP.   V. 

Of  (he  Division  ^Simple  Quantities. 

45.  When  a  number  is  to  be  separated  into  two,  three,  or 
more  equal  parts,  it  is  done  by  means  of  division^  which 
enables  us  to  determine  the  magnitude  of  one  of  those  parts. 
When  we  wish,  for  example,  to  separate  the  number  1^  into 
three  equal  parts,  we  find  by  division  that  each  of  those 
parts  is  equal  to  4. 

The  following  terms  are  made  use  of  in  this  operation. 
The  number  which  is  to  be  decompounded,  or  divided,  is 
called  the  dividend;  the  number  of  equal  parts  sought  is 
called  the  divisor;  the  magnitude  of  one  of  those  parts, 
determined  by  the  division,  is  called  the  qtiotient:  thus,  in 
the  above  example, 

IS  is  the  dividend, 

3  is  the  divisor,  and 

4  is  the  quotient 

46.  It  follows  from  this,  that  if  we  divide  a  number  by  S, 
or  into  two  equal  parts,  one  of  those  parts,  or  the  quotient, 
taken  twice,  makes  exactly  the  number  proposed  ;  and,  in 
the  same  manner,  if  we  have  a  number  to  divide  l)y  3,  the 
quotient  taken  thrice  must  give  the  same  number  again.  In 
general,  the  multiplication  of  the  quotient  by  the  divisor 
must  always  reproduce  the  dividend. 

47.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  division  is  said  to  be  a  rule, 
which  teaches  us  to  £nd  a  number  or  quoüent,  which,  being 
multiplied  by  the  divisor,  will  exactly  produce  the  dividend. 
For  example,  if  35  is  to  be  divided  by  5,  we  seek  for  a 
number  wnich,  multiplied  by  5,  will  produce  35.  Now, 
this  number  is  7,  since  5  times  7  is  35.  The  manner  of 
expression  employed  in  this  reasoning,  is  ;  5  in  35  goes  7 
tiroes;  and  5  times  7  makes  35. 

48.  The  dividend  therefore  may  be  considered  as  a  product, 
of  which  one  of  the  factors  is  the  divisor,  and  the  other  the 
quotient.  Thus,  supposing  we  have  63  to  divide  by  7,  we 
endeavour  to  find  such  a  product,  that,  taking  7  for  one  of 
its  factors,  the  other  factor  multiplied  by  this  may  exactly 
give  63.  Now  7  x  9  Ls  such  a  product,  and  consequently 
9  is  the  quotient  obtained  when  we  divide  63  by  7. 

49.  In  general,  if  we  have  to  divide  a  numl)cr  oZi  by  a,  it 
is  evident  that  the  quotient  will  be  A  ;  for  a  multiplied  by  b 


14  CI.BMBNT9  tBCr.  t. 

Sivcs  the  dîvklefKl  o/i.  It  in  clear  ak»,  that  if  we  had  to 
ivicie  ab  Iw  &»  the  quotient  would  he  a.  And  in  all  ex- 
anipIcA  of  division  tliat  can  \k  proposed,  if  we  divide  the 
dividend  by  the  ciuotient,  we  shall  a^n  obtain  the  divisor  ; 
for  as  S4  divided  by  4  gives  6,  so  24  divided  by  6  will 
give  4. 

50.  As  the  whole  o{XTation  consit^ts  in  representing  the 
dividend  by  two  factors»  of  which  one  may  be  eqtial  to  the 
divisor»  ami  the  other  to  the  quotient»  tne  following  ex- 
amples will  be  eauily  understoocf.  I  say  first  that  the  di- 
vidend oAc»  divided' by  a»  gives  bc\  for  a^  multiplied  by  Ar» 
produces  ahc  :  in  the  same  manner  abc^  being  divided  by  A» 
we  shall  have  ac;  and  abc^  divided  by  ac^  gives  6.  It  is 
also  plain»  that  12mn»  divided  by  3m»  gives  4fi;  for  ckn» 
mulupruxl  by  4fi»  makes  ISmit.  But  if  this  same  number 
Iftmn  bad  been  divided  by  IS!»  we  should  have  obtained  the 
quotient  ntfi. 

51.  Since  every  number  a  may  be  expressed  by  la»  or  o» 
it  is  evident  that  if  we  had  to  divide  a»  or  la»  by  1»  the 
quotient  would  Iw  the  some  number  a.  And»  on  the  oon* 
trary»  if  the  same  number  a»  or  Id»  is  to  be  divided  by  a» 
the  quotient  will  be  1. 

52.  It  often  happens  that  we  cannot  represent  the  di- 
vidend as  the  pnxiuct  of  two  factors»  of  which  one  is  equal 
to  the  divisor  ;  hence»  in  this  case»  the  divison  cannot  be 
performed  in  the  manner  we  have  descrilicd. 

When  we  have»  for  example»  24  to  divide  by  7»  it  is  at 
first  sight  obvious»  that  the  numlxnr  7  U  not  a  factor  of  24  ; 
for  the  product  of  7  X  «S  is  only  21»  and  consequently  too 
small  ;  and  7x4  nwkcs  2H»  which  is  mater  than  524.  We 
discoviT»  however»  from  this»  that  Uie  f|Uotieot  must  be 
greater  than  5»  and  less  than  4.  In  order  therefore  to  de- 
tennilu^  it  exactly»  we  employ  another  species  of  numbers» 
which  are  callcil ^ractiotut^  and  which  we  shall  consider  in 
one  of  the  fol  low  mg  cliafiters. 

&l,  I)efore  we  ))ruceed  to  the  use  of  fractions»  it  is  usual 
to  lie  satisfied  with  the  wliole  number  which  approaches 
nean*st  to  the  true  quotient»  Init  at  the  same  time  paying 
attention  to  the  remainder  which  is  left  ;  thus  we  say»  7  in 
24  giM*s  9  times,  and  the  n*mainder  is  3»  lieiauite  «)  times  7 
imidiices  only  21»  which  is  «i  Icm  tluin  24.  We  may  also 
consider  the  fi>llowing  examples  in  the  muiic  numner  : 

6)«U(5»       that  is  to  say,   the  divisor   is  6»  the 
«'30  dividemi  34»  the  quotient  5»  and  the 
remainder  4. 


CHAP.  T.  OF  ALGEBRA.  ,15 

9)41(4,         here  the  divisor  is  9,  the  dividend 
36  41,  the  quotient  4,  and  the  remain- 

der  5. 

5 
The  following  rule  is  to  be  observed  in  examples  where 
there  is  a  remainder. 

54.  Multiply  the  divisor  by  the  quotient,  and  to  the  pro- 
duct add  the  remainder,  and  the  result  will  be  the  dividend. 
This  is  the  method  of  proving  the  division,  and  of  dis- 
covering whether  the  calculation  is  right  or  not.  Thus,  in 
the  first  of  the  two  last  examples,  if  we  multiply  6  by  5, 
and  to  the  product  30  add  the  remainder  4,  we  obtain  34, 
or  the  dividend.  And  in  the  last  example,  if  we  multiply 
the  divisor  9  by  the  qjuoticnt  4,  and  to  the  product  36  add 
the  remainder  5,  we  obtain  the  dividend  41. 

55.  Lastlyt  it  is  necessary  to  remark  here,  with  regard  to 
the  s^s  +  flus  and  —  minuSy  that  if  we  divide  +öA  by 
-fa,  the  quotient  will  be  +6,  which  is  evident.  But  if  we 
divide  4  ah  by  — o,  the  quotient  will  be  —  6  ;  because  —  a 
X  — Ô  rives  +a6.  If  the  dividend  is  -ai,  and  is  to  be 
divided  by  the  divisor  -f  a,  the  quotient  will  be  —  Ä  ;  because 
it  is  —Ô  which,  multiplied  by  +a,  makes  — ah.  Lastly, 
if  we  have  to  divide  the  dividend  —  oä  by  the  divisor  —  tf, 
the  quotient  will  be  +Ä;  for  the  dividend  —  oô  is  the 
product  of  —a  by  +6. 

56.  With  regard,  therefore,  to  the  signs  +  and  — ,  di- 
viâon  requires  the  same  rules  to  be  observed  that  we  have 
seen  take  place  in  multiplication  ;  viz. 

+  by  +  make»-  -f  ;   -|-  by  —  makes  —  ; 

—  by  +  makes  —  ;   —  by  —  makes  -j-  : 

or,  in  few  words,  like  signs  give  fiuSy  and  unlike  signs  give 
mmtis. 

57.  Thus,  when  we  divide  ISpg  by  —  8p,  the  quotient  is 

-  6g.     Farther  ; 

— 80w  divided  by  +6y  gives  —  6ar,  and 

—  54adc  divided  by  — 96  gives  +  6ar  ; 

for,  in  this  last  example,  —96  multiplied  by  +6ar  makes 

—  6  X  9a6c,  or  — 54a6r.  But  enough  has  been  swd  on  the 
division  of  simple  quantities  ;  we  shall  therefore  hasten  to 
the  explanation  of  fractions,  after  having  added  some  further 
remarks  on  the  nature  of  numbers,  with  respect  to  their 
divisors. 


16  RLBMCNT»  SKGT.  I. 


CHAP.   VI. 

Ofihe  Propertiet  ^Integera,  wUh  respeci  to  ikeir  Dirâom. 

58.  As  we  have  teen  that  fonie  Dumben  are  dÎTÎttUe  I>y 
ocrtûn  divifora,  while  others  are  not  so;  it  will  be  proper« 
in  order  that  we  may  obtun  a  more  particular  knowledge  of 
numbers,  that  this  difference  shoulct  be  carefully  observed, 
both  by  distinguishing  the  numbers  that  are  aiTi«Ue  by 
diTisors  from  those  which  are  not,  and  by  considering  die 
remainder  that  is  left  in  the  division  of  the  latter.  For  this 
purpose  let  us  examine  the  divisors; 

«,  3,  4,  5,  6,  7.  8|  9, 10,  &c. 

89.  First  let  the  divisor  be  2  ;  the  numbers  divisible  by  it 
are,  2,  4,  6,  8,  10, 12, 14, 16, 18,  20,  &c.  which,  it  appears, 
incrcttse  always  by  two.  These  numbers,  as  far  as  they  can 
be  continued,  are  called  ei^cn  numbers.  But  there  arc  other 
numbers,  vis. 

1,  8,  5,  7,  9,  11,  13,  15,  17, 19,  &c 
whidi  are  uniformly  less  or  greater  than  the  former  by  unitff 
and  which  cannot  be  divideu  by  2,  without  the  remainder  1  ; 
these  are  called  odd  numbers. 

The  even  numbers  are  all  comprehended  in  the  ffcneral 
expression  2a  ;  for  they  are  all  obtained  by  successively  sub- 
stituting for  a  the  integers  1,  2,  3,  4,  5,  (>,  7,  &c.  and  tiencc 
it  follows  that  the  odd  numbers  are  all  comprehended  in  the 
expa^ssion  52a  -f  1,  because  Sa  -}-  1  is  greater  by  unity  than 
the  e\*en  number  2a. 

60.  In  the  second  place,  let  the  number  3  be  the  divisor; 
the  numbcm  divisible  by  it  are, 

3,  6,  y,  12,  15,  18,  21,  XH,  27,  3(),  and  so  on  ; 
which  numlK*rs  may  be  re|>n*M*ntiHl  liv  the  expression  Sa  ; 
for  «bi,  dividend  by  3,  gives  the  quotient  a  without  a  re- 
mainder. AH  other  numbi*rs  uhidi  we  wuuld  divide  by  S, 
will  give  1  or  2  for  a  n^mainder,  and  are  a>nsicjuently  of 
two  kinds.  Tliose  nhich  after  the  di\iaion  leave  the' re- 
mainder 1,  are, 

1,4,7,  10,13,  IC,  MK.Scc. 
and  are  contaiuitl  in  the  expreiiiutm  lin  -}-  1  ;  but  the  otlier 
kifui,  where  the  numlxTs  give  tlu*  nTiniiuIir  :i,  are, 

«5,8,  11,  U,  17,  îiO,.\c. 
wliii-h  may  U*  piicrnlly  rt*i)ri*Miititl  by  :Wi  4-  2 ;  mi  tiuit  all 
numlM*rH  may  be  cxprcb^ell  cither  by  <%,  or  by  3a  -|-  1,  tw 
by  3a  +  2.  ' 


CHAP,  VI.  OF  ALGEBRA«  17 

6X.  Let  us  now  suppose^  that  4  is  the  diirisor  under  con- 
aderation  ;  then  the  numbers  which  it  divides  are^ 

4,  8,  12, 16,  20,  24,  &c. 
which  increase  uniformly  by  4,  and  are  comprehended  in 
the  expression  4a.     All  other  numbers,  that  is^  those  which 
are  not  divisible  by  4,  may  either  leave  the  remainder  1,  or 
be  greater  than  the  former  by  1  ;  as, 

1,  5,  9, 13, 17,  21,  26,  &c. 

and  consequently  may  be  comprehended  in  the  expression 
4a  -f- 1  :  or  they  may  give  the  remainder  2  ;  as, 

2,  6, 10,  14,  18,  22,  26,  &c. 
and  be  expressed  by  4a  -f-  2;  or,  lastly,  they  may  ^ve  the 
lemainder  3  ;  as, 

3,7, 11, 16,*  19,  23,27,  &c. 
and  may  then  be  represented  by  the  expression  4a  -f-  3. 

All  possible  integer  numbers  are  cont^ned  therefore  in 
one  or  other  of  these  four  expressions  ; 

4a,  4a  +  1,  4a  +  2,  4a  +  3. 

62.  It  is  also  nearly  the  same  when  the  divisor  is  5; 
for  all  numbers  which  can  be  divided  by  it  are  compre- 
hended in  the  expression  Sa,  and  those  which  cannot  be 
divided  by  5,  are  reducible  to  one  of  the  following  ex- 
pressons: 

6a  +  1,  5a  +  2,  6a  +  3,  6a  +  4  ; 
and  in  the  same  manner  we  may  continue,  and  conàder  any 
greater  divisor. 

63«  It  is  here  proper  to  recollect  what  has  been  already 
sud  on  the  resolution  of  numbers  into  their  simple  factors; 
for  every  number,  among  the  factors  of  which  is  found 

2,  or  3,  or  4,  or  6,  or  7, 

or  any  other  number,  will  be  divisible  by  those  numbers« 
Pbr  example;  60  being  equal  to2x2x3x6,  itis 
evident  that  60  is  divisime  by  2,  and  by  3,  and  by  6  *« 

*  There  are  some  numbers  which  it  is  easy  to  perceive 
whether  they  are  divisors  of  a  given  number  or  not. 

1.  A  given  number  is  divisible  by  2,  if  the  last  digit  is  even  ; 
it  is  divisible  by  4,  if  the  two  last  digits  are  divisible  by  4  ;  it  is 
divisible  by  8,  if  the  three  last  digits  are  divisible  by  8;  and^ 
in  general,  it  is  divisible  by  2**,  if  the  n  last  digits  are  divisible 
by  2". 

2.  A  number  is  divisible  by  3,  if  the  sum  of  the  digits  is  di- 
visible by  3  ;  it  may  be  divided  by  6,  if,  beside  this,  the  last 
digit  is  even  ;  it  is  divisible  by  9,  if  the  sum  of  the  digits  may 
be  divided  by  9. 

3.  Every  number  that  has  the  last  digit  0  or  5,  is  divisible 
by  5. 


Irt  ELtMtNTi  tier.  I. 

64.  Farther,  is  the  general  expreflsinn  abed  is  not  only 
cliviùble  by  a^  and  A,  and  r,  and  a,  but  also  by 

ahf  ac,  ad^  hc^  bdy  cdj  and  by 
oAr,  ahd^  aaU  bcd^  and  laAtfy  by 
ahcdj  that  is  to  say,  its  own  value  ; 
it  follows  that  60,  or  52  x  52  x  8  x  5,  may  lie  divided  not 
only  by  these  simple  numbers  but  also  by  those  which  are 
composed  of  any  two  of  them;  that  is  to  say,  by  4,  6,  10, 
15:  and  also  by  those  which  arc  composed  of  any  three  of 
its  simple  factors  ;  that  is  to  say,  by  IS,  SO,  SO,  and  lastly 
also,  by  60  itself. 

65.  when,  therefore,  we  have  represented  anv  number, 
assumed  at  pleasure,  by  its  simple  factors,  it  will  lie  very 
easy  to  exhibit  all  the  numbers  by  which  it  is  diviuble. 
For  we  have  only,  first,  to  take  the  simple  factors  one  by 
one,  and  then  to  multiply  them  togettier   two  by  two, 

4.  A  number  is  divisible  bv  11,  when  the  sum  of  the  first 
third,  fif\h,  àc.  dipts  is  equal  to  the  »urn  of  the  second,  fourth, 
sixth,  àc.  digits. 

It  woold  be  easy  to  explain  the  reason  of  these  rules,  and  to 
extend  them  to  the  products  of  the  divisors  which  we  have  jusl 
now  considered.  Uulcs  might  be  devised  likewise;  for  some  other 
numbers,  but  tiie  application  of  them  would  in  general  be  longer 
than  an  actual  trial  of  the  division. 

For  example,  I  say  that  the  number  5:i7OM>S021S  is  divisible 
by  7,  because  I  tinJ  that  the  »urn  of  the  di^iits  of  the  number 
GKXH'i45l>53  is  divisible  by  7;  and  thiü  second  number  is  formed, 
according  to  u  very  simple  rule,  from  the  remainders  found  after 
dividing  the  component  parts  of  the  former  number  bv  7. 

Thus,  5S7(H^>Si/213  =  /KKXWMXXJOOO  +  :UKK)()UMXX)  -f 
700000000  -f  0  -f  44)00000  -f>  (KXXM)(>  4.  8(ifNX)  +  <KKX>  4.  200 
-f  10  -f  ;{;  which  being,  each  of  thorn,  divide<l  by  7,  will  leave 
the  remaindiTS  6,  4,  0,  0,  K  2,  4,  5,  4,  X  X  the  number  hcrt 
given. 

If  41,  bt  r,  d,  e,  &c,  be  the  digits  compoiiin:;  any  number,  the 

number  ilM*lf  nmy  be  expresMnl  univerMilly  thus;  a  -f  104 -f 

lOV  4-  10*e/  4-  1()V,  &r.  to  KKs;  m  here  il  in  e^i^v  to  |>erceivc 

that,  if  each  of  the  terms  a,  ](>&,  l(>*r.  Ac.  be  diviürble  bv  a,  the 

number  itsc^lf  a  4-  106  4-  I0*r,  Sic.  will  also  Ir*  di\iulHe  by  «. 

.     ,   ..  a      106    IC>V   .      ,  .  .    .  ^      .  . 

And,  Il — ,   — ,  ,  arc.  leave  the  remamders  r,  «7,  r,  ac  it  it 

N  M  II  '      ' 

obvious,  that  a  4-  106  4-  lOV.  Kc.  will  be  divisible  by  n,  when 
;»  4-  y  +  r,  in  divisible  by  n  ;  which  render«  the  priiieiple  of  the 
rule  Miffieientiv  clear. 

'llie  reader  n»  indebted  to  that  excellent  tnathematicinn,  the 
late  IVofetsor  Hoimycastle,  for  this  sati»factory  dlu»tration  oi 
M.  Bernoulli»  note. 


CBiP.  Tt.  OF  ALOBBRA.  19 

three  by  three,  four  by  four,  &c.  till  we  arrive  at  the  number 
froposed. 

oG,  It  must  here  be  pordcularly  observed,  that  every 
number  is  divisible  by  1  ;  and  also,  that  every  number  is 
divisible  by  itself;  so  that  every  number  has  at  least  two 
fiutors,  or  divisors,  the  number  itself,  and  unity  :  but  every 
number  which  has  no  other  divisor  than  these  two,  belongs 
to  the  class  of  numbers,  which  we  have  before  called  aimpu, 
acprwu  numbers. 

Except  these  mmple  numbers,  all  other  numbers  hav^ 
beâde  unity  and  themselves,  other  divisors,  as  may  be  seen 
from  the  following  Table,  in  which  are  placed  under  each 
number  all  its  divisors  *. 


I 

i 

S 

t|ä 

6 

V 

« 

d 

10 

n 

12 

13 

It 

15 

1617 

18jl9 

20 

1 

1 

1 
•S 

l 

I 

.1 

1 

1 

7 

1 

I 
,■1 

1 

'2 

i 
11 

I 
if 

1 

1 
2 

1 

1    I 

217 

1 
2 

1 
IS 

1 
2 

4 

3 
6 

4 

y 

3 
10 

4 

6 
12 

14 

5 
15 

16 

G 
9 
18 

4 
5 
10 
20 

1 

2 

2 

3 

■2 

4 

2 

4 

3 

4 

2 

6 

'i 

■1 

* 

5 

'À 

^ 

2 

6 

p. 

P- 

P. 

P. 

1p. 

P, 

P. 

P. 

P. 

St.  Lastly,  it  ought  to  be  observed  thatO,  or. nothing, 
nay  be  cooùdered  as  a  number  which  has  the  property  of 
bang  divinble  by  all  posmble  numbers;  because  by  wn&U 
ever  number  a  we  (üvide  0,  the  quotient  is  always  0;  for  it 
must  be  remarked,  that  the  multiplication  of  any  number 
l^  nothing  produces  nothing,  and  therefore  0  times  a,  or 
0^  isO. 

*  A  «milar  Table  for  all  the  divisors  of  the  natural  numbers, 
from  1  to  10000,  was  published  at  Leyden,  in  1767,  by  M. 
Henry  Anjema.  We  have  likewise  another  table  of  divisors, 
which  goes  as  far  as  100000,  but  it  gives  only  the  least  divisor 
of  each  number.  It  is  to  be  found  in  Harris's  Lexicon  Tech- 
nicunt,  the  Encyclopédie,  and  in  M.  Lambert's  Recueil,  which 
we  have  quoted  in  the  note  to  p.  1 1.  In  this  last  work,  it  is 
«mtinued  as  far  as  102000.    F.  T. 


90  BLRMKKT»  «ECT.  I. 


CHAP.   VII. 

(y  Fractions  in  gmcral. 

68.  When  a  number,  m  7,  for  instance,  is  said  not  to  be 
divimble  by  another  number,  let  us  suppoM^  by  3,  this  only 
means,  tliat  the  quotient  cannot  be  expressed  liy  an  integer 
number;  but  it  must  not  by  any  mcims  be  thought  that  it 
h  imposnble  to  form  an  idea  of  that  quotient.  Only 
hnagine  a  line  of  7  feet  in  length  ;  nobody  can  doubt  the 
possibility  of  dividing  this  line  into  9  equal  parts,  and  of 
forming  a  notion  of  the  length  of  one  of  tnose  parts. 

69-  Since  therefore  we  may  form  a  precise  idea  of  the 
quotient  obtained  in  similar  cases,  though  that  quotient  may 
not  be  an  integer  number,  this  leads  us  to  consider  a  par- 
ticular species  of  numbers,  called,^ar/îonA*,  or  hroken  num^ 
her$:  of  which  the  instance  adduced  furnishes  an  illustration. 
For  if  we  have  to  divide  7  by  3,  we  easily  concave  the 

auotient  which  sliould  result,  and  express  it  by  \  ;  tiladng 
ie  divisor  under  the  dividend,   anu  separating  the  two 
numbers  by  a  stroke,  or  line. 

70.  So,  in  general,  when  the  number  a  is  to  be  divided  by 

the  number  6,  we  represent  the  quotient  by  -7-,  and  call 
tliis  form  of  expression  a  Jraction.  We  cannot  therefore 
give  a  better  idea  of  a  fraction  -  ,  than  by  saying  that  it  ex- 
presses the  quotient  resulting  from  the  division  of  the  upper 
numl)er  by  tlie  lower.  We  mu2»t  rememlxT  also»  tliat  in  all 
fractions  the  lower  number  is  called  the  ilcnominatofy  and 
that  above  the  line  the  numerator, 

71.  In  the  aliove  fraction  {>,  which  we  read  seven  ihirdi^ 
7  b  the  numerator,  and  8  tlie  denominator.  We  must  also 
read  4,  two  third»;  ],  three  fourths;  ^,  three  eighths  ;  ^Vö» 
twelve  humlredths;  ami  |,  om*  half,  &c. 

72.  In  order  to  olitain  a  more  |)eHit:t  knowlcnlge  of  the 
nature  of  fractions,  we  shall  begin  by  amsidering  the  caae 
in  which  the  numerator  is  equal  to  the  denominator,  as  in 

— .     Now,  Miice  this  exfiresses  the  quotient  obtained  by 

dividing  a  by  a,  it  is  evident  that  this  (|uoticnt  is  exactly 

unity,  and  that  consequently  tlnr  fraction       in  uf  tla*  same 


CHAP.  VII.  OF  ALG£B&A.  £1 

value  as  1,  or  one  integer  ;  for  the  same  reason,  all  the  fol- 

Jowing  fractions, 

4345678   fiyp 

are  equal  to  one  another^  each  being  equal  to  1,  or  one 
integer. 

7S.  We  have  seen  that  a  fraction  whose  numerator  is 
equal  to  the  denominator^  is  equal  to  unity«  AU  fractions 
therefore  whose  numerators  are  less  than  the  denominators, 
have  a  value  less  than  unity  :  for  if  I  have  a  number  to 
divide  by  another,  which  is  greater  than  itself,  the  result 
must  necessarily  be  less  than  1.  If  wc  cut  a  line,  for  ex^ 
amide,  two  feet  long,  into  three  parts,  one  of  those  parts  wiU 
unaoubtedly  be  shorter  than  a  foot  :  it  is  evident  tnen,  that 
4-  is  less  than  1,  for  the  same  reason  ;  that  is,  the  .numerator 
2  is  less  than  the  denominator  3. 

74.  If  the  numerator,  on  the  contrary,  be  greater  than  the 
denominator,  the  value  of  the  fraction  is  greater  than  Unity. 
Thus  i  is  greater  than  1,  for  |-  is  equal  to  ^  together  with  |. 
Now  I  is  exactly  1  ;  consequently  i  is  equal  to  1  +  f ,  that 
is,  to  an  integer  and  a  half.  In  the  same  manner,  ^  is  equal 
to  If,  ^  to  ly,  and  ^  to  25-.  And,  in  general,  it  is  sufficient 
in  such  cases  to  divide  the  upper  number  by  the  lower,  and 
to  add  to  the  quotient  a  fraction,  having  the  remainder  fur 
the  numerator,  and  the  divisor  for  the  denominator.  If  tlie 
given  fraction,  for  example,  were  44»  ^^  should  have  for  the 
quotient  3,  and  7  for  the  remainder;  whence  we  should 

conclude  that  44  ^^  ^^^  ^^^^  ^  ^A* 

75.  Thus  we  see  how  fractions,  whose  numerators  are 
greater  than  the  denominators,  are  resolved  into  two  mem- 
ners  ;  one  of  which  is  an  integer,  and  the  other  a  fractional 
number,  having  the  numerator  less  than  the  denominator. 
Such  fractions  as  contain  one  or  more  integers,  are  called 
improper  Jractiofis,  to  distinguish  them  from  fractions  pro- 
perly so  called,  which  having  the  numerator  less  than  thp 
denominator,  are  less  than  unity,  or  than  an  integer. 

76.  The  nature  of  fractions  is  frequently  considered  in 
another  way,  which  may  throw  additional  light  on  the  sub- 
ject. If,  for  example,  we  consider  the  fraction  4,  it  is  evident 
that  it  is  three  times  greater  than  J.  Now,  this  fraction  ^ 
means,  that  if  we  divide  1  into  4  equal  parts,  this  will  be  the 
value  of  one  of  those  parts;  it  is  obvious  then,  that  by 
taking  3  of  those  parts  we  shall  have  the  value  of  the 
fraction  ^. 

In  the  same  manner  we  may  consider  every  other  fraction  ; 
for  example,  -5^  ;  if  we  divide  unity  into  12  equal  parts,  7  of 
ihosc  parts  will  be  equal  to  the  fraction  proposed* 


S£  BLIMCMTS  SMT.  I. 

77.  From  this  manner  of  considering  fractions,  the  ex- 
pressions numerator  and  denominator  arc  derived.  For,  as 
m  the  preceding  fraction  Vf»  ^  numlKr  under  the  line 
riiews  that  12  is  the  number  of  parts  into  which  unity  is  to 
be  divided  ;  and  as  it  may  be  said  to  denote,  or  name»  the 
parts,  it  has  not  improperly  been  called  the  denominaêor, 

Ftfther,  as  the  upper  number,  rix.  7,  shews  that,  in  order 
to  have  the  value  or  the  fraction,  we  must  take,  or  collect,  7 
of  those  parts,  and  therefore  may  be  said  to  reckon  or  num- 
ber them,  it  has  been  thought  proper  to  call  the  number 
above  the  line  the  numerator, 

78.  As  it  is  easy  to  understand  what  j-  is,  when  we  know 
the  ngni6cation  of*  },  we  may  consider  the  fractions  whoae 
numerator  is  unity,  as  the  foundation  of  all  others.  Such 
are  the  fractions, 

1»  T»  T»  T»  ■»»  T»   r>  7'    T  :»  7T»  ■TTl  "*^- 

and  it  is  observable  that  these  fractions  go  on  continually 
diminishing:  for  the  more  you  divide  an  integer,  or  the 
creater  tlie  number  of  ports  into  which  you  distribute  it,  the  leas 
does  each  of  those  parts  become,   llius,  ^^  is  less  than  i^^  ; 

T-cVry  i*  •«»  ^n  T-Jt  ;  an  J  .  o  .Vc,  i»  •«»  than  t^^^^^,  &c. 

79.  As  we  have  seen  that  the  more  we  increase  the  de- 
nominator of  such  fractions  the  less  their  values  become,  it 
may  be  asked,  whether  it  is  not  possible  to  make  the  de- 
nominator so  great  tlmt  the  fraction  siudl  be  reduced  to 
nothing?  I  answer,  no;  for  into  whatever  number  of  parts 
unity  (the  length  of  a  foot,  for  instance)  is  divided  ;  let 
those  parts  be  ever  so  small,  they  will  still  preserve  a  certain 
magnitude,  and  therefore  can  never  be  absoluteiy  reduced 
to  nothing. 

80.  It  IS  true,  if  we  divide  the  length  of  a  fool  into  1000 
parts,  those  parts  will  not  easily  fall  under  the  cogntsanoe  of 
our  senses  ;  out  view  them  thrcnigh  a  good  microscope,  and 
each  of  them  will  appear  large  enough  to  be  still  subdivided 
into  100  parts,  and  more. 

At  present,  however,  we  have  nothing  to  do  with  what 
depends  on  oursi*lves,  or  with  what  we  are  really  ca|ial>ie  of 
iH*rfcirming«  and  what  mir  eyes  can  |ierceive  ;  the  qui*sticm 
IS  rather  what  is  jioHsible  in  itself:  and,  in  this  sense,  it  is 
certain,  that  however  gn*at  we  suppose  the  denominator,  the 
fnu*tion  will  never  eiitin*ly  vanish,  or  become  equal  to  0. 

81.  We  ran  iio%'c*r  ihcrvforc  arrive  completely  at  0,  or 
nothing,  lH)we%  cr  gn^at  the  dfiumiinator  may  lie  ;  and,  cun- 
Mt|uetitly«  as  ilurn*  fraction.H  must  always  preserve  a  cit- 
tain  <|iiaiitity»  wc  may  i-uiitiniie  the  series  of  fractions  in  tlK* 
7Hth  artick' without  mterru|ition.  Thisdmimslanrp  has  in- 


^BJLB,  VII.  OF   ALGBBHA.  ^ 

I 

traduced  the  expression,  that  the  denominator  must  be  in- 
finUe^  or  infinitely  great,  in  order  that  the  fraction  may  be 
reduced  to  0,  or  to  nqth^ng;  hence?  tlie  word  infinite  in 
reality  signifies  here,  that  we  can  never  arrive  at  the  end  of 
the  series  of  the  above-mentionedyroc^ionj. 

82.  To  express  this  idea,  according  to  the  sense  of  it 
abov&4iientioned,  wc  make  use  of  the  sign  oo ,  which  cpn- 
sequently  indicates  a  number  infinitely  great;  and  we  may 
iherefore  say,  that  this  fraction  :^  is  in  reality  nothing  ;  be- 
cause a  fraction  cannot  be  reduced  to  nothing,  until  the 
denominator  has  been  increased  to  itifinity. 

83.  It  is  the  more  necessary  to  p^y  attention  to  this  idea  of 
infinity,  as  it  is  derived  from  the  first  elements  of  our  know- 
ledge, and  as  it  will  be  of  the  greatest  importance  in  the 
ibUowing  part  of  this  treatise. 

We  may  here  deduce  from  it  a  few  consequences  that  are 
extremely  curious,  and  worthy  of  attention.  The  fraction  ^ 
represents  the  quotient  resulting  from  tlic  division  of  the 
dividend  1  by  the  divisor  oo.  Now,  we  know,  that  if  we 
divide  the  dividend  1  by  the  quotient  ^,  which  is  equal  to 
nothing,  we  obtain  again  the  divisor  oo  :  hence  we  acquire 
a  new  idea  of  infinity  ;  and  learn  that  it  arises  from  the 
division  of  1  by  0;  so  that  we  are  thence  authorised  in 
saying,  that  1  divided  by  0  expresses  a  number  infinitely 
great,  or  oo. 

84.  It  may  be  necessary  also,  in  this  place,  to  correct  the 
mistake  of  those  who  assert,  that  a  number  infinitely  m*eat 
is  not  susceptible  of  increase.  This  opinion  is  inconsistent 
with  the  just  principles  which  we  have  laid  down;  for  ^ 
signifying  a  number  infinitely  great,  and  J  being  incon- 
testably  Üie  double  of -^,  it  is  evident  that  a  number,  though 
infinkely  great,  may  still  become  twice,  thrice,  or  any  num- 
ber of  tunes  greater  *. 

*  Tliere  appears  to  be  a  fallacy  in  this  reasoning,  which  con- 
sists in  taking  the  sign  of  infinity  tor  infinity  itself;  and  applying 
the  property  of  fractions  in  general  to  a  fractional  expression, 
whose  denominator  bears  no  assignable  relation  to  unity.  It  is 
certain^  tliat  infinity  may  be  represented  by  a  series  of  unit^  (that 

is^  by  -i-  =  - — -  =  1  +  1  4-1,  &c.)  or  by  a  series  of  numbers 

increasing  in  any  given  ratio.  Now,  though  any  definite  part 
of  one  infinite  series  may  be  the  half,  the  third,  &c.  of  a  definite 
part  of  another,  yet  still  that  part  bears  no  proportion  to  the 
whole^  and  the  series  can  only  be  said,  in  that  case,  to  go  on  to 
infinity  in  a  different  ratio.     But,  farther,  4>  or  any  other  nu- 


24  ELiMBHTs  nmcr.  u 


CHAP.  VIII. 

Of  the  Properties  ^Fractions. 

85.  We  hare  already  seen,  that  each  of  the  fractkm, 

T»  Tt  T»  T»  T»  T»  f  »  ***^ 

makes  an  integer,  and  that  conseciueQtIy  they  are  all  equal 
to  one  another.  The  same  equality  preniUs  in  the  foUowing 
fractions, 

t       4       «       •       I  •       I  f      fLg^ 
T»  Tt  ▼»   T»     i  »     1  »  ***-• 

each  of  them  making  two  integers  ;  for  the  numerator  of 
each,  divided  by  its  denominator,  gives  SL  So  all  the  fractions 

7»  T»  Tt    T  f    T  »,  T  »  *^ 

arc  equal  to  one  another,  suicc  S  is  their  common  value« 

86.  We  may  likewise  represent  the  value  of  any  fraction 
in  an  infinite  variety  of  ways.  For  if  we  multiply  lioth  the 
numerator  and  the  denommator  of  a  fraction  ny  the  same 
number,  which  may  be  assumed  at  pleasure,  this  traction  will 
still  preserve  the  same  value,  (or  this  reason,  all  the 
fractions 

ifl4»  «  7  •  «I*      M,0t 

»  T»  T»  1»  TWt  7 r»  rp  T$9  T¥»  TV»  *'*'• 

are  equal,  the  value  of  each  being  |.    Also, 

»  ft   ft  ITt  TT»  Tf»  "JTt  TT»  TT»  "IT»  *»C« 

are  equal  fractions,  the  value  of  eadi  being  f«  The  fractions 

a     4      I       I  •     I  •     I  «      t  •    jt,^ 

T»   T»   t  T»   TT»   t  I  »    11»    TT»  **''• 

luive  likewise  all  the  same  value.  Hence  we  may  conclude^ 
in  general,  that  the  fraction  -.-  may  be  represented  by  any 

of  Uk»  <alk>wing  api««oi»,  c«J>  of  whkh  is  equal  to  |;tri^ 

merator»  having  0  for  its  denominator,  is,  when  expandcdU 
precisely  the  same  as  v* 

Thus^  i  Si  Ç — ;r,  by  division  becomes 

'i-2)2      (1  -h  1  ^  1,  &c.  ad  infinitum 

2 
2-2 


2 

2-2 


2,  Ac. 


CHAP.  VIII.  OF  ALGEBRA.  25 

a    ^   &a   éa   Ba   6a   la 

J'  ^'  JV  46\  56'  &/  W  ^^' 

87.  To  be  convinced  of  this,  we  have  only  to  write  for  the 

a  , 

value  of  the  fracüon  -^  a  certain  letter  c,  representing  by 

this  letter  c  the  quoüent  of  the  division  of  a  by  &  ;  and  to 

recollect  that  the  multiplication  of  the  quotient  c  by  the 

divisor  b  must  give  the  dividend.     For  since  c  multiplied  by 

b  gives  Uy  it  is  evident  that  c  multiplied  by  2i  will  give  ^tf , 

that  c  multiplied  bj^  3b  will  give  Sa^  and  that,  in  general,  c 

multiplied  by  mb  will  ^ve  ma.    Now,  changing  this  into  an 

example  of  division,  and  dividing  the  product  ma  by  mbj 

one  of  the  factors,  the  quotient  must  be  equal  to  the  other 

&ctor  c;  but  ma  divided  by  mb  gives  also  the  fraction 

fna 

—,,  which  is  consequently  equal  to  c;  which  is  what  was  to 

be  proved  :  for  c  having  been  assumed  as  the  value  of  the 

a    ,    ,        , 
fraction  -r-,  it  is  evident  that  this  fraction  is  equal  to  the 

fraction  — r,  whatever  be  the  value  of  m. 
mo 

88.  We  have  seen  that  every  fraction  may  be  represented 

in  an  infinite  number  of  forms,  each  of  which  contains  the 

same  value  ;  and  it  is  evident  that  of  all  these  forms,  that 

which  is  composed  of  the  least  numbers,  will  be  most  easily 

understood.     For  example,  we  might  substitute^  instead  of 

7,  the  following  fractions. 


4       6        s         .0       tt      ^ç^ 


T>  T>  XT»  TT»  TT> 

but  of  all  these  expressions  |-  is  that  of  which  it  is  easiest  to 

form  an  idea.      Here  therefore  a  problem  arises,  how  a 

fraction,  such  as  -|\,  which  is  not  expressed  by  the  least 

possible  numbers,  may  be  reduced  to  its  simplest  ferro,  or  to 

tie  least  terms;  that  is  to  say,  in  our  present  example,  to  y. 

89.  It  will  be  easy  to  resolve  this  problem,  if  we  consider 

that  a  fraction  still  preserves  its  value,  when  we  multiply 

both  its  terms,  or  its  numerator  and  denominator,  by  the 

same  number.     For  from  this  it  also  follows,  that  if  we 

divide  the  numerator  and  denominator  of  a  fraction  by  the 

same  number,  the  fraction  will  still  preserve  the  same  value. 

This  is  made  more  evident  by  means  of  the  general  ex- 

ffia 
prcsfflon  — ^;  for  if  we  divide  both  the  numerator  mü  and 

the  denominator  mb  by  the  number  m,  we  obtain  the  fraction 

a  ma 

-T-)  "which,  as  was  before  proved,  is  equal  to  — r. 


96  ELBMEirni  »scr.  i. 

90.  In  onlor  therefore  to  reduce  a  given  fraction  to  it» 
least  termn,  it  \%  requinxl  to  find  n  number,  by  which  IxHh 
the  numerator  xukI  denominator  may  be  diviiicd.  Such  a 
numlier  is  called  a  commœi  divisor  ;  and  as  long  as  we  can 
find  a  common  divinor  to  the  numerator  and  the  denominatoTf 
it  is  certain  that  the  fraction  may  be  reduced  to  a  lower 
form;  but,  on  the  contrary,  when  we  see  that,  except  unity, 
no  other  common  diviaor  con  be  found,  this  shews  that  die 
fraction  is  already  in  its  simplest  form. 

01.  To  make  this  more  clear,  let  us  consider  the  fraction 
iVe«  ^^^  ^*^  immediately  that  both  the  terms  are  divisible 
by  S,  and  that  there  results  the  fraction  |  ^  ;  which  may  also 
be  divided  by  3,  and  reduced  to  \l  ;  and  as  this  likewise 
hai  8  for  a  common  divisor,  it  is  evident  that  it  may  be  re- 
duced to  ^^..  But  now  we  easily  perciMve,  timt  tlie  nuine- 
ratcNT  and  (lenominator  are  still  divisible  by  3  ;  perionnin^ 
this  division,  therefore«  we  obtiiin  the  fraction  -*,  which  is 
equal  to  the  fracticm  propoMxl«  and  gives  the  simplest  ex- 
presfkion  to  which  it  can  be  reduced  ;  for  2  and  5  have  no 
common  divisor  but  I,  which  cannot  diminish  these  numbers 
any  farther. 

92.  This  property  of  fractions  presenting  an  invariable 
value,  wlR'tlter  we  divide  or  multiply  the  numerator  and 
denominator  by  tlie  same  number,  is  of  the  greatest  import- 
ance, and  is  the  principal  foundation  of  the  doctrine  of 
fractions«  For  example,  we  can  seldom  add  together  two 
fractions,  or  subtract  Uie  one  from  the  otlier,  before  we  have^ 
by  means  of  this  pn>|)erty,  reduced  tliem  to  otiier  forms; 
that  is  to  say,  to  expressions  whose  denominators  are  equal« 
Of  this  we  shall  treat  in  the  following  chapter. 

93.  We  will  conclude  tlie  present,  uowever,  by  remarking, 
that  all  whole  numbers  may  also  be  represented  by  fractions. 
For  examine,  (i  is  the  same  as  y,  because  6  divided  by  1 
makes  6  ;  we  may  alfco,  in  tlie  same  manner,  express  tJie 
number  6  by  the  fractions  \^,  '/,  V,  \^^said  an  infinite 
number  of  oUiers,  which  have  tlie  same  value. 

UI'E^TIONS    FOR    rRACTlCK. 

1.  Reduce  —rz — r"  to  its  lowest  terms  Ans,   -u« 

fa--|-a**r  o- 

j'  —  It'x  X'  "hr 

tL  lUducc    ,  ,  „, n  to  it*  lowest  terms.     Ans.  — rr' 

X  -^^tbx^b*  .r-f-6 

X^     b^  x'+*' 

Î).  Heduoe  -^ — -r—  to  it*  lowoA  terms.  *lfw.       l    ■ 


CHAP.  IX.  OF  AL6XBEA.  27 

:r*— V*       .  1 

4.  Bcduce  -7 — -:  to  its  lowest  terms.  Afis.  — ; — - 

6.  Reduce  -r ••. r-i — «  to  its  lowest  terms. 

Ans.  . 


Ans, 


a*x-|-fla;r*-j-  jr* 


CHAP.  IX. 


Of  (he  Addition  a/nd  Subtraction  g/*Fractions. 

94.  When  fractions  have  equal  denominators,  there  is  no 
difficulty  in  adding  and  subtracting  them  ;  for  y  «-I-  y  ^ 
equal  to  f ,  and  ^  —  ^  is  equal  to  |.  In  this  case,  Uierefore, 
cither  for  addition  or  subtraction,  we  alter  only  the  nume- 
rators, and  place  the  common  denominator  under  the  line, 
thus; 

tvit  +  tI^-  -n^  -  AV  +  T2ny  is  equal  to  ^  ; 

H  -  -^  -  44  +  44  w  equal  to  4|,  or  ||  ; 

T5"  ■"  "ïTT  ■""  T5"  i~  ■$  o"  *s  equal  to  -^-^^  or  y  ; 
also  4-  H"  4*  is  equal  to  4*9  or  1,  that  is  to  say,  an  integer  ;  and 
4  —  4"  H"  T  is  equal  to  ^,  that  is  to  say,  nothing,  or  0. 

95.  But  when  fractions  have  not  equal  denominators,  we 
can  always  change  them  into  other  fractions  that  have  the 
same  denominator.  For  example,  when  it  is  proposed  to 
add  together  the  fractions  \  ana  y,  we  must  consider  that  i^ 
is  the  same  as  ^,  and  that  4*  is  equivalent  to  4  ;  we  have 
therefore,  instead  of  the  two  fractions  proposed,  ^  +  4>  ^'^ 
sum  of  which  is  4«  And  if  tlie  two  fractions  were  united  by 
the  sign  minus  as  |  —  4-»  ^^  should  have  \  -^  \^ox  ^ 

As  another  example,  let  the  fractions  proposed  be  4-  *-]-  4.. 
Here,  since  \  is  the  same  as  |^,  this  value  may  be  substituted 
for  I,  and  we  may  then  say  4  ~f"  t  niakes  -^,  or  I4. 

Suppose  farther,  that  the  sum  of  \  and  \  were  required,  I 
say  tnat  it  is  -j^  ;  for  i  =  -,\ ,  and  {  =  ^^  :  therefore  ^ 

13—7 
r  TT  —  TÎ» 

96*  We  may  have  a  greater  number  of  fractions  to  reduce 


18  KLIMENTIi  »KCT.  U 

to  a  oommon  denominator;  for  example,  i^  ^  ],^,  *^.  In 
tliis  caae,  the  whole  depemls  on  (imlin|(  a  number  that  shall 
be  divisible  by  all  the  den<Hninators  of  those  fraetions.  In 
this  instance,  60  is  the  number  which  has  that  property,  and 
which  consequently  becomes  the  ccmimon  denominator.  \Vc 
shall  therefore  have  J^,  instead  of  |  ;  J^^»  instead  of  |  ;  ♦  J, 
instead  of  i  ;  ^*,  instaid  of  |  ;  and  4-g9  instead  of  ^.  If 
now  it  be  required  to  add  together  all  these  fractions  }^l^ 

lo»  >ro*  tc*  '^  ü  ^  ^^  ^^^  ^^h  ^  ^^  ^'  ^'^  numerators, 
and  under  the  sum  place  the  oommon  denominator  60;  that 
is  to  say,  we  shall  have  W  »  ^  ^  integers,  and  the  fractional 
remainder  ^. 

97.  llie  whole  of  this  operation  consists,  as  we  before 
stated,  in  changing  fractions,  whose  denominators  are  un- 
et]ual,  into  others  whose  denominators  are  etjual.     In  order, 

Ü  c 

tlierefore,  to  perform  it  generally,  let  -r-  and  -j  be  the  frac- 
tions   proposed.     First,    multiply   the   two  terms  of  the 

first  fraction  by  c/,  and  we  shall  have  the  fraction  j-z  equal 

a 
to  -r-  ;  next  multiply  the  two  terms  of  the  second  fraction 

by  6,  and  we  shall  have  an  equivalent  value  of  it  expressed 

ifC 

by  j-j  ;  thus  the  two  denominators  arc  become  equaL  Now, 
if  tlie  sum  of  the  two  proposed  fractions  be  m}uired,  we 

may  immediately  answer  that  it  is  ,  .  ;  and  if  their  dif- 
ference be  asked,  we  say  that  it  is     ^    .     If  the  fractions 

I  and  ^,  for  example,  were  proposed,  wc  siiould  obtain,  in 
their  stead,  |J  and  {%  ;  of  which  the  sum  is  'y\'  and  the 
difTerence  4  J^  •. 

9H,  To  this  part  of  the  subject  belonpi  also  the  c|tiesti(Ni, 
Of  two  |iru|X)6ed  fractions  which  is  the  greater  or  the  less? 

•  The  rule  for  reducing  fractions  to  a  common  denominator 
niav  l>e  concisely  expreiuicd  thii».  Multiply  each  numeruior 
into  every  denominator  exci*)>t  itn  own,  tor  a  new  numerator, 
and  uU  the  denominators  together  for  the  common  denonii« 
nator.  When  thi»  o|HTation  has  been  iHTformetl,  it  nill  a|tpear 
tluil  tlie  nunieralor  and  denominator  ot  each  traction  lia%e  heen 
multiplied  by  the  »amc  f|uantii),  and  consequently  retain  the 
same  value. 


CHAP.  TK.  OF  AL6SBEA.  S9 

for,  to  resolve  this,  we  have  only  to  reduce  the  two  fractions 
to  the  same  denominator.  Let  us  take,  for  example,  the  two 
fractions  4.  and  ^  ;  when  reduced  to  the  same  denominator, 
the  first  becomes  4t,  and  the  second  ~^,  where  it  is  evident 
that  the  second,  or  4^,  is  the  greater,  and  exceeds  the  former 

Again,  if  the  fractions  ^  and  {■  be  pixyposed,  we  shall  have 
to  substitute  for  them  ^J-  and  ^  ;  wnence  we  may  conclude 
that  ^  exceeds  4»  but  only  by  ^V- 

99«  When  it  is  required  to  subtract  a  fraction  from  an 
integer,  it  is  sufficient  to  change  one  of  the  units  of  that 
int^r  into  a  fraction,  which  has  the  same  denominator  as 
that  which  is  to  be  subtracted  ;  then  in  the  rest  of  the  opera- 
Uon  there  is  no  difficulty.  If  it  be  required,  for  example,  to 
subtract  y  from  1,  we  write  4-  instead  of  1,  and  say  that  4 
taken  from  f  leaves  the  remainder  j.  So -j^j-,  subtracted 
from  1,  leaves  -,^. 

If  it  were  required  to  subtract  }  from  2,  we  should  write 
1  and  ^  instead  of  2,  and  should  then  immediately  see  that 
after  the  subtraction  there  must  remain  1{. 

100.  It  happens  also  sometimes,  that  having  added  two 
or  more  fractions  together,  we  obtain  more  than  an  integer  ; 
that  is  to  say,  a  numerator  greater  than  the  denominator  : 
this  is  a  case  which  has  already  occurred,  and  deserves' 
attention. 

We  found,  for  example  ["Article  96],  that  the  sum  of  the 
five  fractions  i,  4,  J,  ^,  and  ^  was  \y,  and  remarked  that 
the  value  of  this  sum  was  3J  J  or  3^.  Likewise,  y  -f-  -J^,  or 
-?^  +  -TTf  makes  ^J-,  or  1  -jV-  We  have  therefore  only  to 
perform  the  actual  division  of  the  numerator  by  the  deno- 
minator, to  see  how  many  integers  there  are  for  the  quotient, 
and  to  set  down  the  remainder. 

Nearly  the  same  must  be  done  to  add  together  numbers 
compounded  of  integers  and  fractions;  we  first  add  the 
fractions,  and  if  the  sum  produces  one  or  more  integers,  these 
arc  added  to  the  other  integers.  If  it  be  proposed,  for  ex- 
ample, to  add  Sj  and  2^i  we  first  take  the  sum  of  f  and  y, 
or  of  ^  and  4^,  which  is  ^,  or  1^  ;  and  thus  we  find  the  total 
sum  to  be  6^. 


QUESTIONS   FOR   PRACTICE. 

2a:  b 

1.  Reduce  —  and  —  to  a  common  denominator. 
a  c 

2cr      ,  ab 

Anu  —  and  — 
ac  ac 


80  BLBMBNtl  »sex.  I« 

2.  Reduce  -7-  And to  a  oommon  denominator. 

0  c 

ae       ^«*+*» 
Aiu.  -T-  and — r— • 

S.  Reduce  -^,  — ,  and  d  to  fractions  having  a  oommon 

,  .      9cx   ^ab      ,6acd 

denominator.  An4>  g--,  g~  and  tj—  • 

3  Ir  2r 

4.  Reduce  t»  -s-  and  aAr —  to  a  common  denominator. 

4  3  'a 

.        9a    Sax      .12««+ «4^ 

5.  Reduce  ^  -s^  >  and  — ; — ,  to  a  common  denominator. 

X     3  Jt-fa 

^"^^  6r+6a*     Or+Ga  *   Gx+Ca  ' 

6.  Reduce  ^-^  ^-y  and  —,  to  a  common  denominator. 

Xa     Xa  a 

^      9a*b   %à€        ,  4aHl  A      oc        .Sod 

^^•4^*  4^»*nd  _;or-i,^,,and^. 


CHAP.  X. 


Q^(Ar  Multiplication  onJ  Diviuion  ^Fractiaoa. 

101.  The  rule  for  the  multiplication  of  a  fraction  by  an 
înteger,  or  whole  number,  is  to  multiply  the  numerator 
only  by  the  given  number,  and  not  to  change  the  deno- 
mmator:  thus, 

2  times,  or  twice  4  makes  *,  or  ]  integer; 

8  times,  or  twice  \  makes  \  ;  and 

S  times,  or  thrice  ^  makes  f,oT\\ 

4  times  ,'  makes  J  J,  or  \\^  or  1|. 
But,  instead  of  this  rule,  we  may  u?ie  tliat  of  dividing  the 
denominator  by  the  given  integer,  which  is  preferable,  when 
it  can  be  done,  because  it  shortens  the  operation.  Let  it  be 
required,  for  exam|ile,  to  multiply  \  by  «i  ;  if  we  multiply 
the  numcfalor  by  the  given  integer  we  obtain  y,  whM^ 


CHAP.  X.  OF  ALOEBEA.  SI 

product  we  must  reduce  to  -f-.     But  if  we  do  not  cliange 
the  numerator,  and  divide  the  denominator  by  the  integer, 
we  find  immediately  ^,  or  ^,  for  the  given  product  ;  and, 
in  the  same  manner,  \^  multiplied  by  o  gives  *^,  or  éf. 
102.  In  general,  therefore,  the  product  of  the  multiplica- 

tipn  of  a  fraction  -7-  by  c  is  -r  ;  and  here  it  may  be  re- 
marked, when  the  integer  is  exactly  equal  to  the  denominator, 
that  the  product  must  be  equal  to  the  numerator. 


r  I  taken  twice,  gives  1  ; 
1 


So  that  K  y  taken  thrice,  gives  2  ; 

(^  i  taken  four  times,  gives  3. 

And,  in  general,  if  we  multiply  the  fraction  j-  by  the 
number  b,  the  product  must  be  a,  as  we  have  already  shewn  ; 
for  since  -j-  expresses  the  quotient  resulting  from  the  di- 
vision of  the  dividend  a  by  the  divisor  b,  and  because  it  has 

been  demonstrated  that  the  quotient  multiplied  by  the  divisor 

d 
will  give  the  dividend,  it  is  evident  that  j-  multiplied  by  b 

must  produce  a. 

lOS.  Having  thus  shewn  how  a  fraction  is  to  be  mul- 
tiplied by  an  integer  ;  let  us  now  consider  alsohow  a  fraction 
is  to  be  divided  by  an  integer.  This  inquiry  is  necessary, 
before  we  proceed  to  the  multiplicadon  of  fractions  by  frac- 
tions. It  is  evident,  if  we  have  to  divide  the  fraction  y  by 
2,  that  the  result  must  be  i  ;  and  that  the  quotient  of  ^ 
divided  by  3  is  f .  The  rule  therefore  is,  to  divide  the 
numerator  by  the  integer  without  changing  the  denominator. 
Thus: 

44  divided  by  2  gives  -^  ; 

-J.  divided  by  3  gives  -^  ;  and 

44-  divided  by  4  gives  ^  ;  &c. 

104.  This  rule  may  be  easily  practised,  provided  the 
numerator  be  divisible  by  the  numoer  proposed  ;  but  very 
often  it  is  not  :  it  must  therefore  be  observed,  that  a  fraction 
may  be  transformed  into  an  infinite  number  of  other  ex- 
pressions, and  in  that  number  there  must  be  some,  by  which 
the  numerator  might  be  divided  by  the  given  integer.  If 
it  were  required,  for  example,  to  divide  }  by  2,  we  should 
change  the  ft-action  into  ^,  and  then  dividing  the  numerator 
by  2,  we  should  inunçdiately  have  4  ^^^  ^^  quotient 
sought. 


8S  ILtMKNTS  SKTT.  U 

In  general,  if  it  be  proposed  to  divide  the  fraction  -j- 
by  Cy  we  change  it  into  t—,  and  then  dividing  the  nume- 
rator ac  liy  r,  write  v-  for  the  (|iiotieiit  sought. 

105.  When  therefore  a  fraction  -v-  it  to  be  divided  by  an 

integer  r,  we  have  only  to  multiply  the  denominator  by  that 
number,  and  leave  the  numerator  aa  it  is.  Thus  |  divided 
by  8  ^ves  j\,  and  ,\  divided  by  5  gives  ,V 

This  operation  becomes  easier,  whien  the  numerator  itself 
is  divisible  by  the  integer,  as  we  have  supposed  in  article 
103.  For  example,  Tr  divided  by  S  would  cive,  according 
to  our  last  rule,  ^\  ;  but  by  the  iirst  rule,  which  b  applica- 
ble here,  we  obtain  i V,  an  ex|iression  equivalent  to  ^  but 
more  simple. 

106.  We  shall  now  be  able  to  understand  how  one  fraction 

-r-  may  be  multiplied  by  anotlier  fraction  -^.  For  this  pur- 

c 
pose,  we  have  only  to  consider  that  -y  means  that  r  is  di- 
vided by  d;  and  on  this  principle  we  shall  first  multiply  the 
fraction  - .-  by  c,  which  produces  the  result  -r-;  aAcr  which 

we  shall  divide  by  <2,  which  gives  -r-r. 

Hence  the  following  rule  for  multiplying  fractions.  Mul- 
tiply the  numerators  together  for  a  numerator,  and  tiic  de- 
nominators together  for  a  denominator. 

Thus  {  by  4  gives  the  product  y»  oc  i  ^ 
rhy  y  makes  -,V  ; 
I'  by  T*r  prcxiuces  ij,  or  A  ;  &c. 

107.  It  now  remains  to  shew  how  one  fraction  may  be 
divided  bv  another.  Here  we  remark  firsts  that  if  the  two 
fractions  )iave  the  same  number  for  a  denominator,  the 
divisicm  takes  place  only  with  respect  to  the  numerators; 
for  it  is  evident,  that  ^\  are  contained  as  many  tiroes  in  ^% 
as  3  is  contained  in  9,  tlmt  is  to  say,  three  times;  and«  in 
the  same  iiuinner,  in  onler  to  divide  t%  by  y*t,  wc  have  only 
to  divide  H  by  9,  which  gives  *.  We  sliall  also  have  ^\  in 
vS«  3  times;  \  '^  in  /^,  7  times;  ,\.  in  ,%,  %  ice 

lOK  Hut  when  the  fractions  have  not  equal  denominators. 


CBAP.  X.  OF  ALGEBRA.  SS 

we  must  have  recourse  to  the  method  ah'eady  mentioned  for 
reducing  them  to  a  common  denominator.     Let  there  be, 

for  example^  the  fracüon  v-  to  be  divided  by  the  fraction 

c 

-p.     We  first  reduce  them  to  the  same  denominator,  and 
a 

there  results  t^  to  be  divided  by  -57-  ;   it  is  now  evident 

that  the  quotient  must  be  represented  simply  by  the  division 

of  ad  by  ôc;  which  gives  -r-. 

Hence  the  following  rule  :  Multiply  the  numerator  of  the 
dividend  by  the  denominator  of  tne  divisor,  and  the  de- 
nominator of  the  dividend  by  the  numerator  of  the  divisor  ; 
then  the  first  product  will  be  the  numerator  of  the  quotient, 
and  the  second  will  be  its  denominator. 

109.  Applying  this  rule  to  the  division  of  ^  by  y,  we 
shall  have  the  quotient  44  î  ^so  the  division  of  i  by  J  will 
give  I-,  or  |,  or  If  ;  and  |^  by  |  will  give  ^^l^o,  or  |. 

110.  This  rule  for  division  is  often  expressed  in  a  manner 
that  is  more  easily  remembered,  as  follows:  Invert  the 
terms  of  the  divisor,  so  that  the  denominator  may  be  in  the 

()lace  of  the  numerator,  and  the  latter  be  written  under  the 
ine  ;  then  multiply  the  fraction,  which  is  the  dividend  by 
this  inverted  fraction,  and  the  product  will  be  the  quo- 
tient sought  Thus,  i  divided  by  f  is  the  same  as  |-  mul- 
tiplied by  T,  which  makes  |-,  or  1^.  Also  \^  divided  by  *  is 
the  same  as  J-  multiplied  by  \^  which  is  44  >  ^^  tt  divided 
by  -J.  gives  tne  same  as  ^^  multiplied  by  y,  the  product  of 
which  is  44ô  >  or  ^. 

We  see  then,  in  general,,  that  to  divide  by  the  fraction  f  is 
the  same  as  to  multiply  by  x»  or  2  ;  and  that  dividing  by  -f 
amounts  to  multiplying  by  f ,  or  by  8,  &c. 

111.  The  number  100  divided  by  \  will  ^ve  200;  and 
1000  divided  by  4  will  give  8000.  Farther,  if  it  were  re- 
quired to  divide  1  by  -ré^^y  ^be  quotient  would  be  1000; 
and  dividing  1  by  tw^ttc-»  ^be  quotient  is  100000.  This 
enables  us  to  conceive  that,  when  any  number  is  divided  by 
0,  the  result  must  be  a  number  indefinitely  great  ;  for  even 
the  division  of  1  by  the  small  fraction  toùàùttàùb  gives  for 
the  quotient  the  very  great  number  1000000000. 

112.  Every  number,  when  divided  by  itself,  producing 
unity,  it  is  evident  that  a  fraction  dividecl  by  itself  must  also 
give  1  for  the  quotient  ;  and  the  same  follows  from  our  rule  : 
lor,  in  order  to  divide  ^J:  by  ^  we  must  multiply  |:  by  ^,  in 

b 


34  ELFMÜIKTS  SRCT.  I. 

which  CAM!  we  obtain   \\^  or  I  ;  oiul  if  it  lie  rcquiml  to 
diviilc  V  by  -.-,  wc  multiply  -r-  by  —  ;  where  the  product 

-jr  is  also  equal  to  1 . 

113.  We  have  »till  to  explain  an  expression  which  is 
fretiuently  used.  It  may  l)e  aüked»  for  example,  what  is  the 
half  of  I  ?  This  means,  that  we  must  multi|iiy  '  by  J.  So 
likewise,  if  the  value  of  4-  of  ^  were  required,  wc  should 
multiply  I  by  J,  which  produces  |^;  and  |  of -^^  is  the 
same  as  ^^^  multiplied  by  ],  which  produces  *^. 

114.  Lastly,  we  must  here  obsene,  with  reelect  to  the 
signs  -f-  and  —,  the  sanK*  rules  that  wc  before  hud  down  for 
integers.  Thus  -(-|  multiplied  by  —  |,  makes  •— t;  and 
—  y  multiplied  by  ^|,  gives  +tt*  Farther  ^  divided 
^y  +T»  P^»  —  îi;  «nd-1  divided  by  «i,  gives +|l, 
or+1. 


aU£8TI0NS    FOR    PRACTICE. 

X  2x  X* 

1.  Required  the  product  of  -»  and  -g-.  Ans.  •^• 

X    4kr  \0x  4H 

58.  Required  the  product  of  -^j  ~,  and  -^p    Ans.  -^  • 

3.  Required  the  product  of  —  and  — r-.    Ans.  -rr — 

^  "^  a  a-j-c  a*-\'ac 

Si-         Sa  Oax 

4.  Required  the  product  of -5-  and  -r .  Ans,  -^r* 

5.  Required  the  product  of  -=-  and  -r-  Ans.  --  ' 
II  Required  the  product  of  — ,  — ,  and  -  -.  Ans.  ftix 


7.  Required  the  product  of  ^  -f"  —  <uid   — . 


^       ab+bx 
Ans.  — = 


H,  Required  the  product  of  — ^- —  and 


CHAP.  X.  OP  äLGSBRA.  S5 

*-l-l  ^  —  1 

9.  Required  the  product  of  x^ ,  and  —rv 

Ans.  —r-, — 7- 

X  2x 

10.  Required  the  quotient  of  -^  divided  by  -ç—.  Ans.  I4. 

11.  Required  the  quotient  of  -j-  divided  by  -, . 


.       ad 


x-\-a      .  .     -        •r-l-ô 

12.  Required  the  quotient  of  -^ — gr  divided  by  ^  ^  . 

2a7*      .  .  X 

13.  Required  the  quotient  of     ^^     divided  by  —7—. 

7^    .  .  12        •  91^ 

14.  Required  the  quotient  of  -^  divided  by  jâ-  -^^*  "ßS  * 

4jr*  4f.i!' 

15.  Required  the  quotient  of -=-  divided  by  &r.  Ans.  qk 

16.  Required  thequotientof  — ^  divided  by  -^. 

A'+l 

JfW.   -3 — • 
4jx 

17.  Required  the  quotient  of -5— r  divided  by  -j-t. 

Ans.  fi-r-- 

18.  Required  the  quotient  of-; — 5X"Xä*  ^^^^  l>y  -   - 
j^+ij  ,  ft* 

x  —  h  X 


1)2 


3(i 


RLKMEMTt» 


IKCT.  I. 


CHAP.  XI. 

Of  Square  Numbers. 

115.  The  product  of  a  number,  when  multiplied  bj 
itself,  is  called  a  square  ;  and,  for  this  reason,  the  number, 
considered  in  relation  to  such  a  product,  is  called  a  squart 
rooi.  For  example,  when  we  multiply  12  by  1 S,  the  product 
144  is  a  square,  of  which  tlie  root  is  12. 

The  origin  of  this  tenu  is  borrowed  from  geometiT,  whidi 
teaches  us  that  the  contents  of  a  square  are  found  bj  mul> 
tiplying  its  side  by  itself. 

1 16.  Square  numbers  are  found  therefore  by  multiplie»» 
tion  ;  that  u  to  say,  by  multiplying  the  root  by  itself:  thus» 
1  is  the  square  of  1,  since  1  multiplied  by  1  inakes  1  ;  like> 
wise,  4  is  the  square  of  2;  and  9  the  square  of  S;  S  alao  is 
the  root  of  4,  and  8  is  the  root  of  9. 

We  shall  bmn  b^  ocmsidenng  the  squares  of  natural 
numbers  ;  and  tor  this  purpose  shall  gi?e  the  following  small 
Table,  on  the  first  line  of  which  several  numbers,  or  roots, 
arc  ranged,  and  on  the  second  thdr  squares  ^. 


Numbers. 
Squares. 

1 
1 

2 
4 

3 

1? 

4 

16 

5 
25 

6 

My 

i 

Vil 

8 
f)4 

9 

HI 

10 
100 

11 
121 

12 
144 

l:> 

\6i) 

117.  Here  it  will  be  readily  perceived  that  the  series  of 
square  numbers  thuA  arranged  has  a  lingular  pro|ierty; 
naniciv,  that  if  each  of  them  be  subtracted  from  tnat  which 
immctVuitely  follows,  the  remainders  always  increase  by  2, 
and  form  this  series  ; 

3,  5,  7,  9, 11,  13,  15, 17,  19,  «1,  &c. 
which  is  that  of  the  odd  numbers. 

118.  The  flc|uares  of  fractions  are  found  in  the  some 
manner,  bv  multiplying  any  given  fraction  by  itself.  F<Nr 
example,  tiie  square  of  ;  is  { , 

*  We  have  very  complt*te  tahltü  for  the  «quares  of  natural 
numbcTs.  |mbli«hed  uiuler  the  title  **  Tetro^onometria  Tobularia» 
&c.  Auct.  J.  Jobo  Liidolfo,  .\mste)odami,  16!^),  in  4to."  These 
Tables  are  continued  from  I  to  lUXXX),  not  only  for  finding  those 
squares,  but  al«o  the  |irti(hK'tji  ot'  uny  two  nutnlM*rs  \cfA  than 
lOüOOO;  not  to  mention  »cvctaI  other  uses,  «hich  arc  explained 
in  the  intrtuUietion  to  the  work.     F.  T. 


CHAP.  XI.  OF  AL6BBEA.  37 


The  square  of  <  J 


{f }»  'i. 


We  have  only  therefore  to  divide   the   square  of  the 
numerator   by   the  square  of  the  denominator,  and  the 
fraction  whicn  expresses  that  division  will  be  the  square  of 
the  given  fraction  ;  thus,  ^  is  the  square  of  ^  ;  and  re-  ' 
dprocally,  f  is  the  root  of  |^. 

119.  when  the  square  of  a  mixed  number^  or  a  number 
composed  of  an  integer  and  a  fraction,  is  required,  we  have 
only  to  reduce  it  to  a  single  fraction,  and  then  take  the 
square  of  that  fraction.  Let  it  be  required,  for  example,  to 
find  the  square  of  2^;  we  first  express  this  number  by  |, 
and  taking  the  square  of  that  fraction,  we  have  y ,  or  6}, 
for  the  value  of  the  square  of  Sf.  Also  to  obtain  tne  square 
of  8},  we  say  8i  is  equal  to  '^  ;  therefore  its  square  is  equal 
to  '^,  or  to  lOj^.  The  squares  of  the  numoers  between 
S  and  4,  supposing  them  to  increase  by  one  fourth,  are  as 
fidlow: 


Numbers.  \  S  \    Sj    \    S^  \    Si 


Squares.    |  9  |  lO-iV  |  12|  |  14^,^^ 


16 


Prom  this  small  Table  we  may  infer,  that  if  a  root  contain 
a  fraction,  its  square  also  contains  one.  Let  the  root,  for 
example,  be  1-,^;  its  square  is  ^^|^  or  &;|^;  that  is  tosay, 
a  little  greater  than  the  integer  & 

190.  Let  us  now  proceed  to  general  expressions.  First, 
when  the  root  is  a,  the  square  must  be  oa  ;  if  the  root  be 
So,  the  square  is  4^;  whidi  shews  that  by  doubling  the 
root,  the  square  becomes  4  times  greater  ;  also,  if  the  root 
be  So,  the  square  is  9aa  ;  and  if  the  root  be  4a,  the  square 
is  16aa.  Farther,  if  the  root  be  ai,  the  square  is  aabb;  and 
if  the  root  be  abc,  the  square  is  iuMcc  ;  or  aVt^. 

121*  Thus,  when  the  root  is  composed  of  two,  or  more 
factors,  we  multiply  their  sauares  together  ;  and  redprocally, 
if  a  8(}uare  be  composed  oi  two,  or  more  factors,  of  which 
each  18  a  square,  we  have  only  to  multiply  together  the 
roots  of  those  squares,  to  obtain  the  complete  root  of  the 
square  proposed.  Thus,  2S04  is  equal  to  4  x  16  x  86, 
the  square  root  of  which  is  2  x  4  x  6,  or  48  ;  and  48  is 
found  to  be  the  true  square  root  of  2304,  because  48  x  48 
gives  2304. 

122.  Let  us  now  conâdcr  what  must  be  observed  on  this 
subject  with  r^ard  to  the  signs  -|-  and  — .     First,  it  is 


38  ELEMENT«  SECT.  I. 

evident  that  if  the  root  have  the  »ign  -|>,  that  i»  to  say,  if  it 
be  a  tMisitive  numlx^r,  its  square  must  necessarily  lie  a  (KMitive 
nuni()cr  also»  because  -f-  niulüplieil  by  4"  nialces  -|-  :  hence 
tlie  s({uare  of  -fa  will  be  -^-aa  :  but  if  the  root  be  a  negative 
number^  as  —a,  the  sauarc  is  still  positive,  for  it  is  -f-oo. 
We  may  therefore  conclude,  that  -f  a/r  is  the  square  both  of 
-)-fl  and  of  —  a^  and  that  consequently  every  m{iuu«  has  two 
roots,  one  positive«  and  the  other  negative.  The  square  rod 
of  !£5,  for  example,  is  lx>tli  -f  5  and  —  5,  because  —  5  muU 
tiplied  by  «—5  gives  S5,  as  well  as  -f  ^  ^^y  4  ^* 


CHAP.  XII. 


Q^Square  Roots,  and  q^ Irrational  Numbers  rendiingjrom 

them, 

123.  What  we  have  said  in  the  preceding  chapter  amouats 
to  this  ;  that  the  scjuarc  root  of  a  given  number  is  that  num* 
ber  whose  sqtiare  is  equal  to  the  given  number  ;  and  thai 
we  may  }Hit  before  those  roots  either  the  positive,  or  the 
negative  «gn. 

1X4.  So  that  when  a  sqtiare  number  is  given,  provided 
we  retain  in  our  memory  a  sufficient  number  of  sqtiare  num» 
bers,  it  is  easy  to  6nd  its  root  If  19G,  for  example,  be  the 
given  number,  we  know  that  its  square  root  is  14. 

Fractions»  Ukewise,  are  easily  managed  in  the  same  way. 
It  is  evident,  for  example,  that  \  is  the  square  root  of  |^; 
to  lie  convinced  of  which,  we  have  only  to  take  the  sqiutte 
mot  of  the  numerator  and  that  of  the  acnominator. 

If  tJie  nurol)er  proposed  be  a  mixed  number,  as  15^,  we 
reduce  it  to  a  single  fraction,  which,  in  this  case,  will  be  Y  t 
and  from  this  we  immediately  perceive  that  [,  or  8^,  must 
/)e  the  siiuare  rout  of  1X|. 

1525.  But  wlien  the  given  numlier  is  not  a  M]uarc,  as  151, 
for  examine,  it  is  not  |X)&»ible  to  extract  its  square  root  ;  or 
to  fiiul  a  number,  which,  multiplied  by  itücH,  will  give  the 
priKluct  15^  We  know,  however,  tliat  the  square  root  of  IS 
mu^t  be  greater  tluin  .'5,  liecause  «S  x  "\  produces  only  9; 
anil  IcM  than  4^  liecnuhc  4x4  produces  16,  which  is  nicav 
than  12;  we  know  also,  tliat  this  root  is  less  than  3;,  for  we 
lia\e  Mvn  tlut  the  M|uare  of  «i;,  or  ^,  in  IS^^  ;  and  we  may 
a()|iniacli  »till  nearer  to  tliis  root,  by  ooiii|iQnng  it  mith  5/,  ; 
forthesquarcof  :t/^,orof  {4,is  Vt/«  ^^  ^^trr^  so  that  ihi» 


CHAf.  XII.  OF   ALOKBRA.  39 

fraction  is  still  greater  than  thedroot  required,  though, but  very 
little  so,  as  the  difference  of  the  two  squares  is  only  -^^t 

136.  We  may  suppose  that  as  3^  aud  3^  are  numbers 
greater  than  the  root  of  12,  it  might  be  possible  to  add  to '3 
a  fraction  a  little  less  than  -^^  and  precisely  such,  that  the 
square  of  the  sum  would  be  equal  to  13. 

Let  us  therefore  try  with  3^  since  4-  is  a  little  less  than  i^. 
Now  3f  is  equal  to  y,  the  square  of  which  is  y/,  and  con- 
sequently less  by  j^  than  IS,  which  may  be  expressed  by 
y^.  It  is,  therefore,  proved  that  3f  is  less,  and  that  3^ 
is  greater  than  the  root  required.  Let  us  then  try  a  num- 
ber a  littie  greater  than  3f,  but  ^et  less  than  3^  ;  for  ex- 
ample,  3^  ;  this  number,  which  is  equal  to  |4>  "^  ^or  its 
square  i^V«  ^^^  ^y  reducing  12  to  this  denominator,  we 
obtain  '-2^  which  shews  that  3^  is  still  less  than  the  root  of 
12,  viz*  by  T^  ;  let  us  ther^ore  substitute  for  -^  the  fraction 
-^  which  is  a  little  greater,  and  see  what  will  be  the  result  of 
the  comparison  of  the  square  of  3-i^,  with  the  proposed  num- 
ber 12.  Here  die  square  of  3^  is  \^  ;  and  12  reduced  to 
the  same  denominator  is  %^^  ;  so  that  3^  is  still  too  small, 
though  only  by  -pl^  whilst  S^  has  been  found  too  great. 

127.  It  is  evident,  therefore,  that  whatever  fraction  is 
j<mied  to  3,  the  square  o£  that  sum  must  always  contain  a 
fraction,  and  can  never  be  exactiy  equal  to  the  integer  12. 
Thus,  although  we  know  that  the  square  root  of  12  is  greater 
than  8^  and  less  than  3^,  yet  we  are  unable  to  assign  an 
intermediate  fraction  between  these  two,  which,  at  the  same 
time,  if  added  to  3,  would  express  exactly  the  square  root  of 
19  ;  but  notwithstanding  this,  we  are  not  to  assert  that  the 
square  root  of  12  is  absolutely  and  in  itself  indeterminate  : 
it  only  fc^ows  from  what  has  faieen  said,  that  this  root,  though 
it  necessarily  has  a  determinate  magnitude,  cannot  be  ex- 
pressed by  fractions. 

128w  There  is  therefore  a  sort  of  numbers,  which  cannot  be 
assigned  by  fractions,  but  which  are  nevertheless  determinate 
quantities;  as,  for  instance,  the  square  root  of  12:  and  we 
call  this  new  species  of  numbers,  irrational  numberê.  They 
occur  whenever  we  endeavour  to  find  the  square  root  of  a 
number  which  is  not  a  square  ;  thus,  2  not  being  a  perfect 
square,  the  square  root  of  2,  or  the  number  which,  multiplied 
by  itself,  would  produce  2,  is  an  irrational  quantity.  These 
numbers  are  also  called  surd  qv^mtities^  or  incommen- 
surables. 

129.  These  irrational  quantities,  though  they  cannot  he 
expressed  by  fractions,  arc  nevertheless  magnitudes  of  which 
ve  may  form  an  accurate  idea;  ^nce,  however  concealed 


40  £LBIIENT1I  tBCT.  I 

the  «quarc  root  of  IS,  for  example,  may  appear,  we  arc  not 
ignorant  that  it  must  Ik*  a  numlier,  whR-h,  wlien  multiplied 
by  itaclf,  would  exactly  produce  IS;  and  thin  property  ia 
sufficient  to  give  us  an  idea  of  the  numlier,  because  it  is  in 
our  power  to  a|)proximate  towards  its  value  continually. 

loO.  As  we  are  therefore  sufficiently  acquainted  with 
the  nature  of  irrational  numbers,  under  our  present  eon- 
ttderation,  a  |Mirticular  ngn  has  been  agreed  on  to  express 
the  square  roots  of  all  numbers  that  are  not  perfect  squares  ; 
which  sign  is  written  thus  ^,  and  is  read  square  rooi. 
Thus,  y/  IS  represents  the  square  rucH  of  IS,  or  the  number 
which,  multiplied  by  itself,  produces  IS  ;  and  y/%  represents 
the  square  root  of  S  ;  v^  S  tne  square  root  of  8;  ^4- that  of 
y;  and,  in  general,  ^a  represents  the  square  root  of  the 
number  a.  Whenever,  therefore,  me  would  express  the 
square  root  of  a  number,  which  is  not  a  square,  we  need 
only  make  use  of  the  mark  ^  by  placing  it  before  the 
number. 

ISl.  The  explanation  which  we  have  given  of  irraüooal 
numbers  will  readiljr  enable  us  to  apply  to  them  the  known 
methods  of  calculation.  For  knowing  that  the  square  root 
of  S,  multiplied  by  itself,  must  produce  S;  we  know  also, 
that  the  multiplication  of  v'â  by  v'S  must  necessarily  pro- 
duce  S;  that,  m  the  same  manner,  the  multiplication  of  ^8 
by  VS  must  give  8;  tlmt  v^5  by  ^5  makes  5;  that  V\ 
by  ^/y  makes  y  ;  and,  in  general,  that  ^a  multiplied  by  ^a 
produces  a. 

ISS.  But  when  it  is  required  to  multiply  ^a  by  \/6,  the 
product  is  ^ab  ;  for  we  have  already  shewn,  that  if  a  square 
nas  two  or  more  factors,  its  root  must  be  cum{)08cd  of  the 
roots  of  those  factors;  we  therefore  find  the  square  root  of 
the  product  a6,  which  is  Vaby  by  multiplying  the  square 
root  of  a,  or  v'a,  b^  the  8C|uare  nxrt  of  6,  or  v^*»  Scc.  It 
b  e\*ident  from  this,  that  if  b  were  equal  to  a,  we  should 
have  Vaa  for  the  product  of  Va  by  ^b.  But  ^am  b 
evidently  a,  since  aa  is  the  square  of  a, 

133.  In  division,  if  it  were  rc({uirud,  for  example,  lo 

divide  ^a,  by  ^/A,  wc  obtain  v^-t-;   ami,  in  this  instance, 

the  irrationality  may  voniAh  in  the  c|U(Kient.  Thus  having 
to  divUic  v^lH  by  \/H,  the  quotient  is  v/V«  ^^^^^  ^  ^^^ 
ducvtl  to  ^^,  aiiif  cuiue(|uently  to  *,lKt.^u»e  {  i!»  the  si|uaiv 
of  j. 

131^.  Wlurn  flu*  iiunibiT  bvfon*  which  wc  liavc  {ilmx'd  tlK* 
nubcal  feign  v^,  is  itiK*lf  a  M|uare,  its  rout  is  expressed  in  the 


OF  ALGEBRA. 


41 


usiul  way  ;  thus,  V4  is  the  B^ne  as  2  ;  v^9  is  the  same  as 
S;  ./Sß  the  same  as  6;  and  W^i  the  same  as  î^  or  S^. 
In  these  instance^  the  irrationality  is  only  apparent,  and 
vanishes  of  course. 

1S5.  It  is  easy  also  to  multiply  irrational  numbers  by  ot^ 
dinary  numbers;  thus,  for  example,  S  multiplied  by  ,/5 
makes  S^5;  and  3  times  VS  makes  3v^2.  In  the  seccrad 
example,  however,  as  3  is  equal  to  ^9,  we  may  also  express 
Stimes  ^/ä  by  ^9  multiplied  by  ^S,othy  ^18;  alsoZ^a 
is  the  same  as  t/4<i,  and  S^a  the  same  as  V9a;  and,  in 
general,  bx^a  has  ihe  same  value  as  the  square  root  of  bba, 
or  -/bba  :  whence  we  infer  reciprocally)  that  when  the  num- 
ber which  is  preceded  by  the  radical  sign  contains  a  square, 
we  may  take  the  root  of  that  square,  and  put  it  before  the 
ngn,  as  we  should  do  in  writing  bt/a  instead  of  ^bàa. 
Ader  this,  the  following  reductions  will  be  easily  under- 


v^8,    or  ^(2.4)   1 

*^24,  or  i/(6A)  I 
V32,orv'(2.ie) 
v' 76,  or  v^  (3.25)  J 


I  ay/ft 
5v/8 


and  so  on. 

136.  IKvisioi^is  founded  on  the  same  prinnples;  as  ^a 

(Uvided  by  ^b  gives  —.,  or  v^-r-.     In  the  same  manner. 


\^  V  *"■  *''*'  <"  ^ 


v'8 

3' 

V18 

V2 

is  equal  to 

^12 

■/» 

-is equal  to 


-,  or  ^4,  or  3. 


,  or^a. 


^3" 
v/144 


Ig 

<w  v'(6  X  4),  or  lastly  Äy-fe. 

137.  There  is  nothing  in  particular  to  be  observed  in  ad- 
dition and  subtraction,  because  wc  only  connect  the  numbers 
by  the  ûgns  -\-  and  —  :  (at  example,  «^9  added  to  \/S  is 


4B  SLBMBirrs  tBcr.  i. 

wfiUcn  VS  4*  ^  >  ^^  'V^  BuUraclcd  from  ^6  b  written 

18H.  We  BUiy  obKnre  lattlv,  that  in  order  to  diatioffiibb 
the  irrational  numbers,  we  call  all  other  numbers»  bow  in* 
tcgral  and  fractional,  raiumal  nmmbers;  so  that,  whenerer 
we  speak  of  raüonal  numbers,  we  understand  integers,  or 
frictions. 


CHAP.  XIII. 


Q^  Impossible,  or  Imaginary  Quantities,  whkJh  ariêe/ram 

the  sawu  source. 

199.  We  have  already  seen  that  the  squares  of  numbers, 
negative  as  well  as  poMtive,  are  always  positive,  or  affected 
by  the  sign  -)-;  having  shewn  that  —a  multiplied  by  —a 

Eves  -^aa^  tlie  same  as  the  product  of  -{-a  by  -fa  :  wbere- 
re,  in  the  preceding  chapter,  we  supposca  that  all  the 
numbers,  of  which  it  was  required  to  extract  the  square 
roots,  were  positive. 

140.  When  it  is  required,  therefore,  to  ex  tract  the  root  of 
a  negative  number,  a  great  difficulty  arises  ;  since  there  is 
no  asngnable  number,  the  square  of  which  would  be  a  nega- 
tive quantity.  Suppose,  for  exam|)ie,  that  we  wished  to 
extract  the  root  of  —  4  ;  we  here  require  such  a  number  as, 
when  multiplied  by  itself,  would  produce  —4:  now,  this 
number  is  neither  -fS  nor  —8,  bcosuse  the  square  both  of 
-f  2  and  of  —2,  is  -f  4^  and  not  -4. 

141.  We  must  therefore  conclude,  that  the  square  root  of 
a  negative  number  cannot  be  either  a  positive  number  or  a 

3;ative  number,  since  the  squares  of  negative  ninnbers  also 
e  tlie  sign  pltis  :  oon8e(|u#ntly,  the  root  in  question  must 
belong  to  an  entirely  distinct  species  of  numbers;  since  it 
cannot  be  ranked  either  anxuig  poûtivc  or  among  m^gative 
numbers. 

14£.  Now,  we  before  remarked,  that  positive  numbers 
are  all  greater  than  nothing,  or  0,  and  that  negative  numbers 
are  all  less  than  nothing,  or  0  ;  so  that  wliatever  exceeds  0 
b  ex|Hvsscd  by  iKisitivo  numbers,  and  whatever  is  less  than 
0  is  ex|ia*Siwd  by  negative  numbers.  The  square  roots  o( 
negative  numbers  tkerefore,  are  iKttlicr  gnaster  nor  less 
ihan  nothing;  yet  we  cannot  say,  that  tbcy  arc  0;  for  0 


CHAP«  XIII.  OF  ALGSBItA.  43 

multiplied  by  0  produces  0^  and  conaequently  does  not  give 
a  negative  number« 

143.  And|  ànce  all  numbers  which  it  is  possible  to  oon- 
côve^  are  either  greater  or  less  than  0^  or  are  0  itself,  it  is 
evident  that  wc  cannot  rank  the  square  root  of  a  negative 
number  amongst  possible  numbers,  and  we  must  therefore 
say  that  it  is  an  impossible  quantity.  In  this  manner  we  are 
led  to  the  idea  of  numbers,,  which  from  their  nature  are  im- 
possible ;  and  therefore  they  are  usually  called  imaginary 
qttarUities^  because  they  exist  merely  in  the  ima^nation. 

144.  All  such  expressions,  as  ^^  —  1*  \/  —  2,  ^  —  8,  -v/  ~"  4,  • 
Sec.  are  consequently  impossible,  or  imaginary  numbers, 
since  they  represent  roots  of  negative  quantities;  and  of 
such  numbers  we  may  truly  assert  that  they  arc  neither 
nothing,  nor  greater  than  nothing,  nor  less  than  nothing; 
which  necessarily  constitutes  them  imaginary,  or  impossible. 

145.  But  notwithstanding  this,  these  numbers  present 
themselves  to  the  mind  ;  they  exist  in  our  imagination,  and 
we  still  have  a  sufficient  idea  of  them  ;  since  we  know  that 
by  >/— 4  is  meant  a  number  which,  multiplied  by  itself, 
produces  —4;  for  this  reason  also,  nothing  prevents  us 
firom  making  use  of  these  imaginary  numbers,  and  employ- 
ing them  in  calculation. 

146.  The  first  idea  that  occurs  on  the  present  subject  is, 
that  the  square  of  >/ — 3,  for  example,  or  the  product  of 
-/ — 3  by  V — 3,  must  be  — 3;  that  the  product  of  ^—1 
by  -v/ — 1>  is  — 1  ;  and*  in  general,  that  by  multiplying 
v^ — a  by  v^ — Of  or  by  taking  the  square  of  \/  —a  we  ob- 
tam  — a. 

147.  Now,  as  — a  is  equal  to  -j-a  multiplied  by  —1,  and 
as  the  square  root  of  a  product  is  found  by  multiplying  to- 
other the  roots  of  its  factors,  it  follows  tnat  the  root  of  a 
times  —1,  or  ^—a,  is  equal  to  ^a  multiplied  by  ^—1; 
but  v^a  is  a  possible  or  real  number,  consequently  the  whole 
imposâbility  of  an  imaginary  quantity  may  be  always  re- 
duced to  -v/ — 1  ;  for  this  reason,  -v/  —  4  is  equal  to  V4  mul- 
tiplied by  ^  —  1,  or  equal  to  2^—1, because  ^^  is  equal  to 
2;  likewise  —9  is  reduced  to  ^9  X  \/— 1,  or  3v— 1; 
and  y/ — 16  is  equal  to  4v' — 1. 

148.  Moreover,  as  v/a  multiplied  by  y/b  makes  ^/ab,  wc 
shall  have  v^6  for  the  value  of  v^  —  2  multiplied  by  \^  —  3  ; 
and  v/4,  or  2,  for  the  value  of  the  product  of  a/  — 1  by 
•  —  4.  Thus  we  see  that  two  imaginary  numbers,  mul- 
tiplied together,  produce  a  real,  or  possible  one. 

But,  on  the  contrary,  a  possible  number,  multiplied  by  an 


44  BLKMBMTA  SECT.  I. 

inponiblc  number,  gives  always  an  imaginary  product: 
thus,  -v^— 8  by  v^-f  5,  gives  v^  — 15. 

140.  It  is  the  same  with  regard  to  division;  for   ^Ja 

divided  by  »Jb  making  '</'r%  it  is  evident  that  V^  ^ 

vided  by  ^-1  will  make  ^-|-4,  or  2;  that  v^+S  divided 
by  ^^8  will  give  ^  —  1;  and  that  1  divided  by  ^—1 

gives  V^»  or  ^—  1  ;  because  1  is  equal  to  ^-|-1. 

150.  We  have  before  observed,  that  the  square  root  of 
anv  number  has  always  two  values,  one  positive  and  the 
euer  negative  ;  that  v^  ^  example,  is  both  -^S  and  —52, 
and  that,  in  general,  we  may  take  —  ^a  as  well  as  -f~VA 
for  the  square  root  of  a.  This  remark  applies  also  to  ima- 
ginary numbers;  the  square  root  of  —a  is  both  -|-^— a 
and  —  V — A  ;  hut  we  must  not  confound  the  ngns  -f~  'uid 
—  ,  which  are  before  the  radical  sign  v^,  with  the  ngn  which 
comes  after  iu 

151.  It  remains  for  us  to  remove  any  doubt,  which  may 
be  entertained  concerning  the  utility  of  the  numbers  oif 
which  we  have  been  speakmg;  for  those  numbers  being  im- 
possible, it  would  not  be  surprising  if  they  were  thought 
entirely  useless,  and  the  object  only  of  an  unfounded  ^)ecu- 
lation.  This,  however,  would  be  a  mistake;  for  the  cal- 
culation of  imaginary  Quantities  is  of  the  greatest  importance, 
as  questions  frequently  arise,  of  which  we  cannot  imme- 
diately say  whether  they  include  any  thing  real  and  possible, 
or  not  ;  but  when  the  solution  of  such  a  question  leads  to 
imaginarv  numbers,  we  are  certain  that  what  is  required  b 
impossible« 

In  order  to  illustrate  what  we  have  said  by  an  example, 
suppose  it  were  proposed  to  divide  the  number  12  into  two 
such  parts,  that  tlie  product  of  those  parts  may  be  40«  If 
we  rnolve  this  question  bv  the  ordinary  rules,  we  find  for 
the  parts  sought  6 -^\/— 4  and  6  —  v^— 4;  but  these  num- 
bers being  imaginary,  we  conclude,  that  it  is  im|X)S8ible  to 
resolve  the  question. 

The  diiTerence  will  be  easily  {wrceivcd,  if  we  suppose  the 
question  had  been  to  divide  1 2  into  two  parts  wnich  mul- 
tiplied together  would  |inNluce  85;  for  it  is  evident  that 
those  iMUts  must  be  7  and  5. 


CHAP.  XIV. 


OF  ALGEBRA. 


45 


CHAP.  XIV. 


Of  Cubic  Numbers. 

152.  When  a  number  has  been  multiplied  twice  by  itself, 
or,  which  is  the  same  thing,  when  the  square  of  a  number 
has  been  multiplied  once  more  by  that  number,  we  obtain 
a  product  which  is  called  a  cube,  or  a  cubic  number.  Thus, 
the  cube  of  a  is  aoa^  since  it  is  the  product  obtained  by 
multi[dying  a  by  itself,  or  by  a,  and  that  square  aa  again 
by  a. 

The  cubes  of  the  natural  numbers,  therefore,  succeed 
each  other  \n  tho  following  order  '^  : 


Numbers 
Cubes 

1 
1 

2 
8 

3 
27 

4 
64 

5 
125 

6 
216 

7 
34S 

8 
512 

9 
729 

10 
1000 

153.  If  we  consider  the  differences  of  those  cubes,  as  we  ' 
did  of  the  squares,  by  subtracting  each  cube  from  that 
which  comes  after  it,  we  obtain  the  following  series  of 
numbers  : 

7, 19,  87,  61,  91, 127, 169,  217,  271. 
Where  we  do  not  at  first  observe  any  regularity  in  them  ; 
but  if  we  take  the  respective  differences  of  these  numbers,  wc 
find  the  following  series  : 

12, 18,  24,  30,  36,  42,  48,  64,  60  ; 
in  which  the  terms,  it  is  evident,  increase  always  by  6. 

154.  After  the  definition  we  have  given  of  a  cube,  it  will 
not  be  difiicult  to  find  the  cubes  of  fractional  numbers; 
thus,  |.  is  the  cube  of  ^  ;  ^  is  the  cube  of  \-  ;  and  ^  is  the 
cube  of  4-.  In  the  same  manner,  we  have  only  to  take  the 
cube  of  the  numerator  and  that  of  ,the  denominator  sepa- 
rately, and  we  shall  have  ^^  (or  the  cube  of  ^. 

155.  If  it  be  required  to  find  the  cube  of  a  mixed  num- 
ber, we  must  first  reduce  it  to  a  single  fraction,  and  then 
proceed  in  the  manner  that  has  been  described.  To  find, 
for  example,  the  cube  of  1^^,  we  must  take  that  of  4^,  which 

*  We  are  indebted  to  a  mathematician  of  the  name  of  J.  Paul 
Büchner^  for  Tables  published  at  Nuremberg  in  1701,  in  which 
are  to  be  found  the  cubes,  as  well  as  the  squares,  of  all  numbers 
from  1  to  12000.    F.  T. 


4ß  KLKIIBNTS  SBCT.  I. 

it  Y«  Ol*  ^f  «  ^so  the  cube  of  1^9  or  of  the  single  fraction  ^, 
is  VV»  or  *Ît  î  «"^  t'*«  <^^  ^^  Si,  or  of  V,  is  *f  J%  or 

156.  Since  ooa  isthecubeof  Oytbat  of  nA  will  beiMwAU; 
whence  we  see»  that  if  a  number  has  two  or  more  factors,  we 
mmy  find  its  cube  by  multiplying  together  the  cubes  of  those 
factors.  For  example,  as  12  is  equal  to  S  x  4,  we  multiply 
die  cube  of  S,  whicn  is  S7,  by  the  cube  of  4,  which  b  64, 
and  we  obtain  17S8,  the  cube  of  18  ;  and  iarther,  the  cube 
of  &  b  8aaa,  and  consequently  8  times  greater  than  the 
cube  of  a:  likewise,  the  cube  of  Sa  b  87aaa  ;  that  b  toaay, 
Sn  times  greater  than  the  cube  of  a. 

157.  Let  us  attend  here  also  to  the  signs  +  ^uid  — •  It 
b  eirident  that  the  cube  of  a  positive  number  -\-a  must  also 
be  positive,  that  is  -^aaa  ;  but  if  it  be  reouired  to  cube  a 
nefjative  number  — 0,  it  b  found  by  first  taking  the  square, 
which  b  -f-aa,  and  then  multiplying,  according  to  the  rule, 
thb  8C}uare  by  —a,  which  gives  for  Uie  cube  rrauired  — «mo. 
In  thb  respect,  therefore,  it  b  not  the  same  witJi  cubic  num- 
bers as  with  squares,  since  the  latter  are  always  positive  : 
iriiereas  the  cube  of  -1  is  ~1,  thatof  — 2b  -8,  that  of 
—9  b  —27,  and  so  on. 


CHAP.  XV. 


QfCube  Roots,  and  €f  Irrational  Numben  resutiingjivm 

them. 

158.  As  we  can,  in  the  manner  already  explained,  find 
the  cube  of  a  given  number,  so,  when  a  number  b  proposed« 
we  may  also  rvdpcocally  find  a  number,  which,  multipliecl 
Iwioe  by  itself,  will  produce  that  number.  The  number 
here  sought  b  called,  with  relation  to  the  other,  thr  cmkc 
rooi  ;  so  that  the  cube  root  of  a  given  number  b  the  number 
whose  cube  b  equal  to  that  given  number. 

159.  It  b  easy  therefore  to  determine  the  cube  root,  when 
the  number  proposed  is  a  real  cube,  such  as  in  the  example» 
in  tlic  last  chapter  ;  for  we  easily  perceive  that  the  cube  root 
ofl  b  1;  that  oi*8  b2;  that  of  27  b  S;  that  of  64  b  4, 
and  so  on.  And,  in  the  same  manner,  the  cube  root  of  —27 
b  -8;  and  that  of -125  b  -5. 

Farther,  if  the  pcti|wscd  niunUrr  be  a  fraction,  as  /y,  tin* 


CHAP.  XV.  OP  ALGBIBA.  47 

» 

cube  root  of  it  must  be  y  ;  and  that  of  -j^  is  ^  Lastly, 
tbe  cube  root  of  a  mixed  number,  such  as  2^  must  be  ^ 
or  1|  ;  because  S^r  ^^  ^ual  to  |^. 

160.  But  if  the  proposed  number  be  not  a  cube,  its  cube 
root  cannot  be  expressed  either  in  integers,  or  in  iracUonal 
numbers.  For  example,  43  is  not  a  cubic  number  ;  there- 
lore  it  is  imposable  to  assign  any  number,  either  integer  or 
fractional,  whose  cube  shall  be  exactly  43.  We  may  how- 
ever affinani  that  the  cube  root  of  that  number  is  greatar 
than  3,  since  the  cube  of  3  is  only  27;  and  less  dum  4, 
because  the  cube  of  4  is  64:  we  know,  therefore^  that  the 
cube  root  required  is  necessarily  contained  between  the 
numbers  8  and  4. 

161.  Since  the  cube  root  of  43  is  greater  than  3,  if  we 
add  a  fraction  to  3,  it  is  certain  that  we  may  approximate 
still  nearer  and  nearer  to  the  true  value  of  this  root  :  but  wc 
can  never  assign  the  number  which  expresses  the  value  ex- 
actly ;  bcfcause  the  cube  of  a  mixed  number  can  never  be 
perJeetly  equal  to  an  integer,  such  as  43.  If  we  were  to 
mspposcj  for  example,  3^  or  -^  to  be  the  cube  root  required, 
the  error  would  be  j-;  for  the  cube  of  ^  is  only  '4',  or 

162.  This  therefore  shews,  that  the  cube  root  of  43  can- 
not be  expressed  in  any  way,  either  by  integers  or  by  frac- 
tions. However,  we  have  a  distinct  idea  of  the  magnitude 
of  this  root  ;  and  therefore  we  use,  in  order  to  represent  it, 
the  sign  v/,  which  we  place  before  the  proposed  number, 
and  wnich  is  read  cube  rooty  to  distinguish  it  from  the  square 
root,  which  is  often  called  simply  tfie  root  ;  thus  y43  means 
the  cube  root  of  43  ;  that  is  to  say,  the  number  whose  cube 
is  43,  or  which,  multiplied  by  itself,  and  then  by  itself  again, 
produces  43. 

163.  Now,  it  is  evident  that  such  expressions  cannot 
belong  to  rational  quantities,  but  that  they  rather  form  a 
particular  species  of  irrational  quantities.  They  have  no- 
thing in  common  with  square  roots,  and  it  is  not  posnble 
to  express  such  a  cube  root  by  a  square  root;  as,  for  ex- 
ample, by  v/12;  for  the  square  of  v^lS  being  1ft,  its  cube 
will  be  12v/12,  consequently  still  irrational,  and  therefore  it 
cannot  be  equal  to  40. 

164.  If  tne  proposed  number  be  a  real  cube,  our  ex- 
pressions become  rational.  Thus,  {/ 1  is  equal  to  1  ;  i/S  is 
equal  to  2  ;  4/27  is  equal  to  3  ;  and,  generally,  i/acM  is  equal 
to  a. 

165.  If  it  were  proposed  to  multiply  one  cube  root,  i/a, 
by  another,  ^A,  the  product  must  hevab  ;  for  we  know  that 


48  ELEMENTS  •BCT«  !• 

ihe  cube  root  of  a  product  ah  is  found  by  inukîpl]rtii^  to- 
gether the  cube  roou  of  the  factors.     YÙoot^  also,  if  we 

a 
divide  4^<f  by  l/b^  the  quotient  will  bc^-r-. 

166.  We  farther  perceive«  that  SC/a  is  equal  to  C^8a, 
because  8  is  equivalent  to  ^/B  ;  that  é^a  is  equal  to  y/TIa^ 
bl/a  is  equal  to  i/aibh  ;  ami,  rcdprocall y,  if  the  number 
under  the  radical  sign  has  a  factor  which  is  a  cube,  we 
may  make  it  disappear  by  placing  its  cube  root  before  the 
sign  ;  for  example,  instead  of 'i/iHa  we  may  write  44/a  ;  and 
8Va  instead  cfi/lft5a  :  hence  ^16  is  equal  to  fU/ft,  because 
16  is  equal  to  8  x  2. 

167.  When  a  number  proposed  is  negative,  its  cube  root 
is  not  subject  to  the  some  aifficulûes  that  occurred  in  treating 
of  square  roots;  for,  since  the  cubes  of  negative  numbers 
are  n^ative,  it  follows  that  the  cube  roots  of  negative  num- 
bers are  also  negative;  thus  {/~8  is  equal  to  —8,  and 
;/-S7  to  —a  ft  follows  also,  that  i/*12  is  the  same  as 
— V18,  and  that  C^— a  may  be  expressed  by  —J  a.  Whence 
we  see  that  the  sign  —,  when  it  is  found  after  the  sign  of 
the  cube  root,  might  also  have  been  placed  before  it.  We 
are  not  therefore  led  here  to  impossible,  or  imaginary  num- 
bers, which  happened  in  considering  the  s(|uare  roots  of 
nq^ve  numbers. 


CHAP.  XVI. 

Q/*  Power»  in  general. 

168.  The  product  which  we  obtain  by  multiplying  a 
number  once,  or  several  timi^  by  itself,  is  called  a  power. 
Thus,  a  M|uare  which  arises  from  tlie  multiplication  of  a 
numlier  by  itself,  and  a  cube  which  we  f)t>uiin  by  mul- 
tiplying a  number  twice  by  itself,  are  |X)wers.  We  say 
also  in  the  former  case,  that  the  number  is  rai«ed  to  the 
second  degree,  or  to  the  heouid  |K)wer;  and  in  the  latter, 
that  the  number  is  raised  tu  the  thtnl  ci4'gree,  or  to  the  third 
powcT. 

1G9.  Wo  clistingtiish  tin  we  jHiwer*  from  one  anothiT  by 
the  numlHT  of  tinn's  tliat  the  given  number  lias  lHX*n  mul- 
tipticd  by  itself.    For  exani{ilc,  a  square  is  calkd  the  seound 


CHAP.  XVI. 


OF  ALGEBRA. 


49 


Dover,  because  a  certain  ^ven  number  has  been  multiplied 
oy  itself;  and  if  a  number  has  been  multiplied  twice  by 
itself  we  call  the  product  the  third  power,  which  therefore 
means  the  same  as  the  cube;  also  if  we  multiply  a  number 
three  times  by  itself  we  obtain  its  fourth  power,  or  what  is 
commonly  called  the  biquadrate:  and  thus  it  will  be  easy 
to  understand  what  is  meant  by  the  fifth,  si^tb»  seventh,  &c 
powar  of  a  number.  I  shall  only  add,  tnat  powers,  after 
the  fourth  degree,  cease  to  have  any  other  but  these  numeral 
distinctions. 

170.  To  illustrate  this  still  better,  we  may  observe,  in  the 
6rst  place,  that  the  powers  of  I  remain  always  the  same; 
because,  whatever  number  of  times  we  multiply  1  by  itself, 
the  product  is  found  to  be  always  1.     We  shall  therefore 


earn  other  as  in  the 

following 

0K  O  WA    0m  «fta-IVI 

order: 

Powers. 

Of  the  number  2. 

Of  the  number  S. 

1st 

2 

8 

2d 

4 

9 

3d 

8 

27 

4th 

16 

81 

5th 

32 

248 

6th 

64 

729 

7th 

128 

2187 

8th 

256 

6561 

9th 

512 

1968S 

10th 

1024 

59049 

11th 

2048 

177147 

ISth 

4096 

531441 

13th 

8192 

1594328 

14th 

16384 

4782969 

15th 

32768 

14848907 

16th 

65536 

43046721 

17th 

131072 

129140163 

18th 

262144 

387420489 

But  the  powers  of  the  number  10  are  the  most  remark- 
able :  for  on  these  powers  the  system  of  our  arithmetic  is 
founded.  A  few  of  them  ranged  in  order,  and  beginning 
with  the  first  power,  are  as  follow  : 

1st    2d      3d         4th  5th  6th 

10,  100,  1000,  10000,  100000,  1000000,  &c. 

171.  In  order  to  illustrate  this  subject,  and  to  consider 
it  in  a  more  general  manner,  we  may  observe,  that  the 

£ 


50  ELEMENTS  tECT.  t. 

powers  of  any  number,  a^  succeed  each  other  in  the  fol- 
lowing order  : 

1st  2d    3d     4th      5th         6th 

a,  aa^  aaa^  aaaa,  aaaaa^  aaaaaa^  &c 

But  we  soon  feel  the  inconvenience  attending  this  manner 
of  writing  the  powers,  which  consists  in  the  ncoenity  of  re- 
peating the  same  letter  very  often,  to  express  high  powers; 
and  the  reader  also  would  nave  no  less  trouble,  if  ne  were 
obliged  to  count  all  the  letters,  to  know  what  power  b  in- 
tended to  be  represented.  The  hundredth  power,  for  ex- 
ample, could  not  be  conveniently  written  in  this  manner; 
ana  it  would  be  equally  difficult  to  read  it. 

172.  To  avoid  this  inconvenience,  a  much  more  com- 
modious method  of  expressing  such  powers  has  been  devised, 
which,  from  its  extensive  use,  deserves  to  be  carefully  ex- 
plained. Thus,  for  example,  to  express  the  hundredth 
power,  we  simply  write  the  number  100  above  the  ouantity, 
whose  hundredth  power  we  would  express,  and  a  little  to- 
wards the  right-hand  ;  thus  a*"^  represents  a  raised  to  the 
100th  power,  or  the  hundredth  power  of  a.  It  most  be 
observed,  also,  that  the  name  exponent  is  given  to  the  num- 
ber written  above  that  whose  power,  or  degree,  it  represents, 
which,  in  the  present  instance,  is  100. 

173.  In  the  same  manner,  a*  signifies  a  raised  to  the  2d 
power,  or  the  second  |x>wer  of  a,  which  we  represent  some- 
times also  by  aa,  because  l)oth  thi*se  expressions  are  written 
and  understood  with  equal  facility  ;  but  to  express  the  cube,  or 
the  third  power  aaa^  we  write  a*,  accordinl)ç  to  the  rule,  that 
we  may  occupy  less  room  ;  so  a*  signifies  the  fourth,  •'  the 
fifth,  and  a^  the  sixth  power  of  //. 

174.  In  a  word,  the  düTerent  powers  of  a  will  be  re» 
preticnted  by  ci,  a\  a',  «*,  a\  a*,  a',  a",  «^  a%  &c  Hence 
we  see  that  in  this  manner  we  might  very  properly  have 
written  a'  instead  uf  a  for  the  first  term,  to  stiew  the  order 
of  the  series  more  clearly.  In  fact,  a*  is  no  more  than  a,  as 
this  unit  shc^wt  that  the  letter  a  is  to  Im*  written  only  once. 
Such  a  series  of  powers  is  called  also  a  geometrical  pro- 
gresûon,  because  each  term  i&  by  one-time,  or  term,  greater 
than  the  preceding. 

175.  As  in  this  seri4^  of  powers  each  term  is  found 
by  multiplyuig  the  preceding  term  by  a,  which  increases 
the  ex|MHient  by  1  ;  so  when  any  term  u  given,  we  may 
also  find  tlie  preceding  term,  if  we  divide  by  a,  because  this 
diminishes  the  exponent  by  1.  This  shews  that  the  term 
which    precedes    the   first    term    n'    murt    nccesaarily    be 


CHAP.  XVI. 


OF  ALGEBRA. 


51 


■— ,  or  1  ;  and,  if  we  proceed  according  to  the  exponents,  we 

immediately  conclude,  that  the  term  which  precedes  the  first 
must  he  a^;  and  hence  we  deduce  this  remarkable  property, 
that  a^  is  always  equal  to  1,  however  great  or  small  the  value 
of  the  number  a  may  be,  and  even  when  a  is  nothing  ;  that 
is  to  say,  cfi  is  equal  to  1. 

176.  We  may  also  continue  our  series  of  powers  in  a  retro- 
grade Older,  and  that  in  two  different  ways  ;  first,  by  dividing 
always  by  a;  and  secondly,  by  diminishing  the  exponent 
by  unity  ;  and  it  is  evident  that,  whether  we  follow  the  one 
or  the  other,  the  terms  are  still  perfectly  equal.  This 
decreasing  series  is  represented  in  both  forms  in  the  fol- 
lowing Table,  which  must  be  read  backwards,  or  from  right 
to  left. 


Ist. 
2d. 


1 

1 

I 

1 
aaa 

1 
aa 

1 
a 

1 

a 

aaaaaa 

aacaa 

aaaa 

1 
1^ 

1 

1 

0* 

1 

I 

1 

(T^ 

Û-» 

«-* 

fl-5 

a-* 

a-' 

a<> 

a« 

1T7.  We  are  now  come   to  the  knowledge  of  powers 

whose  exponents  are  negative,  and  are  enabled  to  assign 

the  precise  value  of  those  powers.  Thus,  from  what  has 
been  said,  it  appears  that 


ct 

a 


-.  (f  - 


a' 


J 


1*1 


a 


*4 


r  ' 

a 

^is  equal  to-{  ^  ^"^ 

J_ 

-♦5    &C. 


a' 


178.  It  will  also  be  easy,  from  the  foregoing  notation,  to 
find  the  powers  of  a  product,  ab  ;  for  they  must  evidently  be 
né,  or  a^A*,  a*A*,  a^6^  a*Ä*,  a'6%  &c.  and  the  powers  of 
fractions  will  be  found  in  the  same  manner  ;  for  example, 

dioae  of  -7-  are 

0 


6^' 


a 


b2 


a' 


a" 


à> 


5S^  CLEMENTS  iBCT.  I* 

179.  Lastly,  wc  have  to  cmunder  the  powers  of  negÊÛwe 
numbers.  Stippoiic  the  given  number  to  be  —a;  then  its 
powers  will  form  the  following  series  : 

—a,  +a«,  -«',  +a\  —a\  +a%  &c. 

Where  wc  may  obser^-e,  that  those  powers  only  become 

/'  negative,  whose  exponents  are  odd  numbers,  ana  that,  on 

the  contrary,  all  the  powers,  which  have  an  ewü  number 

*         for  the  exponent,  are  positive.    So  that  the  third,  fifth, 

seventh,  ninth,  &c.  powers  have  all  the  sign  —  ;  and  the 

>  second,  fourth,  sixth,  eighth,  &c  powers  are  affected  by  the 


CHAP.  XVII. 

Of  the  Calculation  ^Powers. 

180.  We  have  nothing  particular  to  observe  with  regard 
to  the  Jddèiian  and  Subtracikm  of  powers  ;  lor  we  only 
represent  those  operations  by  means  of  the  signs  4  and  «— , 
when  the  powers  are  different«  For  example,  o^  -f  tf *  b  the 
sum  of  the  second  and  third  powers  of  a  ;  and  a'  —  a*  is 
what  remains  when  we  subtract  the  fourth  power  of  a  from 
the  fifUi  ;  and  neither  of  these  results  can  be  abridged  :  but 
when  we  have  powers  uf  the  same  kind  or  degree,  it  is 
evidently  unnecessary  to  connect  them  by  signs  ;  as  a*  +  a* 
becomes  So*,  &c. 

181.  But  in  the  Multiplication  of  powers,  several  circum« 
stances  require  attention. 

Fimt,  wnen  it  is  required  to  multiply  any  power  of  a  by 
a,  wc  obtain  the  succeeding  power  ;  that  is  to  say,  the  power 
whose  exponent  is  greater  oy  an  unit.  Thus,  a\  multiplied 
by  a,  produces  a'  ;  and  a',  multiplied  by  a^  produces  ^. 
In  the  same  manner,  when  it  is  required  to  multiply  by  a 
the  powers  of  sny  number  n*presrnted  by  a,  having  negative 
exponents«  we  have  only  to  add  1  to  thé  exponent  Thus, 
a~'  multiplied  by  a  produces  a%  or  1  ;  whicn  b  made  BMwe 

evident  by  con^ering  that  a~*  is  equal  to  —,  and  that  the 
product  of  hy  a  lieing  --  -,  it  is  aMisequently  equal  to  1  ; 
likewise  a—'  multiplied  by  o,  produces  a***,  or — ;    and 


CHAP.  xyn.  OF  ALGEBRA.  53 

a—"  multiplied  by  a,  gives  a— ^,  and  so  on.     [See  Art 

175,  nai 

182.  Next,  if  it  l)e  required  to  multiply  any  power  of  a 
by  a«,  or  the  second  power,  I  say  that  the  exponent  becomes 
greater  bj  2.  Thus,  the  product  of  a*  by  a^  is  a^  ;  that  of 
Ä*  by  a*  IS  a*  ;  that  of  a}  by  a'  is  a*  ;  and,  more  generally, 
a"  multiplied  by  a*  makes  a"+».  \\'ith  r^;ard  to  negative 
exponents,  we  shall  have  a',  or  a,  for  the  product  of  a—*  by 

a*;  for  a—*  being  equal  to  —,  it  is  the  same  as  if  we  had 

a 

divided  oa  by  a;  consequently,  the  product  required  is 

am 

— ,  or  a  ;  also  a— %  multiplied  by  a%  produces  a^,  or  1  ;  and 

ar^y  multiplied  by  a',  produces  a—'. 

183.  It  is  no  less  evident,  that  to  multiply  any  power  of 
a  by  a*,  we  must  increase  its  exponent  by  three  umts  ;  and 
that,  consequently,  the  product  of  a"  by  a}  is  a""^*.  And 
whenever  it  is  required  to  multiply  together  two  powers  of 
0,  the  product  will  be  also  a  power  of  a,  and  sucn  that  its 
exponent  will  be  ^e  sum  of  those  of  the  two  g^ven  powers. 
For  example,  c^  muItipUed  by  a'  will  make  a^,  and  a}^  mul* 
ti}died  by  cP  will  produce  a^^,  &c. 

184.  From  these  considerations  we  may  easily  determine 
the  highest  powers.  To  find,  for  instance,  the  twenty-fourth 
power  of  2,  I  multiply  the  twelfth  power  by  the  twelfth 
power,  b^use  2**  is  equal  to  2"  X  2'^  Now,  we  have 
already  seen  that  2^  is  4096  ;  I  say  therefore  that  the  num- 
ber 16777216,  or  the  product  of  4096  by  4096,  expresses 
the  power  required,  namely,  2**. 

185.  Let  us  now  proceed  to  diviâon.  We  shall  remark, 
in  the  first  place,  that  to  divide  a  power  of  a  by  a,  we  must 
subtract  1  from  the  exponent,  or  dmdnish  it  by  unity  ;  thus, 
(f  £vided  by  a  gives  o^;  and  a®,  or  1,  divided  by  a,  is  equal 

to  Ä— *  or  —  ;  also  a— ^  divided  by  a,  gives  a—*. 

186.  If  we  have  to  divide  a  given  power  of  a  by  a*,  we 
'  must  diminish  the  exponent  by  2  ;  and  if  by  a',  we  must 

subtract  8  units  from  the  exponent  of  the  power  proposed  ; 
and,  in  general,  whatever  power  of  a  it  is  required  to  divide 
by  any  other  power  of  a,  the  rule  is  always  to  subtract  the 
exponent  of  the  second  from  the  exponent  of  the  first 
of  thoae  powers:  thus  a^^  divided  by  cP  will  g^ve  a^;  cfi 
divided  by  d^  will  give  a—'  ;  and  a—^  divided  by  a*  will 
give  Ä— ^. 

187.  From  what  has  been  said,  it  is  easy  to  understand 


54  ELEMENT»  SECT.  t. 

the  method  of  finding  the  powers  of  powers,  this  being 
done  by  multiplication.  When  we  seek,  for  example,  the 
square,  or  the  second  power  oF  a^,  we  find  a^;  anu  in  the 
same  manner  ne  find  a*^  for  the  thini  |K)wer,  or  the  cube,  of 
Ä*.  To  obtain  the  s(]uare  of  a  power,  we  have  only  to  double 
its  ex)x>nent  ;  for  its  cube,  we  must  triple  the  exponent  ;  and 
so  on.  Thus,  the  s<|uare  of  a  '  is  a**  ;  the  cube  of  a  *  is  a'"  ; 
the  seventh  jxiwer  of  a*  is  a^",  &c. 

188.  The  M|uarc  of  a>,  or  the  square  of  the  square  of  a, 
being  a\  we  see  why  the  fourth  iM)wcr  is  calli*il  the  biqua^ 
drate:  also,  the  sc|uare  of  a*  bcmg  <i^,  the  sixth  power  has 
received  the  name  of  //ir  Aquarc-cumd. 

Lastly,  the  cuIk»  of  //^  being  </**,  we  call  the  ninth  power 
the  cufxxubc:  alter  tliis,  no  other  denominatioos  ol*  this 
kind  have  been  introduced  for  powers  ;  and,  indeed,  the  two 
last  are  very  little  usetl. 


CHAP.  XVIII. 

Q^  Roots,  tcUh  rclaiiofi  to  Powers  in  gcnend. 

189.  Since  the  s({uare  root  of  a  given  number  is  a  num« 
ber,  whose  square  is  equal  to  that  given  number;  and  since 
ibe  cube  root  of  a  given  number  is  a  number,  whose  cube  is 
equal  to  that  given  number;  it  follows  that  any  number 
whatever  being  given,  we  may  always  suppose  such  roots  of 
it,  that  the  fourtn,  or  the  fifkh«  or  any  otlier  power  of  them, 
respectively,  may  be  equal  to  tlie  given  number.  To  distin- 
guisli  these  different  kmds  of  roots  better,  we  shall  call  the 
si|unre  nxH,  the  second  root  ;  and  the  cuIk*  root.  Me  third 
root;  because  according  to  this  denomination  we  may  call 
thr fourth  roi>t^  that  whose  biquadrate  is  equal  to  a  given 
number;  and  tht- ßfih  root^  that  whose  fiAli  power  is  equal 
to  a  given  number,  &c. 

190.  As  the  Mjuare,  or  second  root,  is  marked  by  the  sign 
\/,  and  the  cubic,  or  thirti  niot,  hy  tla*  sign  y,  so  the  fourth 
ruut  is  n*presented  hy  the  si;;n  }/  ;  the  fifth  root  by  the  sign 
l/\  tthil  M>  on.  It  iü  evident  that,  according  to  thu  method 
of  expression,  the  sign  of  the  »quare  root  ouglit  to  bej/: 
but  as  of  all  riMits  tliis  occurs  most  fnniuently,  it  has  bero 
af^*ed,  for  the  sake  f>f  brevity,  to  omit  the  numlicr  51  as  the 
sign  of  this  niol.     So  that  when  the  radical  sign  has  no  nuoK 


CHAP.  XVIIX.  OF  ALGEBRA.  55 

ber  prefixed  to  it,  this  always  shews  that  the  square  root  is 
meant. 

191.  To  explain  this  matter  still  better,  we  shall  here 
exhibit  the  different  roots  of  the  number  c/,  with  their  re- 
spective values  : 

\/a\  rid 

^af  I3d 

>t/a  >  is  the  <  4th  ^  root 
e/aV  /Sth 

4/a  /  f  6th  )  la,  and  so  on. 

So  that,  conversely, 

The  2d  \  (  ^a\  ra, 

TheSd  I  \  ^al  \a, 

The  4th  >  power  oï\  >{/a  >  is  equal  to  <  a, 

The  5th  V  I  >/^\  /  «> 

The  6th  ^  ^l/aJ  (  a,  ^nd  so  on. 

192.  Whether  the  number  a  therefore  be  great  or  small, 
we  know  what  value  to  affix  to  all  these  roots  of  different 
degrees. 

It  must  be  remarked  also,  that  if  we  substitute  unity  for  a, 
all  those  roots  remain  constantly  1  ;  because  all  the  poWers 
of  1  have  unity  for  their  value.  If  the  number  a  be  greater 
than  1,  all  its  roots  will  also  exceed  unity.  Lastly,  if  that 
number  be  less  than  1,  all  its  roots  will  also  be  less  than 
unity. 

198.  Wh^i  the  number  a  is  positive,  we  know  from  what 
was  before  said  of  the  square  and  cube  roots,  that  all  the 
other  roots  may  also  be  determined,  and  will  be  real  and 
posâble  numbers. 

But  if  the  number  a  be  negative,  its  second,  fourth,  sixth, 
and  all  its  even  roots,  become  impossible,  or  imaginary  num- 
bers ;  because  all  the  powers  of  an  even  order,  whether  of 
poâtive  or  of  negative  numbers,  are  affected  by  the  sign  -|-  : 
whereas  the  third,  fifth,  seventh,  and  all  its  odd  roots,  become 
negative,  but  rational  ;  because  the  odd  powers  of  negative 
numbers  are  also  negative. 

194.  We  have  here  also  an  inexhaustible  source  of  new 
kinds  of  surds,  or  irrational  quantities;  for  whenever  the 
number  a  is  not  really  such  a  power,  as  some  one  of  the 
forgoing  indices  represents,  or  seems  to  require,  it  is  im- 
possible to  express  tnat  root  either  in  whole  numbers  dc  in 
mictions  ;  and,  consequently,  it  must  be  classed  among  the 
numbers  which  are  caUed  irrational. 


56  BLBMEN14  htn.  t. 


(HAP.  XIX. 

(}f*Üu  Method  of  reprisent  i  tiff  IrnitiunAl  NuiuIkti»  //;/ 

Fractiuiiul  ExpoiienU. 

195.  We  have  shewn  in  the  preceding  chapter,  tliat  the 
iquare  of  any  power  is  found  by  doubling  tlie  exponent  of 
that  power  ;  or  that,  in  gi-ncral,  the  8(|uart*,  or  the  second 
power,  of  a",  isfi*";  and  the  converse  also  follows,  vix.  that 
the  square  root  of  the  power  à'"  is  ff",  whicli  is  found  by 
taking  half  the  exponent  of  that  |)ower,  or  dividing  it 
by  2. 

196.  Thus,  the  square  root  of  u*  is  a\  or  a;  that  of  a* 
is  o*;  that  of  o^  is  a^  ;  and  so  on  :  and,  as  this  is  general, 

the  square  root  of  a'  must  necessarily  be  a*,  and  that  of  <«^ 

must  be  a  *^;  consequently,   we  shall  in  the  same  mamier 

have  a*  for  the  square  root  of  o*.  Whence  we  see  that  «^ 
is  equal  to  ^'o;  which  new  method  of  representing  the 
sqttare  root  demands  particular  attention. 

197.  We  have  also  shewn,  that^  to  find  the  cube  of  a 
power,  as  a",  we  must  multiply  its  exponent  by  8,  and  ooo* 
seouently  that  cube  is  a*\ 

llence,  conversely,  when  it  is  required  to  find  the  third, 
or  culie  root,  of  the  power  a^,  we  have  only  to  divide  that 
exponent  by  S,  and  may  therefore  with  certainty  conclude, 
that  the  root  required  is  a:  consec|uently  tf^  or  a,  is  the 
cube  root  of  a';  o*  b  the  cube  root  of  a^;  o'  of  a^;  and 
soon. 

I9H.  There  is  nothing  to  present  us  from  apply iiif(  the 
same  reasoning  to  those  cases  in  which  the  expooent  u  not 
divisible  by  S^  or  from  concluding  that  the  culie  root  of  a* 

is  a^y  and  that  tlie  culie  root  of  a^  is  a^,  or  a'^; 


quently,  the  thinl,  or  cube  root  of  «^  or  a',  must  be  a^: 

wheiKv  also,  it  appt^arf^,  tliat  a  *  is  the  same  as  i/<i. 

MH).  It  is  the  same  with  roots  of  a  higher  degree:  thus, 

the  iburtli  root  of  a  h  ill  Ijc  a^,  which  expres&ion  has  the 

same  value  as  {/a  ;  the  fit\h  root  of  a  will  be  à^^  which  is 
0üiise(|ucntly  i*<|uivalent  to  ^Z";  and  the  Nime  observation 
may  be  extended  to  all  roots  of  a  higher  degree. 


CHA^.  XIX.  OF   JiLGKlftA.  5J  ' 

âOO.  We  may  therefore  entirely  reject  the  radical  signs  at 

present  made  use  of,  and  employ  m  their  stead  the  fractional 

exponents  which  we  have  just  explained  :  but  as  we  have 

been  long  accustomed  to  those  âgns,  and  meet  with  them  in 

most  books  of  Algebra,  it  might  be  wrong  to  banish  them 

entirely  from  calculation  ;  there  is,  however,  sufficient  reason 

also  to  employ,  as  is  now  frequently  done,  the  other  method 

of  notation,  because  it  manifesüy  corresponds  with  the  nature 

I 

of  the  thing.     In  fact,  we  see  immediately  that  à^  is  the 

■ 
square  root  of  a,  because  we  know  that  the  square  of  a*^, 

that  is  to  say,  a^  multiplied  by  a^,  is  equal  to  a',  or  a, 

201.  What  has  been  now  said  is  sufficient  to  shew  how 
we  are  to  understand  all  other  fractional  exponents  that  may 

occur.     If  we  have,  for  example,  aJ,  this  means,  that  we 
must  first  take  the  fourth  power  of  a,  and  then  extract  its 

cube,  or  third  root;  so  that  a'  is  the  same  as  die  common 

expression  l/a\     Hence,  to  find  the  value  of  a^,  we  must 
first  take  the  cube,  or  the  third  power  of  a,  which  is  a',  and 

then  extract  the  fourth  root  of  that  power  ;  so  that  a^  is  the 

same  as^a^y  and  a'^is  equal  to^a^  &c. 

S02.  When  the  fraction  which  represents  the  exponent 
exceeds  unity,  we  may  express  the  value  of  the  given  quan- 
tity in  another  way  :  for  instance,  suppose  it  to  be  a"^;  this 

I 
quantity  is  equivalent  to  a^,  which  is  the  product  of  a*  by 

a^  :  now  aJ  being  equal  to   ^o,  it  is  evident  that  c^  is 

1  O  I  ^ 

equal  to  a*\/û^:  alsoa^,  or  a^,  is  equal  to  a*  \/fl;  and 

a  ^ ,  that  is,  a^,  expresses  a^  l/a\     These  examples  are  suf- 
ficient to  illustrate  the  great  utility  of  fractional  exponents. 

203.  Their  use  extends  also  to  fractional  numbers  :  for  if 
there  be  given  — ,  we  know  that  this  quantity  is  equal  to 

—  ;  and  we  have  seen  already  that  a  fraction  of  the  form 

—  may  be  expicssed  by  a—"  ;  so  that  instead  o£  -^  we 

^_  I 
may  use  the  expression  a    '^;  and,  in  the  same  man- 


M  SUUlSlITt  iICT.  I. 


MUTf  -^ —  is  equal  to  a      .   Again,  if  the  quanti^  -;^^  be 

pitipoeed;  letit  be  transTomed  into  this,  — ,  whidi  ia  the 

fly 

product  of  a*  by  a    '^;  now  this  product  b  equivalent  to 

a^,  or  to  a'^,  or  lastly,  to  at/a.  Practice  will  render  similar 
reductions  easy. 

S04.  We  snaU  observe,  in  the  last  place,  that  each  root 
may  be  represented  in  a  variety  of  ways;  for  v^a  being  the 

same  as  a^,  and  \  being  transformable  into  the  fractions,  ^ 
jv  p  -109  T  I«  ^c-  >^  i*  evident  that  ^a  is  equal  to  (/a*,  or  to 

ya*,  or  to  Va%  and  so  on.     In  the  same  manner,^«,  which 

I 
is  equal  to  a"^,  will  be  equal  to  v^a*,  or  to  ^d',  or  to  ^a^. 

Hence  also  we  see  that  the  number  a,  or  a',  might  be  repre- 
sented by  the  following  radical  expressions  : 

yû^ya'.yfl^yû^&c. 

JK)5.  This  property  is  of  great  use  in  multiplicatAoo  and 

dBvinon  ;  for  if  we  have,  for  example,  to  multiply  ^a  by  (/tf, 

we  write  (/a'  (br  (/a,  and  ^a*  instead  of  ^a  ;  so  that  in  this 

manner  we  obtain  the  same  radical  si^  for  both,  and  the 

multiplication  being  now  performed,  gives  the  product  ^o^. 

I  «  I 
The  same  result  is  also  deduced  from  a^^^,  which  is  the 

I  I 

product  of  a^  multiplied  by  a^  ;  for  j-  +  y  "^  79  <^  ooose- 

quently  the  product  rrauired  is  a^,  ory^i^. 

On  the  contrary,  if  it  were  required  to  divide  yo,  or 

a^,  by  y«,  or  a\  we  should  have  for  the  quotient  a^    ^, 

or  a^     '^j  that  is  to  say,  a*,  or v«. 


Ut'CSTIONS    rOR    PRACTICE    ERSPBCTINC    SVROS. 

1.  Reduce  6  to  the  form  of  ^5.  Ans.  V96. 

S.  Ileduce  a  +  6  to  the  form  of  ^bc. 

Ans.  ^(aa  +  Sa&  +  M). 

S.  Reduce  r—  to  the  form  of  Vd.  Ans.  •  r^:- 

4.  Reduce  a*  and  6^  to  the  common  index  t» 


Am.  71',  and  *^^. 


CHAP.  XIX.  OF  ALQBBBA.  59 

5.  Heduce  V48  to  its  amplest  form.  Ans.  4v^3. 

6.  Reduce  y/  {a?x  —  aV)  to  its  simplest  form. 

An9.aV{ax--àx^).  1 

7.  Reduce  v/gr^oT  to  its  simplest  form. 

Ans.  -ôT  Vt 

35       o  — a 

8.  Add  -v/6  to  2v/6;  and  ^/S  to  ^50. 

Ans.  8^/6;  and  7/2. 

9.  Add  v^  4a  and  !^cfi  together.  Ans.  (a + 2)  \/a. 

10.  Add  J  ^  and  4r  together.  Ans.  -r^—^. 

11.  Subtract  \/4a  from  t/cfi.  Ans.  (ö— 2)-v/a. 


"Til  Tl' 

12.  Subtract -T-' *  from  —  p  ^n^.  I--J:  ^^ 


ft«-c»     1 


13.  Mulüply  y/—  by  v/ gj--  ^»w. 

14.  Multiply  ^/dhy^ab.  Ans^{a'VJP).   ? 

15.  Multiply  ^(40  -  ar)  by  2a. 

An$.  V{\ßa^  -  Ifti^x). 

16.  Multiply  -57  v^(a  —  x)  by  (c  —  d)\/ar. 

oc— ad 

-^W^.  — gT—V^C«*^— AT«). 

17.  Divide  a*^  by  a^;  and  a*  by  a*. 

Ans.  à^  ;  and  a^H^JT* 

ùc-'od  a 

18.  Divide  — ^r—  v^(a*d?  —  or*) by  qiy/(^  —  ^). 

ilfw.  (c  —  cQ\/aar. 

19.  Divide  a«  —  ad  —  6  +  dv^*  by  a  -  v/*. 

iliw.a+-v^6  —  dL 

20.  What  is  the  cube  of  v"  ^  ?  Am.  ^8. 

21.  What  is  the  square  of  85/ôc'.!»  Ans.Qc^b'c. 

a       2a 

22.  What  is  the  fourth  power  of  -^^ — 7  ? 


Ans. 


a« 


4&*(c'-2fc+i*)* 

23.  What  is  the  square  of  3  +  •S  ?        Ans.  14  +6  v^6. 

24.  What  is  the  square  root  of  a^  ?        Ans.  a^  ;  or  v^o*. 

25.  What  is  the  cube  root  of  y/  (a«  —  ä^)  ? 

Ans.  $/(a*  -  X*). 


JML  What  multiplier  will  raider  a +v^  8  noioiMa? 

87.  What  multiplier  will  render  y/a^-^b  rational? 

S8,  What  multipfier  will  render  the  denominator  of  the 
fraction    ,^  .     -^  rational  ?  Ans.  v/7—  v^8. 


CHAP.  XX. 

QTiAr  Cerent  Methods  o/*Calculation,  and  qflheir  muênal 

Connexion* 

£06.  Hitherto  we  have  only  explained  the  diferenC  me- 
thods of  calculation  :  namely,  addition,  subtraction,  mul- 
tipKcatinn,  and  division  ;  the  involution  of  powers,  and  the 
extraction  of  roots.  It  will  not  be  improper,  therefore,  in 
tUs  plaee,  to  tiaoe  back  the  origin  of  these  different  methods, 
and  to  explain  the  connexion  which  subsists  among  them  ; 
in  order  that  we  may  satisfy  ourselTcs  whether  it  be 
possible  or  not  for  other  operations  of  the  same  kind  to 
cnst  This  inquiry  will  throw  new  light  on  the  subjects 
which  we  have  considered. 

In  prosecuting  this  design,  we  shall  make  use  of  a  new 
diaracter,  which  may  be  employed  instead  of  the  expression 
that  has  been  so  often  repeated,  u  eaual  to  ;  this  sign  b  =, 
which  is  read  iv  equêl  to:  thus,  when  I  write  a  z  6,  this 
means  that  a  is  equal  to  A  :  so,  for  example,  8  x  5  r:  15. 

SÜ7.  The  first  mode  of  calculation  tnat  presents  itsrif  to 
the  mind,  is  undoubtedly  addition,  by  which  we  add  two 
numbers  together  and  find  their  sum  :  let  therefore  o  and  b 
be  the  two  given  numliers,  and  let  their  sum  be  expressed 
by  the  letter  c,  then  we  shall  have  a-\-b  ^  c\  to  that  when 
we  know  the  two  numbers  o  and  6,  addition  teaches  us  to 
find  the  number  r. 

liÜH.  Preserving  this  ooroparison  a  +  4  s  c,  let  us  reverse 
the  question  by  «ing,  how  we  are  to  find  the  number  ft, 
when  we  know  the  numbers  a  and  r. 

It  if  here  rtauired  therefore  to  know  what  number  must 
be  added  to  o,  in  order  that  the  sum  may  be  the  number  c  : 
suppose,  for  example,  s  s  8  and  r  s  o;  so  that  we  must 
Jiave  8  4-  6  «  8;  then  b  will  eridcntly  be  fimnd  by  sub- 


CHAP.  XX.  OP  ALGEBRA.  61 

tracting  8  from  8:  ,and,  in  general,  to  find  i,  we  must  gub* 
tract  a  from  c>  whence  arises  6  =:  c  —  a  ;  for  by  adding  a  to 
both  âdes  again,  we  have  /^-f-a=c-  —  a-f<'»  that  is  to  say, 
z  Cj  as  we  supposed. 

209.  Subtraction  therefore  takes  place,  when  we  invert 
the  auestion  which  mves  rise  to  addition.  But  the  number 
whicn  it  is  rèquirea  to  subtract  may  happen  to  be  greater 
than  that  from  which  it  is  to  be  subtracted  ;  as,  for  example, 
if  it  were  required  to  subtract  9  from  5:  this  instance  there- 
fore furnishes  us  with  the  idea  of  a  new  kind  of  numbers, 
which  we  call  negative  numbers,  because  5  -^  9  s=  —  4. 

âlO.  When  several  numbers  are  to  be  added  together, 
which  are  all  equal,  their  sum  is  found  by  multiplication,  and 
is  called  a  product.  Thus,  ab  means  the  product  arising 
from  the  multipUcation  of  a  by  /;,  or  from  the  addition  of  the 
number  a,  b  number  of  times  ;  and  if  we  represent  this  pio- 
duct  by  the  letter  c,  we  shall  have  ab  ss  c;  thus  multiplica- 
tion teaches  us  how  to  determine  the  number  Cy  when  the 
numbers  a  and  b  are  knoMm. 

Sil.  LfCt  us  now  propose  the  following  question:  the 
numbere  a  and  c  being  known,  to  find  the  number  b.  Sup- 
pose, for  example,-  a  =:  S,  and  c  =  15  ;  so  that  36  =  15, 
and  let  us  inquire  bv  what  number  S  must  be  multiplied,  in 
order  that  the  pnxiuct  may  be  15  ;  for  the  question  pro- 
posed is  reduced  to  this«  This  is  a  case  of  division  ;  and  the 
number  required  is  found  by  dividing  15  by  8;  and,  in 
general,  the  number  b  is  found  by  dividing  c  by  a;  from 

which  results  the  equation  6  =  — . 

SIS.  Now,  as  it  frequently  happens  that  the  number  c 
camiot  be  really  divided  by  the  number  a,  while  the  letter  6 
must  however  have  a  determinate  value,  another  new  kind 
of  numbers  present  themselves,  which  are  called'^oir^iofBtf. 
For  example,  suppose  a  =^  4,  and  c  =:  3,  so  that  46  =  8; 
then  it  is  evident  that  ^  cannot  be  an  integer,  but  a  fraction, 
and  that  we  shall  have  6  =:  |-. 

818*  We  have  seen  that  multiplication  arises  from  ad- 
dition; that  is  to  say,  from  the  addition  of  several  equal 
Suantities  :  and  if  we  now  proceed  farther,  we  shall  perceiTe 
lat,  from  the  multiplication  of  several  equal  quantities  to- 
gether, powers  are  derived  ;  which  powers  are  represented  in 
a- general  manner  by  the  expression  a^.  This  signifies  that 
the  number  a  must  be  multiplied  as  many  times  by  itself, 
minus  1,  as  is  indicated  by  the  number  b.  And  we  knoW 
from  what  has  been  already  said,  that,  in  the  present  in- 


LLKMKXTM  SKCT.  1. 

ttânœ,  a  is  aükd  the  rooC^  6  the  expoocott  and  a^  the 


814.  Farther,  if  we  represent  thin  power  al»o  by  tin?  letter 
r»  we  have  u^  zz  r,  an  ct|iiation  in  which  tliree  letters  a,  A,  r« 
are  found  ;  and  we  have  nhewn  in  treating  of  powers  how 
to  find  the  power  itself«  that  is,  the  letter  r,  when  a  root  a 
and  its  exponent  b  are  given.  Supix^eo,  for  example,  a  s»  5, 
and  6  =:  8,  M>  that  c  zz  6^:  then  it  is  evident  that  we  must 
take  the  third  power  of  5,  which  b  123,  so  that  in  this  case 

tl5.  We  have  now  seen  how  to  determine  the  power  r,  bj 
means  of  the  root  a  and  the  exponent  6  ;  but  if  we  wish  to 
iwverse  the  question,  we  shall  find  that  this  may  lie  done  in 
two  ways,  and  that  there  are  two  diflcrcnt  cases  to  be  con- 
sidered :  for  if  two  of  these  three  numbers  cr,  6,  r,  were  ffiven« 
and  it  were  required  to  find  the  third,  we  should  imroeoiately 
perceive  that  this  question  would  admit  of  three  different 
suppositions»  and  consequently  of  three  solutions.  We  have 
considered  the  care  in  which  a  and  6  were  the  given  num- 
bers, we  may  therefore  supfxise  farther  that  e  and  tf,  or  r 
and  6,  are  known,  and  that  it  is  required  to  determine  the 
third  letter.  But,  before  we  proceed  any  farther,  let  us  point 
€iai  a  very  essential  distinction  between  involution  and  the 
two  operations  which  lead  to  it  When,  in  addition,  we  rc> 
versed  the  question,  it  could  be  done  only  in  one  way  ;  it 
was  a  matter  of  indifference  whether  we  took  c  and  a,  or  c 
and  6,  for  the  given  numbers,  because  we  might  indifferently 
write  a  +  6,  or  6  fa;  and  it  was  also  the  same  with  mul- 
tifrfication  ;  we  could  at  pleasure  take  the  letters  a  and  b  for 
each  other,  the  eauation  ah  ^  c  being  exactly  the  same  as 
&a  =  c  :  but  in  tne  calculation  of  powers,  tHe  same  thing 
does  not  take  place,  and  we  can  by  no  means  write  ^  in» 
stead  of  ii\  as  a  single  example  will  be  sufficient  to  il- 
lustrate  :  for  let  a  s  5,  and  6  s  8  ;  then  we  shall  have 
a*  ss  5*  =  12o;  but  6-  s  8^  =  248:  which  n^  two  very 
diflS^rent  results. 

216.  It  is  evident  then,  that  we  may  propone  two  ques- 
tions more  :  one,  to  find  the  rout  a  by  means  of  the  given 
power  r,  and  the  expom^nt  6;  the  other,  to  find  the  ex- 
ponent Â,  supposing  the  |x>wer  r  and  the  root  a  to  be 
Known. 

217.  It  may  be  said,  indeed,  that  the  former  of  these 
questions  has  been  resolved  in  the  cliapter  on  the  extraction 
«if  roots  ;  since  if  6  =:  2,  for  example,  and  a^  =  r,  we  know 
bj  this  means,  that  a  is  a  number  whose  square  is  equal  to 
r,  and  ooosequcotly  that  a  ^  ^c.    In  the  same  mamcr,  if 


CHAP.  XXI.  OF   ALGEBRA'.  6S 

ft  =:  3  and  a'  =  r,  we  know  that  the  cube  of  a  must  be  equal 
to  the  given  number  c,  and  consequently  that  a  =  ^c.  It 
is  therefore  easy  to  conclude,  generally,  from  this,  how  to 
determine  the  letter  a  by  means  of  the  letters  c  and  6;  for 
we  must  necessarily  have  a  =  l^c, 

218.  We  have  already  remarked  also  the  consequence 
which  follows,  when  .the  given  number  is  not  a  real  power; 
a  case  which  very  frequently  occurs  ;  namely,  that  then  the 
required  root,*  a,  can  neither  be  expressed  oy  integers,  nor 
by  fractkms;  yet  since  this  root  must  necessarily  have  a  de- 
terminate value,  the  same  consideration  led  us  to  a  new  kind 
of  numbers,  which,  as  we  observed,  are  called  surds^  or  frro- 
Honal  numbers  ;  and  which  we  have  seen  are  divisible  into 
an  infinite  number  of  different  sorts,  on  account  of  the  great 
variety  of  roots.  Lastly,  by  the  same  inquiry,  we  were  led 
to  the  knowledge  of  another  particular  kind  of  numbers, 
which  have  been  called  imaginary  numbers. 

219*  It  remains  now  to  consider  the  second  question, 
which  was  to  determine  the  exponent  ;  the  power  c^  and  the 
root  a,  both  being  known.  On  this  question,  which  has  not 
yet  occurred,  is  founded  the  important  theory  of  Logarithms, 
the  use  of  which  is  so  extensive  throi^h  the  whole  compass 
of  mathematics,  that  scarcely  any  long  calculation  can  be 
carried  on  without  their  assistance  ;  and  we  shall  find,  in 
the  following  chapter,  for  which  we  reserve  this  theory,  that 
it  will  lead  us  to  another  kind  of  numbers  entirely  new,  as 
they  cannot  be  ranked  among  the  irrational  numbers  before 
mentioned. 


CHAP.  XXL 

0/*  Logarithms  in  general. 

2S0.  Resuming  the  equation  a*  =  c,  wc  shall  begin  by 
remarking  that,  m  the  doctrine  of  L^ogarithms,  we  assume 
for  the  root  a^  a  certain  number  taken  at  pleasure,  and  sup- 

Çkse  this  root  to  preserve  invariably  its  assumed  value, 
his  being  laid  down,  we  take  the  exponent  b  such,  that 
the  power  a'*  becomes  equal  to  a  given,  number  c;  in 
which  case  this  exponent  b  is  said  to  be  the  hgariutm  of  the 
number  c.  To  express  this,  we  shall  use  the  letter  L.  or 
the  initial  letters  log.     Thus,  by  6  =r  L.  c,  or  6  =  log.  c, 


M  CL£M£.\T!»  iECT.  t. 

we  mean  that  b  m  equal  to  the  kigarithni  of  the  number  r» 
or  that  the  logarithm  of  c  is  6. 

221.  We  see  then»  tliat  the  value  of  the  root  a  being 
once  esitahlisJiecIy  the  lo;;anthni  of  any  number,  r,  i«  notbiii^c 
more  than  the  ex|ioiu*nt  of  timt  txiwer  of //«  which  is  c(|ual 
tO€:  to  that  c  In'ing  =:  u\  b  is  tlie  Icigarithm  of  the  |M>wer 
«\  If«  for  the  present»  we  bupiXMe  A  :=  1,  we  liave  1  for 
the  logarithm  of  <i*,  and  consetjueotly  tog.  <i  =  1  ;  but  if  we 
•uppuse  b  ^a^we  liave  2  for  the  logarithm  of  a^;  that  is  to 
aay,  leg.  tf *  =r  2,  and  we  may,  in  the  same  manner,  obtain 
kg.  a'  =:  3  ;  Iqg.  n^  =:  4  ;  log.  tt^  =  5,  and  so  on. 

2Sbt.  If  we  make  &  =  0,  it  is  evident  that  0  will  be  the 
logarithm  of  a«';  but  u®  =  I  ;  oonsec|uently  log.  1=0,  wliat- 
ever  be  the  value  of  the  root  a. 

Suppose  A  =  —  1,  then    —1   will  be  the  logaritlim  of 

a—'  ;  but  fl— '  =  —  ;  so  llmt  we  have  log.  —  =  —  I,  and  in 

the  same  manner,  we  shall  have  loff.  —  n  —  8  ;  loß.  — 

Ä  —  8;  fa^.  —  =  —  4,  &e. 

SSS.  It  is  evident,  then,  how  we  may  represent  the  loga- 
rithms of  all  the  powers  of  a,  and  even  those  of  fraetions, 
which  have  unity  for  the  numerator,  and  for  the  denominator 
a  power  of  a.  We  set*  sâ^j  that  in  all  those  cases  tlie  loga- 
ritlims  are  integers  ;  but  it  must  be  observed,  that  if  b  were 
a  fraction,  it  would  be  the  logarithm  of  an  irrational  num- 
ber :  if  we  suppose,  for  example,  b  =  {*,  it  follows,  that  [  is 

the  logarithm  of  «i*,  or  of  %^a;  conscc|uently  we  have  also 
log.  s'a  —  [i  and  we  shall  find,  in  the  same  manner,  that 
/c^.^ii  ~  :,  io^,^a  =  i,  &c. 

2^4.  Hut  if  it  Ik*  reipiired  to  find  the  logarithm  of  another 
number  c,  it  u  ill  be  n^iidily  |x*rceivcd,  that  it  can  neitluT 
be  an  inti-gtT,  ncir  a  fraction  ;  yet  there  must  Im.*  such  an  ex- 
ponent b^  that  the  |M>wer  a  may  lieixmu*  iH|ual  to  the  num- 
Der  pnipotied  ;  we  luve  tlu>rcfore  b  =-  h^.  c  ;  and  generally« 
a*-'  &  c. 

^tio,  Ijcl  us  n4>w  cfitisidtT  aiu>ther  numlier  J,  wIiom.^  l«>ga- 
rithm  ha*»  Urn  repri*M*ntiti  in  a  similar  maiuuT  by  lo^.  d\ 
so  tliat  j'  ^  =:  iL  Here  if  we  multiply  this  expression  by 
the  |mxxtliiig  one  a}  *  =  r,  we  »hall  have  u*  '^^-^  zz  cd\ 
benct*,  ihr  tjjMßneui  ia  aiurai/*  ihr  lofiariihm  ofiluptmtri 
oonae«|uently,  Ltf(.  <-  +  h^.  d  ^  log.  cd.  Hut  if,  instead  of 
multiplying,  we  cbvide  the  former  expresaJMin  by  the  latter. 


CHAP.  XXI.  OF    ALGEBRA.  65 


C 

we  shall  obtain  a^-^^-rf  _.       .  ^^j^  consequently,  log.  c  — 

log.d^hg.-j. 

ââ&  This  leads  us  to  the  two  principal  properties  of  loga- 
rithms, which  are  contained  in  the  equations  log.  c  +  log.  d 

=  log.  cd,  and  log.  c  —  log.  d  =  log.  -3-.     The  former  of 

these  equations  teaches  us,  that  the  lo^rithm  of  a  product, 
as  cd,  IS  found  by  adding  together  tne  logarithms  of  the 
factors  ;  and  the  latter  shews  us  this  property,  namely,  that 
the  logarithm  of  a  fraction  may  be  determined  by  sub- 
tracting the  logarithm  of  the  denominator  from  that  of  the 
numerator. 

^27.  It  also  follows  from  this,  that  when  it  is  required  to 
multiply,  or  divide,  two  numbers  by  one  another,  we  have 
only  to  add,  or  subtract,  their  logarithms  ;  and  this  is  what 
constitutes  the  singular  utility  of  logarithms  in  calculation  : 
for  it  is  evidently  much  easier  to  add,  or  subtract,  than  to 
multiply,  or  divide,  particularly  when  the  question  involves 
large  numbers. 

^8.  Logarithms  are  attended  with  still  greater  advan^ 
tages,  in  the  involution  of  powers,  and  in  the  extraction  of 
r<x)ts  ;  for  if  d  =  c,  we  have,  by  the  first  property,  log.  c  -f 
log.  c  =  log.  cc,  or  c*  ;  consequently,  log.  cc  zz  2  log,  c  ;  and, 
in  the  same  manner,  we  obtain  log.  c*  =  3  log.  c\  log.  c*=s 
4  lo^.  c  ;  and,  generally,  log.  c'*  =c  n  log.  c.  If  we  now  sub- 
stitute fractional  numliers  tor  n,  we  sh^  have,  for  example, 

log.  c^,  that  is  to  say,  log.  a/c,  =  ilog.  c  ;  and  lastly,  if  we 
suppose  n  to  represent  negative  numbers,  we  shall  have  hg. 

c-*,  or  log.  — ,  =  —  log.  c;  log.  c— %  or  log.  —,  =-^2log. 

If  c 

Cy  and  so  on;  which  follows  not  only  from  the  equation 
log.  c**  =  w  log.  c,  but  also  from  loj.  1  =  0,  as  we  have 
already  seen. 

229.  If  therefore  we  had  Tables,  in  which  logarithms 
were  calculated  for  all  numbers,  we  might  certainly  derive 
from  them  very  great  assistance  in  performing  the  most 
prolix  calculations  ;  such,  for  instance,  as  require  frequent 
multiplications,  divisions,  involutions,  and  extractions  of 
roots  :  for,  in  such  Tables,  we  should  have  not  only  the 
logarithms  of  all  numbers,  but  also  the  numbers  answering 
to  all  logarithms.  If  it  were  required,  for  example,  to  find 
the  square  root  of  the  number  c,  we  must  first  find  the  loga- 


ELEMENTS  tlCT.  I. 

rithm  of  r,  that  ia»  log.  c,  and  next  taking  the  half  of  that 
logarithm,  or  |/o^.  r,  we  shoukl  have  the  logarithm  of  the 

?[uare  nxH  re(|uired  :  we  hnvc  therefore  only  to  look  in  the 
Ébles  for  tiie  number  answering  to  that  logarithm,  in  order 
to  obtain  the  root  rei|iiired. 

5H0.  We  have  alrouly  seen,  that  the  numbers,  1,  3,  8,  4, 
5t  6^  &C.  that  is  to  say,  all  positive  numbers,  are  logarithms 
of  Use  root  a,  and  of  its  fiusitive  ixiwers  ;  consec|uently, 
logarithms  of  numbers  greater  than  unity  :  and,  on  tlie  ooo- 
tmry,  that  the  negative  numbers,  as  —  1,  —5^  &c.  are  loga* 

rithiiis  of  the  fractions  — ,    .^ ,  Sec.  whidi  n^  less  than  unity, 

bat  yet  greater  than  nothinir. 

rienoe,  it  iblbws,  that,  if  the  k)garithm  be  pontivc^  the 
number  is  always  greater  than  unity  :  but  if  tne  logarithm 
bt  negative,  the  number  is  always  less  than  unity,  and  yet 
mater  than  0;  conseauently,  we  cannot  express  the  kwa- 
iUhnis  of  negative  numoers  :  we  must  therefcnre  conclude,  that 
the  logarithms  of  negative  numbers  are  impossible,  and  that 
they  belong  to  the  class  of  imaginary  quantities. 

wl.  In  order  to  illustrate  this  more  fully,  it  will  be 
proper  to  fix  on  a  determinate  number  for  the  root  a.  Let 
us  make  choice  of  that,  on  which  the  common  Lofnritbmic 
Tables  mt^  formed^  that  is,  the  number  10,  which  nas  been 
prefinrred,  because  it  is  the  foundation  of  our  Arithmetic. 
Bnl  it  is  evident  that  any  other  number,  provided  it  were 
greater  than  unity,  woula  answer  the  same  purpose:  and 
Uie  reason  why  we  cannot  suppose  a  =  umty,  or  1,  is 
manifest  ;  because  all  the  powers  a*  would  tiêa  be  con- 
stantly ec^ual  to  unity,  and  could  never  become  equal  to 
another  given  number,  r. 


CHAP.  XXII. 

Of  ihr  logarithmic  Tables  now  in  use. 

fSSL  In  those  Tolilc«,  as  we  have  already  miütioned,  we 
begin  with  the  su|>position,  that  the  root  a  is  s  10;  so  that 
the  logarithm  of  any  numlier,  r,  is  the  exponent  to  which  wo 
must  raise  the  number  10,  in  order  that  tne  power  resulting 
ftmn  it  may  be  equal  to  the  number  r  ;  or  il*  we  denote  the 
Infirithm  of  c  by  Ur,  we  shall  always  have  10^  s  c. 


GBAK  XXII.  OF  ALOEBEA.  67 

SUS.  We  have  already  observed,  that  the  Icgarithm  of 
the  number  1  is  always  0  ;  and  we  have  also  10^  n  1  ;  oon« 
•equeoily,  log.  1  ==  0;  log.  10  =  1  ;  log.  100  =  2;  %. 
1000  =  8;  fcg- 10000  =  4;  log.  100000  =  6;  %.  lOOOOW 
=  6.  Farther^  fegp.  -j!^^  =  —  1  ;  &g.  t-^  =  -  8;  fc^ç.  ^Ar 
=  -  8;    log.  -TuWîr  =  —  4;    fcjf.  tW^w  =  -  5;    i^?. 

teoo^oo  —  —  u.  .     1  1  1       i» 

234.  The  logarithms  of  the  principal  numbers,  therefore, 

are  ea^ly  determined  ;  but  it  is  much  more  difficult  to  find 

the  logarithms  of  all  the  other  intervening  numbers  ;  and 

yet  they  must  be  inserted  in  the  Tables.     This  however  is 

not  the  place  to  lay  down  all  the  rules  that  are  necessary  for 

such  an  inquiry  ;  we  shall  therefore  at  present  content  our- 

adves  with  a  general  view  only  of  the  subject. 

885.  First,  since  h^.  1  =:  0,  and  loff.  10  =  1,  it  is  evident 
that  the  logarithms  of  all  numbers  between  1  and  10  must  be 
included  between  0  and  unity  ;  and,  consequently,  be  ^ater 
than  0,  and  less  than  1«  It  will  therefore  be  suffiaent  to 
consider  the  single  number  2  ;  the  Ic^rithm  of  whidi  is 
certainly  fi;reater  than  0,  but  less  than  unity  :  and  if  we  repre- 
sent this  logarithm  by  the  letter  07,  so  that  log.  2  =  jt,  the 
vidue  of  that  letta*  must  be  such  as  to  give  exactly  10*  ^1t. 

We  easily  perceive,  also,  that  x  must  be  considerably 

less  than  •^,  or  which  amounts  to  the  same  thing,  10^ 
is  greater  than  S  ;  for  if  we  square  both  sides,  the  square  of 

10*  =  10,  and  the  square  of  2  =  4.     Now,  thb  latter  is 

much  less  than  the  former  :  and,  in  the  same  manner»  we 

I 

see  that  x  is  also  less  than  4-  ;  that  is  to  say,  10^  is  greater 

than  2  :  for  the  cube  of  10^  is  10,  and  that  of  2  is  only  8. 
But,  on  the  contrary,  by  making  x  =  ^,  we  give  it  too  small 

a  value  ;  because  the  fourth  power  of  10^  bein^  10,  and 

that  of  2  being  16,  it  is  evident  that  10^  is  less  than  2. 
Thus,  we  see  that  x,  or  the  lag.  2,  is  less  than  ^,  but  greater 
than  -^  :  and,  in  the  same  manner,  we  may  determine,  with 
respect  to  every  fraction  contained  between  I  and  -f,  whether 
it  be  too  çreat  or  too  small. 

In  makmg  trial,  for  example,  with  y,  which  is  less  than  |, 
and  greater  than  ^,  10%  or  10|,  ought  to  lie  =  2  ;  or  the 
seventh  power  of  lOy,  that  is  to  say,  10=,  or  100,  ought  to 
be  equal  to  the  seventh  power  of  2,  or  1 28  ;  which  is  con- 
sequently greater  than  100.  We  sec,  tlierefore,  that  y  is 
less  than  log.  S,  and  that  log.  3,  which  was  found  less  than 
y,  is  however  greater  tlian  y. 

r2 


68  KMMKNTS  SKCT.  f. 

I^t  lift  try  another  fmcium,  which,  in  consequence  of 
what  we  have  aln^dy  foiincK  mu»t  be  conttined  betwem  y 
and  ^     Such  a  fraction  between  these  limitJi  is  jl^.  ;  and  H  is 

therefore  required  to  find  whether  10^  =  2;  if  this  be  the 

case,  the  tenth  powers  of  those  luimlters  are  also  equal  :  but 

1 
the  tenth  )x>wer  of  10^  "^  is  10*  =  1000,  and  the  tenth  power 

of  8  is  1024;  we  conclude  therefore,  tlmt  10^^  is  less  than 
8,  and,  consequently,  that  ^t^  is  too  small  a  fraction,  and 
therefore  the  log.  2^  tliough  less  than  |,  is  yet  greater 

than  Vo- 

836.  This  discussion  serves  to  orove,  that  bg.  8  has  a 
determinate  value,  since  we  know  tnat  it  is  certainly  greater 
than  t^,  but  less  than  |  ;  we  shall  not  however  proceed  any 
fiurther  in  this  investigation  at  present.  Being  therefore  stiu 
ignorant  of  its  true  value,  we  shall  represent  it  by  «r,  so  that 
bg.  8  =  X  ;  and  endeavour  to  shew  now,  if  it  were  known, 
we  could  deduce  from  it  the  logarithms  of  an  infinity  of 
other  numbers.  For  this  purpose,  we  shall  make  ium?  of 
the  equation  already  mentioned,  namely,  log.  cd  s  log.  c  -^ 
far.  d,  which  comprehends  the  property,  that  the  lonrithm 
of  a  product  is  found  by  adding  ti^tner  the  logantJuns  of 
the  nctors, 

887.  Firstt  as  Jog.  2  =  x,  and  loj^.  10  =  1,  we  shall  have 
fo^.  20  r:  X  +  1,  &^.  200  =  x  +  2 

fo^.  2000  =  jr  +  8,  /o^.  90000  =  x  +  4 

log.  200000  =  X  +  5,        lo^.  2000000  =  x  f  6,  Stc 

8S8.  Farther,  as  log.  r*  =  2  h^.  c,  and  log.  r*  =:  3  log.  c, 

and  log.  r^  r:  4  fa/,  r,  &c.  we  have 

fa/.  4  =  2x;  faf.  8  s  Sx;  hg.  16  s  4x;  fa^.  32  =  Sx; 
log.  61  s  6x,  &c.     Hence  we  find  also,  that 

fa^.  40  =  2x  +  1*  fa«r.  400  =  ar  +  2 

lor.  4000  =  2x  +  3,  faif .  40000  =  2*  +  4^  &c 

fatfr.  HO  =  3x  +  I,  %  HOO  =  3x  +  2 

log.  8000  =  3x  4^  3,  log.  mOOO  =  är  f  4,  &c. 

fa^.  IGO  =  4r  +  1,  hg.  1600  ^  4x  +  2 

fa^.  16000  :=  4r  +  3,  fa^.  160000  ==  4vr  +  4,  &c 

899.  I^  us  resume  also  the  other  fundamental  equation, 
log.  -.  =  log.  c  "  hg.  dj  and  let  us  suppose  c  =  10,  and 

if  K  2:  since  fajf.  10  s  1,  and  hfi.  2  s  i«  we  shaU  have 
far«  V,  o€  log.5  =i  \  --  jr.  and  shall  dtduce  frum  boioe  the 
following  e«|uation» 


CHAP«  XXIII.  OF  ALG£BBA.  69 

loff.SO-fi--x,  log.BOO  —  S'-x 

log.  6000  =  4  ^  J-,  fo^.  60000  =  6  -  ^,  8cc. 

fo^.  26  =  2  -  2^,  iïi^,  125  =:  8  -  So? 

log.  626  =:  4  -  4jr,  fog.  8125  zz  5  •-  5x,  &c. 

fo^.  250  =  8  -  2ar,  /o^.  2500  =  4  —  2^? 

foj§^.  26000  =  6  -  2r,  fog,  250000  =  6  -  2r,  &c. 

log.  1260  =  4  —  3x,  tosr.  12500  =  5  -  Sir 

log.  125000  =  6  -  3i:,         /eg-,  1250000  =  7  -  8ar,  &c. 
fog^.  6250  =z  5  -  4a:,  fog-.  62500  =  6  -^  4ir 

fo^.  625000  =  7  -  4x,  fo^.  6250000  =  8  -  4r,  &c. 
and  so  on. 

240.  If  we  knew  the  logarithm  of  3,  this  would  be  the 
means  also  of  determining  a  number  of  other  logarithms  ;  as 
appears  from  the  followmg  examples.  Let  the  log.  8  be 
represented  by  the  letter  y  :  then, 

fog.  80=3^+1,  %.  800=y  +  2 

foxf.  3000  =  y  +  8,  fog.  80000  =  y  4-  4,  &c. 

log,  9  =  2y,  log.  27  =  %,  fog.  81  =  4j^,  8&.  we  shall 
have  also, 
log.  6  =  a?  +y,  fog.  12  =  20?  +  y,  4g^.  18  =  a?  +  %, 
/Scg*.  15  =  hg.  8  +  ^*  5  =  y  +  i  —  ^* 

241.  We  have  alreaoy  seen  that  all  numbers  arise  from 
the  multiplication  of  prime  numbers.  If  therefore  we  only 
knew  the  logarithms  of  all  the  prime  numbers,  we  could  find 
the  logarithms  of  all  the  other  numbers  by  simple  additions. 
The  number  210,  for  example,  being  formed  by  the  factors 
2,  3,  5,  7,  its  logarithm  will  be  log.  2  +  log.  3  4-  log.  S  + 
log.  7.  In  the  same  manner,  smce  360  =  2  x  2  x  2  x 
3  X  3  X  5  =  2»  X  8*  X  5,  we  have  fog-.  360  =  3  fog-.  2  + 
2  fo^.  8  -f  fog^.  6.  It  is  evident,  therefore,  that  by  means 
of  the  logarithms  of  the  prime  numbers,  we  may  determine 
those  of  all  others  ;  and  that  we  must  first  apply  to  the 
determination  of  the  former,  if  we  would  construct  Tables 
of  Logarithms. 


CHAP.  XXIII. 

OJ'tlie  Method  qfexpresshig  Logarithms. 

242.  We  have  seen  that  the  logarithm  of  2  is  greater  than 
-,?^,  and  less  than  -f,  and  that,  consequently,  the  exponent  of 
10  must  full  between  those  two  fractions,  in  order  that  the 
|X3wcT  may  become  2.     Now,  although  we  know  this,  yet 


70  ELEMENTS  IBOT.  I. 

whatever  fractioD  we  «Kunie  on  this  oaciditioii,  the  power 
resulting  from  it  will  be  alway»  an  irrational  number,  greater 
or  less  than  2  ;  and,  oonAcquently,  the  logarithm  of  S  cannot 
be  aocurmtely  expressed  by  such  a  fractiim:  therefore  we 
must  content  ourselves  with  detennining  the  value  of  that 
logwithm  bv  such  an  approximation  as  may  render  the 
error  of  üttie  or  no  importance;  for  which  purpose,  we 
cflipioy  what  are  called  dicinuil  fraitioruf,  the  nature  and 
properties  of  which  ought  to  l)e  explained  as  dearly  as 
pCMsibie. 

5Md.  It  is  well  known  that,  in  the  ordinary  way  of  writing 
munbers  by  means  of  the  ten  figures,  or  characters, 

0,1,2,S,4,6,6,7,8,9, 

the  first  figure  on  the  right  alone  has  its  natural  signification  ; 
that  the  f^res  in  the  second  place  have  ten  times  the  value 
which  they  would  have  had  in  the  first  ;  that  the  figures  in 
the  third  place  have  a  hundred  times  the  value  ;  and  those 
in  the  fourth  a  thousand  times,  and  so  on  :  so  that  as  they 
advance  towards  the  left,  tliey  acquire  a  value  ten  times 
greater  than  they  had  in  the  prccedmg  rank.  Thus,  in  the 
number  1765,  the  figure  5  is  in  the  nrst  place  on  the  right, 
and  is  just  equal  to  5;  in  the  second  place  is  6;  but  this 
fifjuie,  mstead  of  6,  represents  10  x  6,  or  60  :  the  figure  7 
is  m  the  third  pbce,  and  represents  100  x  7,  or  700  ;  and 
lastly,  the  1,  which  is  in  the  fourtli  row,  becomes  1000;  so 
that  we  read  the  given  number  tlius  ; 

One  ihousandj  seven  hundred^  and  êirty^vf. 

144.  As  the  value  of  figures  becomes  always  ten  times 
greater,  as  we  go  from  the  right  towards  the  left,  and  as  it 
oonsequendy  becomes  continually  ten  times  le«  as  we  go 
ftom  the  left  towards  the  right  ;  we  may,  in  conformity  with 
ibis  law,  advance  still  farther  towards  the  right,  and  obtain 
figures  whose  value  will  continue  to  become  ten  times  less 
than  in  the  preceding  place  :  but  it  must  be  obvrved,  that 
the  place  where  the  figures  have  their  natural  value  is 
marked  by  a  |)oint.  So  that  if  we  meet,  Uvr  example,  with 
the  numbiT  ;i6'54892,  it  'i%  to  lie  understood  in  this  nuinner: 
the  figure  6,  in  tlie  first  plai*e,  has  its  natural  value  ;  and  the 
figure  d,  which  is  ia  the  second  |>lace  to  the  left,  means  SO. 
But  the  figure  5,  which  comes  after  the  |Knnt,  expresses 
«ily  Vc  *  and  the  4  is  equal  only  to  if  ^  ;  the  figure  H  is 
equal  to   ,  A^  ;  the  figure  9  is  equal  to  T^^?irc  «  ^^  ^^ 

figure  2  is  rcpial  to  , .  .* We  see  then,  that  the  mort* 

those  figures  advance  ti>wards  the  right,  the  more  their 


CHAP.  XXIII.  OF  AL6KBKA.  71 

values  diminish,  and  at  last^  those  values  become  so  small, 
that  they  may  be  eonsidered  as  nothing  *. 

£45.  This  is  the  kind  of  numbers  which  we  call  decimal 
Jraciions^  and  in  this  manner  logarithms  are  represented  in 
the  Tables.  The  logarithm  of  à,  for  example,  is  expressed 
by  O'SOIOÎMX)  ;  in  which  we  see,  Ist.  That  since  there  is  0 
before  the  point,  this  Ic^rithm  does  not  contain  an  integer; 
Ädly,  that  its  value  is  .V+tSts^+tc^W  +  rtt^b  +  . vinnnr 
+  loogfts^  +  -TüTrÄ-b-b-Tr  We  might  have  left  out  the  twa 
last  ciphers,  but  they  serve  to  shew  that  the  logarithm  in 
question  contains  none  of  those  parts,  which  have  1000000 
and  10000000  for  the  denominator,  it  is  however  to  be 
understood,  that,  by  continuing  the  series,  we  might  have 
found  still  smaller  parts;  but  Math  regard  to  these,  they  are 
n^lected,  on  account  of  their  extreme  minuteness. 

£46.  The  logarithm  of  3  is  expressed  in  the  Table  by 
0'4771äl3;  we  see,  therefore,  that  it  contains  no  integer, 
and  that  it  is  composed  of  the  following  fractions  :  i^  -|-  -rj^, 

we  must  not  suppose  that  the  logarithm  is  thus  expressed 
with  the  utmost  exactness  ;  we  are  only  certain  that  the  error 
is  less  than  -loec'oooo  «  which  is  certainly  so  small,  that  it 
may  very  well  be  neglected  in  most  calculations. 

£47.  According  to  this  method  of  expressing  Ic^rithmi, 
that  of  1  must  be  represented  by  0*0000000,  since  it  is 
really  =  0  :  the  logarithm  of  10  is  1  0000000,  where  it  evi- 
dently  is  exactly  =  1  :  the  logarithm  of  100  is  £'0000000, 
or  £•  And  hence  we  may  conclude,  that  the  logarithms  of 
all  numbers,  which  are  included  between  10  aim  100,  and 

*  The  operations  of  arithmetic  are  performed  with  dedmal 
fractions  in  the  same  manner  nearly,  as  with  whole  numbers  ; 
some  precautions  only  are  necessary,  after  the  opération«  to 
place  the  point  properly,  which  separates  the  whole  numbers 
from  the  decimals.  On  this  subject,  we  may  consult  almost  any 
of  the  treatises  on  arithmetic.  In  the  multiplication  of  these 
fractions,  when  the  multiplicand  and  multiplier  contain  a  great 
number  of  decimals,  the  operation  would  become  too  long,  and 
would  give  the  result  much  more  exact  than  is  for  the  most 
part  necessary  ;  but  it  may  be  simplified  by  a  method,  which  is 
not  to  be  found  in  many  authors,  and  which  is  pointed  out  by 
M.  Marie  in  his  edition  of  the  mathematical  lessons  of  M.  de  la 
Caille,  where  he  likewise  explains  a  similar  metliod  for  the 
division  of  decimals.     F.  T. 

The  method  alluded  to  in  this  note  is  clearly  explained  in 
Bonnycastlc's  Arithmetic. 


78  BLKMIkNTii  SKCT.  1. 

OGStcqucfitly  oumpoHCcl  of  two  (i^^re^,  are  oonipreliended 
beiwivii  1  aiul  !^,  aiui  tiicri*forc  muHt  \ye  expreraed  by  I  plus 
a  déclinai  IVactioiiy  as  loff.  50  b  I-(>ÖH97(X);  il»  value  tliere- 

Cmtü  u  uiiilv,  pluj  r\  r  t5o  T  »V*  .  -r  , -•  -r  -r  i  t-%«rc  ' 
and  it  will  Ik*  alsa  caAily  fierceived,  that  tlu*  Idj^aniliiiift  of 
number»,  between  100  and  1000,  are  expressed  by  the  intep.T 
8  with  a  dectiaul  fraction  :  tliose  of  nuinlHrrs  l)ctwecii  1000 
and  10k>00,  by  J  phi»  a  deciuml  fraction  :  those  of  number« 
balween  lOOtK)  and  100000,  liy  4  intirrt-rs  ft/tis  a  decinial 
frKtion«  and  to  on.  Thus  tHe  h^.  HOO,  tor  example,  is 
f-9(»U900  ;  that  of  2290  i»  «S  ;iô9H:|jô,  kc. 

£48.  On  the  other  hand,  tlie  kigarithin»  of  numliers  which 
are  less  than  10,  or  expressed  by  a  single  figure,  do  not  con* 
tain  an  integer,  and  tor  this  reason  we  tind  0  betöre  the 
point  :  so  that  we  have  two  parts  to  consider  in  a  logarithm. 
First,  that  which  precedes  the  point,  or  the  integral  part  ; 
and  the  other,  the  decimal  fractions  that  are  to  be  added  to 
the  former.  The  integral  part  of  a  logarithm,  which  is 
unially  called  the  characUrlstic,  is  easily  determined  from 
what  we  liave  said  in  the  tweceding  article.  Thus,  it  is 
0,  for  all  tlie  numbers  whicn  have  but  one-figure;  it  »  1, 
fer  those  which  have  two;  it  is  S,  for  tlioi«  wtiich  have 
threes  and,  in  general,  it  is  always  one  (ess  than  the  number 
of  figures.  Iftheretbre  the  logarithm  of  1766  be  rrquirai, 
we  already  know  that  the  tirst  [lart,  or  that  of  the  integers, 
is  Necessarily  «S. 

SI9*  So  reciprocally,  we  know  at  the  first  sight  of  the 
integer  part  of  a  logarithm,  how  many  tigures  comjxn^e  the 
ouinber  answering  to  that  kigaritlim  ;  since  tlie  nunil)er  of 
those  tigures  always  exceed  the  intigcr  |uirt  of  the  K>garuhm 
by  unity.  Supuo^e,  tor  example,  tiK*  nuuilicr  aiLswiiin^  to 
the  logarithm  u'4T7121J  were  nquired,  ue  kiuiw  ia^nie- 
ctiately  tiuit  tiiat  number  must  have  M.*%'en  tigures,  and  U* 
mater  than  1 000000.  And  in  fait  thU  iiuinUT  i»  :KKX)iHK)  ; 
for  log.  .«3000000  =  /<vr-  ^  +  loff.  1000000.  Now  itiff.  8  = 
0-4771^18,  and  loff.  lOiXKMK)  =z  6,  and  tlie  sum  of  th(»>^'  t;ro 
IfllCarithms  in  frillV2\fl. 

250.  The  princi|;al  aiii  aidera  lion  thcrtlon*  uiili  n-^i^vt 
to  each  iogarithm  i»,  the  diviinal  fraiuion  ulucii  fullou»  the 
point,  and  e\ en  tluii,  h  hon  omx*  known,  üer\e>  tor  M.viTal 
OUmbeni.  In  order  to  pio\e  thiü,  kl  us  coitsidiT  the  U';;.i- 
rithin  of  tlie  uuiiiIkt  Ml'i  ;  it»  tir>t  |»art  i^  undoubtolU  ^  ; 
with  rvHp^vt  t«i  tilt*  uihtr«  or  the  dit-iiiml  frartioii,  let  usât 
present  repri*M:nt  it  In  tin*  Utter  j  ;  «e  jJmil  ha\e  io^.  H6.> 
=  2-f-<^i   thin  muitjphing  contintully  by    10,  wv  shall 


CHAP.   XXIII.  OF    ALGEBRA.  73 

have  log.  SSSOczSi-x;  log.  S6S00  -  é  ^  x  ;  log.  S65000 
=s  5  +  Xy  and  so  on. 

But  we  can  also  go  back,  and  continually  divide  by  10  ; 
which  will  give  us  log.  36*5  =  1  +  x ;  log.  S'65  =  0  +  jr; 
log.  0-365  =  -l  +x;  log.  00366  =- 2  +^;  log,  0-00366 
=  —  3  -|-  a?,  and  so  on. 

-  ftSl.  All  those  numbers  then  which  arise  from  the  figures 
366,  whether  preceded,  or  followed,  by  ciphers,  have  always 
the  same  decimal  fraction  for  the  second  part  of  the  loga» 
rithm  :  and  the  whole  difference  lies  in  the  integer  before 
the  point,  which,  as  we  have  seen,  may  become  negative; 
namely,  when  tlie  number  proposed  is  less  than  1.  Now,  as 
ordinary  calculators  find  a  difficulty  in  managing  negative 
numbers,  it  is  usual,  in  those  cases,  to  increase  the  integers 
of  the  logarithm  by  10,  that  is,  to  write  10  instead  of  0 
before  the  ix)int  ;  so  that  instead  of  — 1  we  have  9;  instead 
of  —2  we  have  8;  instead  of  — 3  we  have  7,  &c.  ;  but  then 
we  must  remember,  that  the  characteristic  has  been  taken 
ten  units  too  great,  and  by  no  means  suppose  that  the  num- 
ber consists  of  10,  9,  or  8  figures«  It  is  Ukewise  easy  to 
conceive,  that,  if  in  the  case  we  speak  of,  this  characteristic  be 
less  than  10,  we  must  write  the  figures  of  the  number  after 
a  point,  to  shew  that  they  are  decunals  :  for  example,  if  the 
characteristic  be  9»  we  must  begin  at  the  first  place  after  a 
point  ;  if  it  be  8,  we  must  also  place  a  cipher  in  the  first 
row,  and  not  begin  to  write  the  figures  till  tne  second  :  thus 
9-6622929  would  be  the  logarithm  of  0*366,  and  8*6622989 
the  log.  of  0*0366.  But  tliis  manner  of  writing  logarithms 
is  principally  employed  in  Tables  of  sines. 

262.  in  the  common  Tables,  the  decimals  of  logarithms 
are  usually  carried  to  seven  places  of  figures,  the  last  of 
which  consequently  represents  the  «ö^a'ooeo  P»**^  ^^  ^c 
are  sure  that  they  are  never  erroneous  by  the  whole  of  this 
part,  and  that  therefore  the  error  cannot  be  of  any  imjxnt- 
ance.  There  are,  however,  calculations  in  which  we  require 
still  greater  exactness  ;  and  then  we  employ  the  large  Tables 
of  Vlacq,  where  the  logarithms  are  calculated  to  ten  decimal 
places  *. 

*  The  most  valuable  set  of  tables  we  are  acquainted  with  are 
those  published  by  Dr.  Hutton,  late  Professor  of  Mathematics 
at  the  Royal  Military  Academy,  Woolwich,  under  the  title  of, 
"  Mathematical  Tables  ;  containing  common,  hyperbolic,  and 
logistic  logarithms.  Also  sines,  laiigents,  Ac.  to  which  is  pre- 
fixed a  large  and  original  history  of  the  discoveries  and  writings 
relating  to  those  subjects." 


74  tLBMEirrs  tscr.  i. 

tits.  At  the  firat  jmrtf  or  charactcrisüc  of  a  lonrithiiH  it 
subject  to  no  diflicult y,  it  is  seldom  expresiicd  in  tne  Tabio«  ; 
the  secomi  part  only  is  written,  or  tlie  wer^  figures  of  the 
dedmal  fraction,  i'here  is  a  set  of  Knglish  Tablet  in  which 
we  find  the  lof^arithms  of  all  numbers  fnitn  1  to  100000, 
and  even  those  of  p^reater  numbers  ;  for  small  additional 
Tables  shew  what  is  to  be  added  to  the  logarithmt,  io  pro- 
portion lo  the  fifi^res,  which  the  propotccl  numbert  baTe 
more  than  those  in  the  Tables.  We  eamlv  find,  for  ex* 
anple,  the  logarithm  of  379456,  by  means  or  that  of  37945 
ana  the  small  Tables  of  which  we  speak  *. 

5B54.  From  what  has  been  said,  it  will  eanly  be  perccivedi 
how  wc  are  to  obtain  from  the  Tables  the  numner  conxs 
tponding  to  any  logarithm  which  may  cxrcur.  Thus,  in  mul- 
tiplying the  numl)er8  343  and  8401  ;  since  we  must  add 

*Tlie  English  Tables  spoken  of  in  the  text  are  those  which  were 
published  by  Sherwin  in  the  beginning  of  the  last  century»  and 
Lave  been  several  times  reprinted  ;  they  are  likewise  to  be  found 
m  the  tables  of  Gardener»  which  are  commonly  made  use  of  by 
ai^fronomcrs,  and  which  have  been  reprinted  at  Avignon.  With 
respect  to  these  Tables  it  is  proper  to  leroark»  that  as  they  do  not 
carry  logarithms  farther  than  seven  places,  independently  of  the 
characteristic,  we  cannot  use  them  with  perfect  exactness  except 
on  numbers  that  do  not  exceed  six  digits  ;  but  when  we  employ 
the  great  Tables  of  Vlacq,  which  carry  the  logarithms  as  far  as 
ten  aecinud  places,  we  may,  by  taking  the  proportional  parts, 
work,  without  error,  upon  numbers  that  have  as  many  as  nine 
digits.  The  reason  or  what  we  have  said,  and  the  method  of 
enphnring  these  Tables  in  operations  upon  still  greater  numbers, 
b  weU  explained  in  Sauudersoo's  **  Elemenu  of  Algebra,*' 
Book  IX.  Psrt  II. 

It  is  farther  to  be  observed,  that  these  Tables  only  give  the 
logarithms  answering  to  given  numbers,  so  that  when  we  wish 
le  get  the  numbers  answering  to  given  logarithms,  it  is  seldom 
that  we  find  in  the  Table«  the  precise  logarithms  tliat  are  given, 
and  we  are  for  the  most  part  under  the  necessity  of  stacking  for 
these  numbers  in  an  imlircct  wav,  by  the  method  of  interpola- 
tion. In  order  to  »upply  this  detect,  another  set  of  Tables  was 
Ï»ublished  at  London  in  174t2,  under  the  title  of  **  The  Anti- 
ogarithmic  Canon,  &r.  by  James  Dodson."  He  has  arranged 
the  decimals  of  logariihro«  from  0,0001  to  1,0000,  and  ofipositc 
lo  them,  in  order,  the  corre»|Mindin^  numbers  carried  as  far  as 
eleven  places,  lie  lus  likewise  given  the  proportional  parts 
necessarv  lur  dctcTttiiiiin^'  ilio  luiiiibcT»,  which  answer  to  tlie 
tnlermeJiaIr  l(»^arit!iin»  that  .irv  not  to  be  fuund  in  tlur 
TabK-.     I-   T 


QtLAP,  XXIII.  OF  ALGEBRA.  75 

together  the  logarithms  of  those  numbers,  the  calculatioii 
wul  be  as  follows  : 


log.    &4&=  2-5352941  )    , ,   , 
fcg-.  2401  =  8-3803922  |^^^ 


6*9156863  thâr  sum 
leg.  823540  =  5*9156847  nearest  tabular  log. 

16  difference, 
which  in  the  Table  of  Differences  answers  to  S  ;  this  t)iere- 
fore  being  used  instead  oPthe  cipher,  gives  823543  for  the 
product  sought  :  for  the  sum  is  the  logarithm  of  the  product 
required  ;  and  its  characteristic  5  shews  that  the  product  is 
composed  of  6  figures  ;  which  are  found  as  above. 

255.  But  it  is  in  the  extraction  of  roots  that  logarithms 
are  of  the  greatest  service  ;  we  shall  tlierefore  give  an  ex^ 
ample  of  the  maimer  in  which  they  are  used  in  calculations 
of  this  kind.  Suppose,  for  example,  it  were  required  to 
extract  the  square  root  of  10.  Here  we  have  only  to  divide 
the  logarithm  of  10,  which  is  1*0000000  by  2;  and  the 
quotient  0*5000000  is  the  logarithm  of  the  root  required. 
Now,  the  number  in  the  Tables  which  answers  to  that 
logarithm  is  3*16228,  the  square  of  which  is  very  nearly 
equal  to  10,  being  only  one  hundred  thousandth  part  too 
great*. 

*  In  the  same  manner,  we  may  extract  any  other  root,  by 
dividing  the  log.  of  the  number  by  the  denominator  of  the  index 
of  the  root  to  be  extracted  ;  that  is,  to  extract  the  cube  root, 
divide  the  log.  by  8,  the  fourth  root  by  4,  and  so  on  for  any 
other  extraction.  For  example,  if  the  5th  root  of  2  were  re- 
quired, the  log.  of  2f  is  0*8010300  :  therefore 

5)0-8010300 

0*0602060  is  the  log.  of  the  root,  which 
by  the  Tables  is  found  to  correspond  to  1*1497;  and  hence  we 
have  ^  =s  1*1497.  When  the  index,  or  characteristic  of  the 
los.  is  negative,  and  not  divisible  by  the  denominator  of  the 
index  of  the  root  to  be  extracted  5  then  as  many  units  must  be 
borrowed  as  will  make  it  exactly  divisible,  carrying  those  units 
to  the  next  figure,  as  in  common  division. 


76  BIJtM£]IT!«  UCT.  11* 


SIXTIOX  II. 


Of'  the  di/frreni  Mcuuxh  of  ralculntinff  Omipouiiil 

Vtmntttics. 


CHAP.  I. 

Of  the  Addition  o/*(!(Hnpounil  Quantifies. 

tü6.  When  two  or  more  expressions,  consisting  of  several 
terms,  are  to  be  added  together,  the  operation  is  frequently 
vepreseuted  nierelv  by  signs,  placing  each  expression  be- 
tween two  pan^ntnesesy  and  connecting  it  with  the  rest  bv 
means  o(*  the  sign  -f  •  Thus,  for  example,  if  it  be  requimi, 
to  add  the  expn*N>ions  a  -f  ft  -|-  c  and  d-^-c  -^Jl  we  repre- 
wot  the  sum  by 

(a  +  A  +  r)  +  (d  +  r+/). 

S57.  It  is  e%'ident  that  this  is  not  to  perform  addition, 
but  mily  to  repre*ent  it.  We  see,  however,  at  the  same 
time,  that  in  order  to  perform  it  actually,  we  have  only  to 
leave  out  the  parentheses;  for  as  the  numl)er  d  -{  €  -f yis 
to  be  added  to  u  -f  ft  -^  O  ^®  know  that  tliis  is  done  by 
joining  to  it  6rst  4  dE,  then  -r  ^i  And  then  -^J*;  which  therefore 
givi*s  liK'  sum  a  +  ft-f-r-f-d-r^  +yi  ^^  ^*  same  mi*tluid 
'  IS  to  l)e  olMiTved,  if  any  of  tlie  terms  are  affected  by  the 
sign  —  ;  as  they  must  be  connected  in  the  same  way,  by 
means  of  their  proper  sign. 

5t58.  To  make  this  more  evident,  we  shall  consider  an 
example  in  pure  numliers,  proposing  to  add  the  expression 
15  —  6  to  Ix  —  H.  Here,  if  we  l)egin  liy  adding  15,  we 
shall  have  12  -  8  -f  15;  hut  this  U  adding  too  much«  stncn* 
we  had  only  to  add  15  —  6,  and  it  is  evidi*nt  that  6  is  the 
nunilier  which  we  ha%e  added  too  much  ;  let  us  therefore 
take  tliiji  6  away  by  writing  it  with  the  negative  sign,  and 
we  slmll  have  tin*  true  nuiii« 

lî>-.S.f.  15  -  6; 

which   altews  that   tin*  mi:i*>  arc  found  l»v   ^%nting  all  tin- 
tcnJl^,  racll  with  It-  |l«i{i-l   -I:.!!. 


CHAP.  I.  OF  ALGEBRA.  T7 

^9.  If  it  were  required  tlierefore  to  add  tlie  expression 
d  —  e  — ^y  to  a  —  Ä  +  c,  we  should  express  the  sum  thus, 

a  ^  b^c-^-d  —  e  — y; 
remarking,  however,  that  it  is  of  no  consequence  in  what 
order  we  write  these  terms  ;  for  their  places  may  be  changed 
at  pleasure,  provided  their  signs  be  preserved  ;  so  that  mis 
sum  might  have  l)een  written  thus, 

c  —  tf  "t-,a  — ^y+  d  —  b. 
S60.  It  is  evident,  therefore,  that  addition  is  attended 
with  no  difficulty,  whatever  be  the  form  of  the  terms  to  be 
added  :  thus,  if  it  were  necessary  to  add  together  the  ex- 
pressions 2a^  +  6^b  —  4  log,  c  and  Si/ a  —  7c,  we  should 
write  them 

«ûr»  +  e-v/ft  -  4  fcg-.  c  4- 54/a  -  7c, 
either  in  this  or  in  any  other  order  of  the  terms  ;  for  if  the 
âgns  are  not  changed,  the  sum  will  always  be  the  same. 

261.  But  it  frequently  happens  that  the  sums  represented 
in  this  manixer  may  be  considerably  abridged,  as  is  the  case 
when  two  or  more  terms  destroy  each  other  ;  for  example,  if 
we  find  in  the  same  sum  the  terms  -f*  ^  —  dr,  or  3a— 4a-|-A: 
or  when  two  or  more  terms  may  be  reduced  to  one.  See. 
Thus,  in  the  following  examples  : 

Sa  +  2a  =  5a,  70  —  36  =  +  46 

-6c  +  10c  =  +4c;  4d-2i  =  2J 

5a  —  8a  =  -  Sa,  -76  +  6  =  -  66 

-Sc  -  4c  =  -  7c,  -3d  -  6d  =  -  8d 

2a-5a  +  a=:  —  2a,  -86- 5* +  26  =  — 66. 
Whenever  two  or  more  terms,  therefore,  are  entirely  the 
same  with  regard  to  letters,  their  sum  may  be  abridged; 
but  those  cases  must  not  be  confounded  with  such  as  these, 
Art'  +  Sa,  or  26*  —  6*,  which  admit  of  no  abridgment. 

262.  Let  us  consider  now  some  other  examples  of  re* 
duction,  as  the  following,  which  will  lead  us  immediately  to 
an  important  truth.  Suppose  it  were  required  to  add  to- 
gether the  expressions  a  -f-  6  and  a  —  6  ;  our  rule  gives 
a  +  6  -f  a  —  6  ;  now  a  -^  a=i  2a,  and  6  —  6=0;  the  sum 
therefore  is  2a  :  consequently,  if  we  add  together  the  sum  of 
two  numbers  (a  +  6)  and  their  difference  (a  —  6),  we  obtain 
the  double  of  the  greater  of  those  two  numbers. 

This  will  be  better  understood  perhaps  from  the  following 
examples  : 

Sa-26-c  a'-2a'6+2a6* 

56-6c+a  -  a«6+2a6«-6» 


4a+36-7c  aJ-3a'6+4a6«— 6» 


TB  ELKMCKT9  tSCT.ll. 


7a*-.   6+l(V  ^'2a'b+^iab+W 


CHAP.  IL 

Cjfthe  Subtraction  ^Compound  Quantities. 

963.  If  we  wish  merely  to  n'prenent  subtraction,  we  en- 
dote  each  expression  within  two  jiarenthcses,  joining,  by  the 
aign  — f  the  expression  which  is  to  be  subtracted,  to  that 
from  whidi  we  nave  to  subtract  it 

When  we  subtract,  for  example,  the  expresûoo  d  —  e 
4-y*frocn  the  expression  a  —  ft  +  r,  we  write  the  remainder 
thiis: 

and  this  method  of  representing  it  suircientljr  shews  which 
of  the  two  exoressions  ts  to  be  subtracted  from  the  other. 

t64.  But  it*  we  wish  to  perform  the  actual  subtraction,  we 
must  observe,  6rst,  that  when  we  subtract  a  positive  quantity 
-f  ft  from  another  quantity  a^  we  obtain  a^o:  and  secondly, 
when  we  subtract  a  negative  quantity  *  ft  from  a,  we  obcam 
a  4-  ft  ;  because  to  free  a  person  from  a  debt  is  the  same  as 
to  give  him  something. 

SS5.  Suppose  now  it  were  required  to  subtract  the  ex- 
pression ft  —  d  from  a  —  c.  We  6rst  take  away  ft,  which 
gives  a  -^  c-^b:  but  this  is  taking  away  too  much  by  the 
miantity  d,  nnoe  we  had  to  subtract  only  ft  —  </;  we  must 
tkarefore  resUxe  the  value  of  </,  and  then  shall  have 

a  —  c  —  ft  4"  ^; 
wbenoe  it  is  evident  that  the  terms  of  the  expression  to  be 
subtracted  must  change  their  signs,  and  then  be  jomed,  with 
those  contrary  si^ns,  to  the  terms  of  the  other  expression. 

5M6L  Subtraction  is  therefore  easily  performed  by  this 
rule,  nnce  we  have  only  to  write  the  expression  from  which 
we  are  to  subtract,  jfoimng  the  other  to  it  without  any  change 
beside  that  of  the  signs.  Thus,  in  the  first  example,  whm* 
it  was  required  to  subtract  the  expression  d  —  e  +J'from 
«  —  ft  +  <"»  ''^t  obtain  a  —  ft  +  r  —  d  +  r  — yi 

An  example  in  numbers  will  render  this  still  more  clear  ; 


GHAT.  III.  OF  AtGSBEA«  79 

for  if  we  subtract  6  —  2  +  ^  ^^^^m  9  —  S  +  2»  we  evidently 
obtain 

9-.3  +  2«.6  +  2-  4  =  0; 
for  9-3  +  2  =  8;  also,  6-2  +  4  =  8;  and  8  -  8  s  0. 

267«  Subtraction  being  therefore  subject  to  no  difficulty, 
vre  have  only  to  remark,  that  if  there  are  found  in  the  re» 
mainder  two  or  more  terms,  which  are  entirely  similar  with 
regard  to  the  letters,  that  remainder  may  lie  reduced  to 
an  abridged  form,  by  the  same  rules  whidi  we  have  given 
in  addition* 

268.  Suppose  we  have  to  subtract  a  ^  b  from  a  +  i; 
that  is,  to  take  the  difference  of  two  numbers  from  their 
sum  :  we  shall  then  have  (a  +-  6)  —  (a  —  Ä)  ;  but  a  —  a 
=  0,  and  i  -|-  i  =  26  ;  the  remainder  sou&;ht  is  therefore 
2£  ;  that  is  to  say,  the  double  oi  the  less  of  the  two 
quantities. 

269.  The  following  examples  will  supply  the  place  of 
further  illustrations  : 


fl'+aô+A* 
-««+a6+Ä« 


2fl«. 


3a— 4Ä+5c 


9a— 66+c. 


a5  +  2fl2*+3fli«+ô' 
fl5— 3a«Â+3flA«-ô^ 


6lI«6+2Ä^ 


5^b. 


CHAP.  III. 

Of  the  Mulüplication  ^Compound  Quantities. 

270.  When  it  is  only  required  to  represent  multiplication, 
we  put  each  of  the  expressions,  that  are  to  be  muIdpUed 
together,  within  two  parentheses,  and  join  them  to  eadi 
other,  sometimes  without  any  âgn,'  and  sometimes  pladng 
the  sign  x  between  them.  Thus,  for  example,  to  represent 
the  product  of  the  two  expressions  a  --h  ■\-  c  and  d  —  e  +yî 
we  write 

(a-6+-c)x(J-f+/) 
or  barely,  (a  —  i  +-  c)     (d  —  e  +y*) 

which  method  of  expressing  products  is  much  used,  becattse 
it  immediately  exhibits  the  iactors  of  which  they  are  com- 
posed. 

271.  But  in  order  to  shew  how  multipUcation  is  actually 
performed»  we  may  remark,  in  the  first  place,  that  to  mul- 
tiply, for  example,  a  quantity,  such  as  a^-^h  '^t^  by  2, 


80  KLKMKNTb  SBC-T.  II. 

each  tcmi  of  it  b  neparatrly  multiplied  h\  that  number;  to 
that  the  pnxiuit  in 

1^1  —  ilh  \   iL. 
And  the  same  thiiiji^  take»*  pl'ue  wilh  ri»;;i^r(l  to  nil  other 
mimbpm  ;  i\>r  if  d  were  the  iniitiher  hv  which  it  was  requireil 
to  multiply  the  saiiie  expres^i<)l1,  we  should  obtain 

a  J  —  ^/  +  aL 
2752.  In  the  last  artitle,  wt-  have  suppoM?d  r/  to  be  a 
positive  numlier  ;  but  if  the  multiplier  wi-re  a  negative  num- 
ber, US  —  €y  the  rule  formerly  pt%eii  nni>t  Ik»  applied  ;  nanH*ly, 
that  unlike  Kigiis  multiplietl  ti)getlier  produce  —,  and  like 
agns  ^ .     l*hu»  we  ithould  have 

—or  ^  be  "  ve, 
S7d.  Now,  in  order  to  shew  how  a  quantity,  a,  is  to  be 
multiplied  by  a  compound  quantity,  J  -  r  ;  let  us  first  con- 
sider an  example  in  numbcns  siip|K)!»in«(  that  a  istobemtiU 
tipBed  by  7  —  d.  Here  it  is  evident,  that  we  are  required 
to  take  the  quadruple  of  a  :  for  if  we  first  take  a  seren 
tinie%  it  will  tiien  ue  necessary  to  subtract  3a  from  that 
product 

lo  general,  therefore,  if  it  be  required  to  multiply  a  by 
d  —  e,  we  multiply  the  qtiantity  a  fir»t  by  d,  and  then  by  r, 
and  subtract  liiis  last  product  from  the  fin»t  :  wheooe  results 
\        i/a— >rA. 

If  we  now  suppose  a  =:  a  —  6,  and  that  this  is  the  quantity 
to  be  multiplied  by  J  —  r  ;  we  sliall  have 

dA  ^  ad  —  bd 
eh  ^  tie  —  be 


whence  da  —  «'Ablief  —  M—  ur+ir  is  the  product  nv 
quinxt. 

87i.  Since  therefore  we  know  accurately  the  product 
(m^b)x  (d  ^  r),  we  shall  now  exhibit  the  same  (example  of 
mttlti|>lieation  under  the  following  form  : 

a  —  b 


ad  —  bd  —  ^v  4  ''♦'• 
Whk'h  shews,  tliat  we  muht  multiply  each  term  of  the  upper 
expres«hion  by  each  tenn  of  the  lower,  and  that,  with  n*gard 
to  the  signs,  we  roii»t  strictly  obM*r%'e  tlie  rule  before  given  ; 
a  rule  which  this  cirruinManco  would  com|iletely  confirm,  if 
it  admittixl  of  the  leaj»t  doubt« 

S7«^  It  will  be  easy,  therL*ft»n.s  acconling  to  this  nn^thod, 
to  calculate  the  following  exam|>le,  wliich  is,  to  multiply 
a^^bby  a  '^b; 


CSAiy  UT.  OP  ALOXIBA.  81 

a— ô 


■  ^immmmmmmam 

Product      a*-**. 

876.  Now,  we  may  substitute  tot  a  and  b  any  numbers 
whatever;  so  that  the  above  example  will  furnish  the  fol- 
lowing theorem  ;  viz.  The  sum  of  two  numbers,  multiplied 
by  their  difference,  is  equal  to  the  difierenoe  of  the  squares 
or  those  numbers  :  which  theorem  may  be  expressed  thus  : 

(a  +  6)x(a-i)=a«- 6V 

And  from  thia  another  theorem  may  be  derived  ;  namdy, 
The  diflêrenoe  of  two  square  numbm  is  always  a  product, 
and  divisible  both  by  the  sum  and  by  the  différence  of  the 
roots  of  those  two  squares  ;  ^consequently,  the  difference  of 
two  squares  can  never  be  a  prime  number*,  ) 
S77.  Let  us^now  calculate  some  other  examples  : 

2a-8  4^*&i+9 

a+2  %a  +8 


9^-9a  &r»-12a*+18a 

4a-.6  l«a*-18a+27 


»»*+  a-6  8a»+27 


2a  -46  Ä*-a»6» 


*  Thb  theorem  is  general,  ekcept  when  the  difference  of  the 
two  numbers  is  only  1,  and  their  sum  is  a  prime;  then  it  is 
evident  that  the  difference  of  the  two  squares  will  also  be  a 
prime:  thus,  6*-5«=  11, 7* -6«=  13,9«  -  8«  =  17,  Arc. 


G 


nanvn  amat.  ta. 


«■ 


«M-** 


ItTH.  When  we  hare  more  than  two  qnawtitiet  to  muU 
tiplr  tof^ether,  it  will  eanly  be  understood  that^  after  having 
multiplied  two  of  them  tiigether,  we  must  then  multiply 
that  product  by  one  of  time  which  remain^  and  ao  on: 
bat  it  it  indiffeient  what  order  »  obeenred  in  those  muU 

Let  it  be  proposed,  for  example,  to  find  the  ndue,  or 
produdf  of  the  war  (bUowing  factors,  rû;. 

I.  U,  III.  IV. 

(•+*)    (Ä«  +  fl*  +  A*)     (a-*)    (a*-a6  +  Ä^. 


IsL  The  product  of  the  fac- 
tors I.  and  II. 


Sd.  The  product  of  the  fac 
ton  III.  Mid  IV. 

a-  b 


à» -tfb-^-abl' 


OÊAW.  m.  OP  ALOKBBA.  8S 

It  remaii»  now  to  multijdy  the  first  product  I.  II.  by  this 
second  product  III.  IV. 

which  is  the  product  required« 

fndr  Now  let  us  resume  the  same  example,  but  chanjge 
the  order  of  it,  first  multiplying  the  fiustors  I.  and  III.  and 
then  II.  and  IVi  together. 

a+b  i^+ab+b^ 

a— 6  a'— oft-j-A* 

a^+ab  (^-^-a^b-^-ifb* 

^ab^l^  -a^b^a^l^'-abi^ 


a*-tf 


a*-|.a«é«+** 


Then  multipljring  the  two  products  I.  III.  and  IL  IV. 


which  is  the  product  required. 

280.  We  may  oerform  this  calculation  in  a  manner  stUl 
more  concise,  by  nrst  multiplying  the  I**,  factor  by  the  IV*. 
and  then  the  IP.  by  the  I1I< 

a  +6  a  — é 


à'b'^ab* -^^  b"  -(^b^atf-^V 

G    St 


84  ELBMBIITS  SECT.  II« 


It  femams  to  multiply  the  product  I.  IV.  by  that  oTIL 
and  III. 

a'- A» 


the  same  result  as  before* 

881.  It  will  be  proper  to  illustrate  this  example  by  a 
numerical  applicatioo.  For  th»  purpose,  let  us  make  a  =8 
tod  6  =  5t|  we  shall  then  have  a  -f-  ft  =  5,  and  a  —  ft  =  1  ; 
finther,  a*  rr  9»  aA  =  6,  and  ft'  =  4:  therefore  a^  -h  oft  + 
ft*  :=  19,  and  a^  -  oft  -f  ft'  =  7:  so  that  the  product  re- 
quiral  isthatof5xl9xlx7,  which  is  665. 

Now,  o^  =5  7S9«  and  t^  s  64  ;  consequently,  the  product 
required  is  o^  —  t^  =  665,  as  we  have  already  seen. 


CHAP.  IV. 

Of  ihr  Division  ^Compound  Quantities. 

SHS.  A\lien  we  wish  simply  to  represent  division,  we 
make  use  of  the  usual  mark  of  fractions  ;  which  is,  to  write 
the  denominator  under  the  numerator,  separating  tliem  by  a 
line  ;  or  to  enclose  each  quantity  between  parentheses,  planng 
two  |M>ints  between  the  divisor  and  dividend,  and  a  une  be- 
tween them.  Thus,  if  it  were  required,  for  exam|)le,  to 
divide  «i  -f  ft  by  c  4-  cf,  we  should  represent  the  quotient 

thus  ;  — j-^n  according  to  the  former  method  ;  and  llius, 

(a  +  A)  -r  (f  -h  rf) 
aooording  to  the  lattc*r,  where  each  expression  is  read  a  4-  ft 
dkv%ded  by  c  ^  éL 

SBHS.  When  it  is  rec|uired  to  divide  a  compound  quantity 
by  a  simple  one,  we  divide  each  term  separately,  as  in  thic 
following  examples  : 

(6o  -  8ft  +  4«  )  H-  «  =:  3#i  -  1*  -h  «r 

(a*  -  2flft)  -4-  a  nil  -  îêft 

(a'  -  %fb^  8«ft')  -r  a  =  a*  -  leoft  4  Sft* 


CSAP.  IV.  OF  ALGEBRA.  85 

(4a<  -  Wc  -f  Sabc)  -T-52as2a-3iic4-4öc  ' 

C9o«&;  —  12ö6*c  +  15aAc*) -•  8aÄc  =  8a  -  46  +  Sc. 

284.  If  it  should  happen  that  a  term  of  the  dividend  i^ 
not  divisible  by  Üie  divisor,  the  quotient  is  represented  by  a 
fraction,  as  in  the  division  of  a  --|-  ^  ^  ^^  which  gives  1  -f- 

— .   Likewise,  (a'  -  06  +  i«)  -Î-  a»  =  1  -  ~+  ~. 

In  the  same  manner,  if  we  divide  Sa  -f-  6  by  2,  we  ob- 
tmn  ^  -f-  'q'  :  and  here  it  may  be  remarked,  that  we  may 

*  .  b 

write  4^9  instead  of  -3-,  because  4  times  b  is  equal  to  -^  ;  and, 

in  the  same  manner,  -^  is  the  same  as  ^,  and  -^  the  same 

as  yö,  &c. 

285.  But  when  the  divisor  is  itself  a  compound  quantity, 
division  becomes  more  difficult.  This  frequently  occurs 
where  we  least  «expect  it;  and  when  it  cannot  be  performed, 
we  must  content  ourselves  with  representing  the  quotient  by 
a  fraction,  in  the  manner  that  we  have  weady  describedu 
At  present,  we  will  be^n  by  considering  some  cases  in  which 
actual  diviâon  takes  place. 

286.  Suppose,  for  example,  it  were  required  to  divide 
ac  "  be  hy  a  —  b,  the  quotient  must  here  be  such  as,  when 
multiplied  by  the  divisor  a  —  A,  will  -produce  the  dividend 
ac  —  be.  tiow,  it  is  evident,  that  thb  quotient  must  in- 
clude c,  since  without  it  we  could,  not  obtain  ae;  in  order 
therefore  to  try  whether  c  is  the  whole  quotient,  we  have 
only  to  multiply  it  by  the  divisor,  and  see  if  that  mul- 
tiplication  produces  the  whole  dividend,  or  only  a  part  of 
it  In  the  present  case,  if  we  multiply  a  —  ô  by  c,  we 
have  ac  ^be,  which  is  exactly  the  dividend  ;  so  that  c  is 
the  whole  quotient.     It  is  no  less  evident,  that 

(a«  +  aé)4-(a  +  *)  =«; 
(3a»  —  2aÄ)  4-  (8a  -  2A)  =  a; 

(6a'  -  9ab)  -r  (2a  -  36)  =  3a,  8ic. 

287.  We  cannot  fail,  in  this  way,  to  find  a  paît  of  the 
quotient;  if,  therefore,  what  we  have  found,  when  mul- 
tiplied by  the  divisor,  does  not  exhaust  the  dividend,  we 
have  only  to  divide  the  reminder  again  by  the  divisor,  in 
order  to  obtain  a  second  part  of  the  Quotient  ;  and  to  con- 
tinue the  same  method,  until  we  have  found  the  whole. 

Let  us,  as  an  example,  divide  a*  +  Sab  +  26*  by  a  -f  *. 


86  BLBMXIITII  tlCT.  11. 

It  is  evident,  in  the  first  place,  that  the  quotient  will  indiide 
the  ienn  a,  nnce  otherwise  we  should  not  obtain  a\  Now, 
from  the  multiplication  of  the  divisor  a  -f-  6  by  a,  arises 
ttP^abi  which  quantity  bdnir  subtracted  from  the  dividend, 
leaves  the  remainder,  2o6  -{•  xb*  ;  and  this  remainder  must 
also  be  divided  by  a  -f-  6,  where  it  is  evident  that  the  quo- 
tient of  this  division  must  contain  the  term  9b.  Now,  26, 
multiplied  by  a  -|-  ^,  produces  9ab  +  ftb*  ;  consequentlv, 
a-^ibiê  the  quotient  required  ;  whioh  multiplied  by  tne 
divisor  a  -f-  A,  ought  to  produce  the  dividend  if  -{•  Sib  -f- 
U^.    See  the  operation. 

a+b}a^4'3ab+ftb\a'^ftb 
a«-|-  ab 


2aÄ+2Ä» 
0. 


888.  This  operation  will  be  considerably  facilitated  by 
choosing  one  of  the  terms  of  the  divisor,  which  contains  the 
Ingbest  power,  to  be  written  first,  and  then,  in  arrai^piw  tha 
tanns  or  the  dividend,  begin  with  the  hi^^hest  powers  of  thai 
first  term  of  the  divisor,  continuing  it  aocoiding  to  the 
powers  of  that  letter.  This  term  in  the  prsoeding  example 
was  a.  The  fioUowing  examples  will  render  tht  proem 
more  perspicuous. 

a- A)o>-  3a*A+8oA*  -  b^a'^ftab+V 
a*-  a*A 


2a*A+SaA* 


0. 


a^b)a'^b\a^h 


-aA-A* 
-aA-A* 


0. 


CBAf.  IV.  or  ALOSMA.  87 


18aft~8i* 
18aft-86< 

0. 
cf+a*b 


.a*b+  4» 


irt^ 


0. 


4a*A-SaA* 


J8oft»-4» 
0. 


-«a»*+5ö«A*-4«i» 


•— a^^VOTH^^^M  ■■Mi»'»* 

0. 


BummTn  iBot« 


0. 


0. 


O. 


CHAP.  V. 

Of  the  Resolution  0/ Fraction»  mio  Infinite 

ffi9.  When  the  dividend  is  not  divisible  by  the 

*  The  Theory  of  Serie»  w  one  of  the  roost  important  in  all  thi* 
matheniatic»«     The  series  considered  in  this  chapter  were  dis- 


GftAe  T.  OF  ALGEBRA.  99 

the  (juotieiit  is  expreaaed,  as  we  have  already  observed,  by  a 
fraction  :  thus,  if  we  have  to  divide  1  by  1  —  a,  we  obtain 

the  fraction .    This,  however,  does  not  prevent  us  from 

attempting  the  division  according  to  the  rules  that  have  been 
given,  nor  from  pontinwng  it  as  far  as  we  please  ;  and  we 
shall  not  (aM  thus  to  find  the  true  quotient,  though  under 
different  forms. 

290.  To  prove  this,  let  us  actually  divide  the  dividend  I 
b^  the  divisor  1  —  a,  thus  : 

1— a 


remainder  a 

or,  \-^a)i     ♦    (l+a+  ■; 

1-a 


a 
a—a* 

remainder  a^ 

To  find  a  greater  number  of  forms,  we  have  only  to  con- 
tinue dividing  the  remainder  a*  by  1  —  a  ; 


ft* 


covered  by  Mercator,  about  the  middle  of  the  last  century  ;  and 
soon  after,  Newton  discovered  those  which  derived  from  the  ex- 
traction of  roots,  and  which  are  treated  of  in  Chapter  XII.  of  this 
section.  This  theory  has  gradually  received  improvements  from 
several  other  distinguished  mathematicians.  The  works  of  James 
Bernoulli,  and  the  second  part  of  the  **  Differential  Calculus*' 
of  Euler,  are  the  books  in  which  the  fuHest  information  is  to  be 
obtained  on  these  subjects.  There  is  likewise  in  the  Memoirs 
Qf  Berlin  for  1768,  a  new  method  by  M,  de  la  Grange  for  re- 
solving, by  means  of  infinite  scries,  all  literal  equations  of  any 
dimensions  whatever.     F.  T. 


EUUUEMTS  SMT.  H. 


thcii,i-«K    »(«j  +  j^ 

and  afpùo»  I  — «)•*      •  (a*  +  — 


S91.  Thifl  shews  thai  the  fraction  ; may  be  exhibited 

1  —a      ^ 

under  all  the  following  forms: 

I.  I  +  r-^.  II.  I  +  a  +  7^  ; 

III.  I  +a  -I-  a*  + .     IV.  I +a-^a*-f a' -4.  . ; 

I— a  1— a 

V.  l  +  a  +  a«4-a*  +  a*  +  ; , fcc. 

1  —a 

Now,  by  considering  the  first  of  these  cxpwssionsj  which 
is  1  +  ' — ,  and  remembering  that  1  is  the  same  as > 


we  have 


g    _  i— g        g         I— g  +  g         I 


I— g      1— g      I— g  I— g         I— g 

If  -  fodow  Ae  «»e^pr««..  whh  «g«d  to  th.  «ood 

fipwssion,  1  4-  g  4-  7^^  ^^uu  is  to  say,  if  we  reduce  the 

integral  part  I  4-  g  to  the  same  deauminator,  1  —  g,  we 

1  —g*  g* 

shall  have  ; ,  to  which  if  we  add  4- :•  we  shall  have 

I  — g  I— g' 

I— g»+g*    ,     .  I 

,  ,  that  IS  to  say,  - — . 

I— g  •''  I— g 

In  the  third  exprcsnoo,  I  -h  g  -f  g^  -►  - — -,  the  integers 

rsdnoed  to  the  dmominator  I  -  m  make  — ^^  ;  and  if  we 

I— a 

g*  1 

add  to  that  tht  firadkm ,  we  have  . — -,  as  befiane  ;    . 

I  -  g  1  — g^ 

theielbfe  all  these  exprcmions  are  equal  in  value  to  ....^, 

the  propuicd  fraction. 


CHAP.  ▼.  OF   AL6XBBA.  01 

â9S.  This  bemg  the  case,  we  may  continue  the  series  as 
far  as  we  please,  without  being  under  the  necessity  of  peir- 
fbrmiog  any  more  calculations  ;  and  thus  we  shall  nave 


=:  1  -h  a  -♦-  fl*  +  a'  -+-  o*  -+-  a*  -^-  a^  -♦-  a^ 


Ö« 


1— a  1— a' 

or  we  might  continue  ihis  farther,  and  still  go  on  without 
end;  for  which  reason  it  may  be  said  that  llie  proposed 
fraction  has  been  resolved  into  an  infinite  series,  which  is; 
1  +a+a«  +  tfS  -f  a*  +  a*  4-  a«  +  fl7  4.  a^ -^-ö»  +a'°-hu*'+ö",  &c. 
to  infinity  :  and  there  are  sufficient  grounds  to  maintain, 
that  the  value  of  this  infinite  series  is  the  same  as  that  of  the 

fraction . 

1  —a 

293.  What  we  have  said  may  at  first  appear  strange; 
but  the  consideration  of  some  particular  cases  will  make  it 
easily  understood.  Let  us  suppose,  in  the  first  place^  a=l  ^ 
our  series  will  become  l-|-l  +  l  +  l  +  l-|-l  +  l»8rc; 

and  the  fraction ,  to  which  it  must  be  equal,  becomes  ^ 

Now,  we  have  before  remarked,  that  ^  is  a  number  infinitely 
great;  which  is  therefore  here  confirmed  in  a  satisfiKtOiy 
manner.     See  Art  83  and  84. 

Again,  if  we  suppose  a  =  S,  our  series  becomes  \  -^it^ 
4-}~8-}-16-}~3S-|-  64,  &c.  to  infinity,  and  its  value  must 

be  the  same  as  - — 5,  that  is  to  say  —  =  —  1  ;  which  at  first 

«ght  will  appear  absurd«     But  it  must  be  remarked,  that  if 

we  wbh  to  stop  at  any  term  of  llie  above  series,  we  cannot  do 

so  without  annexing  to  it  the  fraction  which  remains.  Suppoié^ 

for  example,  we  were  to  stop  at  64,  afler  having  wntten 

1  +  3  +  4  4-  8  +  16  +  32  -f  64,  we  must  add  the  fhiction 

128        128 

= — ^,  or  — =•,  or  —128;  we  shall  therefore  have  127—128^ 

.that  is  in  fact  —1. 

Were  we  to  continue  the  series  without  intermission,  the 
fraction  would  be  no  longer  considered  ;  but,  in  that  case, 
the  series  would  still  go  on. 

294.  These  are  the  considerations  which  are  necessary, 
when  we  assume  for  a  numbers  greater  than  unity  ;  but  if 
we  suppose  a  less  than  1,  the  wnole  becomes  mQre  intel- 
ligible :    for  example,  let  a  ss  4  ;  and  we  shall  then  have 

111 
ij =  = — ;  =  ~  =5  2,  which  will  be  equal  to  the  fbllowing 

series  1  +  ^  +  ^  4-  4.  +  ^  4-  /^  4-  ^'^  +TTT>  &c.  to  in. 


ioîly.  Now»  if  we  take  only  two  terms  of  this  acriet,  we 
flhall  have  1  +  «>  ^^  i^  wants  [  of  being  equal  to  r-—  =  2. 

If  we  take  three  terms,  it  wants  i;  for  the  sum  is  1|.     If 

we  take  four  terms,  we  have  1  ^,  and  the  deficiency  is  only 

^  Therefore,  the  more  terms  we  take,  the  less  the  dfiflerence 

becomes;  and,  consequently,  if  we  continue  the  series  to 

infinity,  there  will  be  no  difference  at  all  between  its  sum 

I 

and  the  value  of  the  fraction 1,  or  2. 

I  --tr 

890.  Let  a  s  4-  ;  and  our  fraction  ; will  then  be  = 

*  1  —a 

— p  =  I  =  1|,  which,  reduced  to  an  infinite  series,  be* 

comes  1  -I-  T  -I-  T  +  tV  +  rr  +  ri-n  *^-  ^hich  is  oonse- 

qu«Uy  equ.1  to  -±-^. 

Here,  if  we  take  two  terms,  we  have  If,  and  there  wants 
y.  If  we  take  three  terms,  we  have  If,  and  there  will  still 
be  wanting  ^  If  we  take  fiiur  terms,  we  shall  have  If}, 
and  the  mlEmnce  will  be  y^;  since,  therefore,  the  error 
always  becomes  three  times  less,  it  must  evidently  vanish 
allasL 

996.  Suppose  a  =  f  ;  we  shall  have  — -  =  r-— ;  =  8, 

=  1  +  f  +  f  +  ,V  +  TT  +  ,Vn  &c.  to  infinity  ;  aaJ  here, 
by  taking  first  If,  the  error  is  If;  taking  three  terms, 
wnich  miuce  2f,  the  error  u  f  ;  taking  four  terms,  we  have 
Stff,  and  the  error  is  f^. 

897.  If  a  =  f,  the  fraction  is- — ;  »T  ^  ^t^  *>^  ^ 

senes  becomes  1  ^  '  ^  ^  +  ^  4-  ^,  &c.  The  first  two 
forms  are  equal  to  If,  which  gives  ^^  for  the  error;  and 
taking  one  term  more,  we  have  ly^,  that  is  to  say,  only  an 

896.  In  the  same  manner  we  may  resolve  the  fraction 
TT^t  into  an  infinite  series  by  actually  dividing  the  nu- 
merator 1  by  the  denominator  1  4-  a«  as  follows  ^. 

*  After  a  certain  number  of  terms  have  been  obtained,  the 
Jaw  by  which  the  following  terms  are  formed  will  be  evident  ; 
•o  that  the  fcric«  may  be  carried  to  any  length  without  the 
Irpuble  of  continual  division,  a»  is  shewn  in  this  example. 


OHAP.  ▼.  OF  ABOEBRA. 


a 


a« 

,7 


-a' 
—AT*— a* 

—a*,  &c. 
Whence  it  follows,  that  the  fraction  -j-^--  is  equal  to  the* 

series, 

1  —  fl  +  fl«  —  a*  +  o*  —  a*  4-  a*  —  0^  &c. 
299.  If  we  make  a  =  1,  we  have  this  remarkable  oom-* 
parison: 

-^  =  i  =  l-l+l-l  +  l-l+l-l,  &c.  tohi- 

l+a       »  '  T  7 

infinity  ;  which  appears  rather  contradictory  ;  for  if  we  stop 
at—  1,  the  series  gives  0  ;  and  if  we  finish  at  +  1,  it  ^ves  1  ç 
but  this  is  predsely  what  solves  the  difficulty  ;  for  since  we 
must  go  on  to  infinity,  without  stopping  eitner  at  —  1  or  at 
4-1,  it  is  evident,  that  the  sum  can  neither  be  0  nor  1,  but 
that  this  result  must  lie  between  these  two,  and  therefinre 
bei*.  V 

dOO.  Let  us  now  make  a  =  |,  and  our  fraction  will'  be 

- — J  X2  ^,  which  must  therefore  express  the  value  of  thç 

series  1— T+i  +  T  +  iV""Tr+  isTf  ^^-  ^  infinity;  here 
if  we  take  only  the  two  leading  terms  of  this  series,  we  have 
{-,  which  is  too  small  by  ^  ;  ifwe  take  three  terms,  we  haV« 
•|,  which  is  too  much  by  i^,^  ;  if  we  take  four  terms,  we  have 
|,  which  is  too  small  by  -^  &c. 

*  It  may  be  observed,  that  no  infinite  series  is  in  reality  equal 
to  the  fraction  from  which  it  is  derived,  unless  the  remainder  be 
considered,  which,  in  the  present  case,  is  alternately  +{  and 
— { ;  tliat  is,  -f  I  when  the  series  is  0,  and  —  f  when  the  series 
is  1,  which  still  gives  the  same  value  for  the  whole  expression. 
Vid.  Art.  293. 


I  HiBauBm  «er.  IL 

901.  Sàppote  agvn  a  =  4^  our  fnctkn  will  then  be  = 

-—  =  I,  which  niuit  be  equal  to  this  Mries  1  *  ^  ^.  ^  * 

JS^  4-  TT  "*  TTT  +  TTV9  Skc.  cxMitiDued  to  infinity.  Now, 
DJ  considering  only  two  terms,  we  have  y,  which  is  too  small 
by  1^^  ;  three  terms  make  ^  which  is  too  much  by  ^  ;  four 
terms  give  ^7»  which  is  too  small  by  -jl^j  and  so  on. 

902.  The  fraction  7-—  may  also  be  resolved  into  an  in- 

finite  scries  another  way  ;  namely,  by  dividing  1  by  a  +  I, 
«efbUows: 

I 


a 
1 


a« 


a«  '*'  a' 

Consequently,  our  fraction —- .  is  equal  to  the  infinite 

7-^  +  5r-5r+;?-5r>   *c.     Let  u.  make 

a  B  1,  and  wc  shall  have  the  «cries  l-l^-l^l  +  l- 
1,  &c.  =  I,  as  before:  and  if  we  suppose  <i  s  t^  we  tJull 
hare  the  scries  ;  -  1  4-  ;  -  ,V  +  /,  -  «•,»  &c.  =  ;. 

^  It  is  unneccasary  to  carry  the  actual  division  any  farther, 
as  the  seriw  may  be  contiDucd  to  any  length,  from  the  law  ob- 
servable in  the  terms  already  obtained  ;  for  the  signs  are  alter- 
nately u/mj  and  mimuâf  and  any  subseonent  term  may  be 
ebtaineu  by  multiplying  that  imrocdiatviy  preceding  it  b\ 
I 


CHAP«  V.      ^  OP  ALOIimA« 


SOS.  In  the  same  numiier,  by  i€éolynig  the  {^ei^^ 

CT.  «M«.  »  ««11 


into  an  infinite  series,  we  shall  have^ 


a+6 

^  ^a       efi       cr       tr 


be 

&r 

ä 

* 

be 

6»c 

a 

a» 

é«c 

a« 

b^e     Ife 

a» 


Whence  it  appears,  that  we  may  compare  — — :   with  the 

series— -^  +  ^-  ^,  &c  to  infinity. 

Let  a»S,  Aaa4,c:BS,  and  we  shall  have 

e  3         : 


4.=,>.34.6-12,&c. 


If  a  =  10,  iîs  1,  and  c  =  11,  we  shall  have 

_  ,   t —  104-1  ■"  ''^       ^TTTBT  T*    10  00'  "•    i-OTTOr»  «.C« 

Here  if  we  oonaidér  only  one  teite.  of  the  series,  we  have 
44,  which  is  too  much  by  f^;  if  we.  take  two  terms,  we 
have  -^,  which  is  too  small  by  ^4^;  if  we  take  three  toms, 
we  have  {gg^,  which  is  too  much  by  x^Vo?  ^<^- 

304.  When  there  lore  more  than  two  terms  in  the  divisor, 
we  may  also  continue  the  division  to  infinity  in  the  same 

*  Here  again  the  law  of  continuation  is  manifest  ;  the  signs 
being  alternately  +   and  «-,  and  each  succeeding  term  is 

formed  by  multiplying  the  foregoing  one  by  — . 


WLÊMMVn  JBCTiirll. 


nuuiner.    Thus,  îf  the  firactk» — ^  were  propoèed,  the 

iofimte  aeries,  to  which  it  is  equal,  will  be  found  as  fbUowt  ; 
1  -a^i^)    1     •     •(l+o,  8ic. 


-flû 

-Ol» 

We  have  therefore  the  equation 

: r— k  =  I  +  «  -  a*  —  a*  +  «^  +  o%  &c  ;  where,  if  We 

make  a  =  l,  we  have  1  =  1  +  1-1-1 +  1^1-1-» 
1,  tLc  which  series  contains  twice  the  aeries  found  abore 
l^l4-l— l-flybc  Now,  as  we  haie  found  this  to 
be  ^  it  is  not  extraordinary  that  we  should  find  {,  or  1,  for 
the  value  of  that  wUch  we  have  just  determtaed. 

By  making  a  s  4^  we  shall  have  the  équation  -;  =  4   = 

If  a  =  i,  we  shall  hare  the  equation  -;-  =  f  s  1  ^  |  - 

^j.  -^  ^  -f  YTw^  &c.  and  if  we  take  the  four  leading  terms 
or  this  series,  we  have  '^^,  which  is  only  y^  less  than  ^. 

Suppost  again  a  s  4,  we  shall  have  -^=^=1-|-|^ 

Vt  -  jt  4-  rfVi  &c.  This  series  b  therefore  equal  to  the 
preoeding  one  ;  and,  by  subtracting  one  frooi  the  other,  we 
obtain  ;  ~  ,%  ^  w*  "^  Ap  ''^  which  is  necessarily  sO. 

90S.  The  method,  wh^  we  have  here  exphûncd,  serves 
to  rmilve,  gem^rallv,  all  fractions  into  infinite  series;  which 
is  uAen  found  to  be  of  the  greatest  utility.     It  is  also  re- 


CHAP.  Tl.  OF  ALGEBRA.  97 

markable,  that  an  infinite  scries,  though  it  never  ceases,  may 
have  a  determinate  value.  It  should  likewise  be  observeo, 
that,  from  this  branch  of  mathematics,  inventions  of  the 
utmost  importance  have  been  derived  ;  on  which  account  the 
subject  deserves  to  be  studied  with  the  greatest  attention. 


QUESTIONS   FOR    PRACTICE. 


ax 

1.  Resolve  into  an  infinite  series. 

a— X 

X"  TC^  X^ 

Ans.  x  -f f-  -Ö  +  —r^S^c. 

2.  Resolve  — r-  into  an  infinite  series. 

b  X       x^       .r** 

Ans.  —  x(l h— T—  -r+,&c.) 

a  a        a-       or  ^         ' 

or    , 

3.  Resolve  — ri  into  an  infinite  series. 

x-^o 

Am.—  X  (1  --.4-  — -— +,&c.) 


a? 


4.  Resolve  ; into  an  infinite  series. 

1— jr 


Ana.  1  +  2j  -f  ar'  +  2a:^  +  ar*,  &c. 


A'       . 

5.  Resolve  7 — ; — r-  into  an  infinite  series. 
{a^xY 


^       ^        ar    ,  3jr*      4rJ    . 
Ana.  1 H  — r r>  »c« 


CHAP.  VI. 

Of  the  Squares  q/' Compound  Quantities. 

306.  When  it  is  required  to  find  the  square  of  a  com- 
|X)und  Quantity,  we  have  only  to  multiply  it  by  itself,  and 
the  product  will  be  the  square  required. 

For  example,  the  square  of  a  4-  6  is  found  in  the  following 
manner  : 

H 


9B  KLXMKKT>  SBCT«  II. 


a«+2aA+A* 

907.  So  that  when  the  root  consists  of  two  terms  added 
toffeiher,  as  a  +  A,  the  square  comprehends,  1st»  the  squares 
ofeach  term,  namely,  a*  and  A*  ;  and  Sdly,  twice  the  pro- 
duct of  the  two  terms,  namely,  2ab  :  so  tKat  the  sum  a*  '^- 
9mè  '^b^iM  the  squareof  a  -|-  A.  Let,  for  example,  a  =:  10, 
and  AaS  ;  that  is  to  say,  let  it  be  required  to  find  the  square 

of  10 -f  S,  or  IS,  and  we  shall  have  100  +  60  +  9,  or  1G9. 

808.  We  may  easily  find,  by  means  of  this  formula,  the 
squares  of  numoers.  However  great,  if  we  divide  them  into 
two  parts.  Thus,  for  example,  the  squxure  of  57,  if  we  con- 
âder  that  this  number  is  the  same  as  50  -|-  7,  will  be  found 
=  2500  +  700  ^  4d  =  3249. 

S09.  Hence  it  is  evident,  that  the  square  of  a  -f- 1  will  be 
tp'^-fta-^'l:  and  since  the  siiuare  of  a  is  a*,  we  find  the 
üpiare  of  a  +  1  by  adding  to  tnat  square  8a  «-f-  1  ;  and  it 
must  be  observed,  that  this  2ii  -f"  ^  ^  the  sum  of  the  two 
roolsa  and  a-f-  1* 

Thus,  as  the  square  of  10  is  100,  that  of  11  will  be  100 
-f  SI  :  the  square  of  57  being  3249»  that  of  58  is  3249  + 
115  =  3364;  the  square  of  59  =:  3364  +  117  a  3481  ;  the 
square  of  60  =  3481  ^  119  =:  3600,  &c. 

810.  The  square  of  a  compound  quantity,  as  a  -|-  A,  is 
represented  in  this  manner  (a  -f  A)*.  We  have  therefore 
(a  -f>  A)*  a  Oi  -f*  2aA  4.  A%  whence  we  deduce  the  following 
equations: 

(a+l)«=a«+2o+l  ;         (fl+2)«=ra*-f  4ii+4; 
(a4-8r=a*+6a+9;         (fl+4)*=a*+8a+16;  &c. 

311.  If  the  root  be  a  —  A,  the  s()uare  of  it  is  a*  —  2aA  f 
A*,  which  contains  also  the  M|uares  of  the  two  terms,  but  in 
such  a  manner,  that  we  must  take  from  their  sum  twice  the 
nroduci  of  those  two  terms.  Let,  for  exaniple,a  :r  10«  and 
A  =  —  1,  then  the  square  of  9  will  be  found  equal  to  100  — 
20^1  s81. 

812.  Smœ  we  have  the  equation  (a  --  A)*  :=  ai*  —  2aA-f 
1^,  we  shall  have  (a  -  1)'  =:  ««  -  2a  4  1.  The  square  of 
tf  —  1  is  found,  therefore,  bv  subcractinff  Amn  if  the  sum  of 
the  two  rooU  a  and  a  -  1,  namdy,  !a  —  1.    Thus,  fcr 


CBAP.  VI.  OF   ALGEBRA.  99 

example,  if  a  =  60^  we  have  a*  =  2500,  and  3a  —  1  =s  99; 

therefore  ^  z:  2500  -  99  =  2401. 

813.  What  we  have  said  here  may  be  also  confirmed  and 

illustrated  by  fractions;  for  if  we  take  as  the  root  -f-  -f-  4-  = 

1,  the  square  will  bej  ^  +  ^  +  4^  =  |  j^  =:  1. 

Farther,  the  square  of  |.  —  ^  =  ^  will  be  ^J  —  ^  +  ^ 
— >    t 

—   TT- 

314.  When  the  root  consists  of  a  greater  number  of  terms, 
the  method  of  determining  the  square  is  the  same.  Let  us 
find,  for  example,  the  square  of  a  -f  i  +  c  : 

a-j-i-f"^ 


a«-faaÄ+2ac+6'+2ic+c» 

We  see  that  it  ccmtains,  first,  the  square  of  each  term  of 
the  root,  and  beside  that,  the  double  products  of  those  terms 
multiplied  two  by  two. 

S15.  To  illustrate  this  by  an  example,  let  us  divide  the 
number  256  into  three  parts,  200  -f  50  +  6  ;  its  square 
will  then  be  composed  of  thé  following  parts  : 


90(fi  =  ¥iXm 

60*-    2600 

6»=       36 

2(50  X 

200)  =  20000 

2(  6x 

200)=    2400 

8(  6  X 

50)=      600 

66536  =  256  X  256,  or  256*. 

S16.  Wben  some  terms  of  the  root  are  n^ative,  the 
square  is  still  found  by  the  same  rule;  only  we  must  be 
carefiil  what  «gns  we  prefix  to  the  double  products.  Thus, 
(a  -ô-.c)«  =  a*4-V+c*  -  2aô  -  2ac  +  2Äc;  and  if 
we  represent  the  number  256  by  800  —  40  —  4,  we  shall 
have, 


h2 


100  KLF.icoiTH  Acer.  II« 

Poridve  Parte.  Nqn^tÎTC  Part«. 

S00>=:  90000  2(40x900)  =  24000 

40<=    1600  2(4x800)=    5M00 

2(40x4)=      820 

4<  =        16  -  26400 


91936 
26400 

6â536|  the  square  of  266  as  bcron* 


CHAP.  VII. 

Of  the  Extraction  ^  Roots  appRed  to  Caavpowx^  Quantities. 

817.  In  order  to  ^ve  a  certain  rule  for  this  operation,  wi* 
mutt  consider  attentively  the  square  of  the  root  a-f  A,  which 
bo«  -)-  %ab  -{-&*,  in  order  that  we  may  reciprocally  find  the 
root  €if  a  ffiven  square. 

318.  We  must  consider  therefore,  first,  that  9»  the  tquarr« 
a*  +  2a6  -f-  A*,  is  composed  of  sereral  termsy  it  is  certain 
that  the  root  also  will  cximprise  more  than  one  term  ;  and 
that  if  we  write  the  terms  m  the  square  in  such  a  manner, 
that  the  powers  of  one  of  the  letters,  as  a,  may  go  on  con- 
tinually diminishing,  the  first  term  will  Ix^  the  square  of  the 
first  term  of  the  root  ;  and  since,  in  the  present  case,  the 
first  term  of  the  square  is  tr^  it  is  certain  tnat  the  first  term 
of  the  root  is  a. 

319.  Having  therefore  found  the  first  term  of  the  root, 
that  is  to  say,  a,  we  must  consider  tlie  rest  of  the  square, 
namely,  94tb  -f-  6*,  to  see  if  we  can  derive  from  it  the  second 
part  of  the  root,  which  is  b.  Now,  this  remainder,  2aA  -\- 
a^,  nuiy  be  represented  by  the  iiroduct,  (2a  -|-  b)b  ;  where- 
ibre  thle  remainder  having  two  factors,  (2a  --|-  &),  ami  A,  it  \> 
evident  that  we  shall  find  tlie  latter,  &,  which  is  the*  seccmd 
part  of  the  root,  by  dividing  the  remainder,  2aA  -f  6%  by 
2a  -I-  6. 

820.  So  tliat  the  quotient,  arising  from  the  division  of  tite 
above  remainder  by  2a  -f  &,  is  the  seooml  term  of  the  riMit 
required;  and  in  this  division  we  oiiser\'e,  tliat  2a  iü  the 
dcKible  of  the  first  term  a,  which  is  already  determined  :  si» 
that  although  the  stxrond  term  is  yet  unknown,  and  it  i> 
neegisary,  (or  the  present,  to  ieo%'e  it«  place  empty,  we  may 
nercrtheless  attempt  the  diviiôon,  since  in  it  we  attend  only 


CHAP.  VU.  OF  ALGEBKA.  101 

to  the  first  t&na  Sa;  but  as  soon  as  the  quotient  is  found, 
which  in  the  present  case  is  by  we  must  put  it  in  the  vacant 
place,  and  thus  render  the  division  complete. 

âSl.  The  calculation,  therefore,  by  which  we  find  the 
root  of  the  square  à*'  -{-  2aA  -{-  b%  may  be  represented  thusi  : 

à'+Zab'\'b%a+b 


2aé+é« 
0. 


322.  We  may,  also,  in  the  same  manner,  find  the  square 
root  of  other  compound  quantities,  provided  they  are  squares, 
as  will  appear  from  the  following  examples  : 

«•+6aé+9é*  (a+8ô 


2a+3i)  6aé+96* 
6aé+9A* 

0. 


4«* 


0. 

^*+24pg+167*  (3p-h47 
9p^ 


6/>+4ç)  24pgr+16g« 
Ä4pgr+16g* 

0. 


25x»-60t+36  (5x-6 


10^-6)  -60r  +  36 
-60^  +  36 

0. 


IM  BLBMXlITt  UCT.  H. 


MS.  When  there  it  a  miudnder  after  the  diTÎiion,  it  U  • 
proof  that  the  root  \%  oompoeed  of  more  than  two  terms. 
We  munt  in  that  case  consider  the  two  terms  already  found 
as  forming  the  first  part,  and  endeavour  to  derive  the  other 
from  the  remainder,  in  the  same  manner  as  wc  found  the 
second  term  of  the  root  from  the  first.  The  following  ex- 
amples will  render  this  operation  more  clear. 

a* 


2a  +  A)  2aA-îeac-2Ac+A*+r* 
Stab  +b^ 

8a+S6-e)  -2ac-eAc+r' 

-2ac-2Ac4-c* 


0. 


8a*+  a" 


0. 


a* 


9a* ^  fab)   -  4o>A+8aA>+4A« 

<ea*-4aA-2A')     -4o^A^f  8flA»+iA* 

^ià'b^^SaV+W 


0. 


CHAP.  TU.  OF  ALGBBRA.  108 


i^«a> 


3S4.  We  easily  deduce  from  the  rule  which  we  have  ex- 

!)lained,  the  metnod  which  is  taught  in  books  of  arithmetic 
or  the  extraction  of  the  square  root,  as  will  appear  from  the 
following  examples  in  numbers  : 


529  (23 
4 

2304  (48 
16 

43)  129 
129 

88)  704 
704 

0. 

0. 

4096  (64 
36 

9604  r98 
81 

124)  496 
496 

188)  1504 
1504 

0. 

0. 

Ï5é25  (125 
1 

998Ô0i  (999 
81 

22)  56  189)  1880 

44  1701 


245)  1226         1989)  17901 
1225  17901 


0.  0. 

325.  But  when  there  is  a  renudnder  after  all  the  figures 
have  been  used,  it  is  a  proof  that  the  number  proporad  is 


r 
/ 


/ 

/  BLBI1K19TS  fttCT.  IL 

jbC  a  square;  and,  oonscquently,  that  its  root  cannot  be 
amffned.  In  such  cases,  ttic  radical  sign,  which  we  before 
employedy  is  made  use  of.  This  is  written  before  the  quan- 
tity, and  the  quantity  itself  is  placed  between  parentheses, 
or  under  a  line  :  thus,  the  sc|uare  root  of  a*  +  6'  is  repre- 

septcd  by  ^{a*  +  b%  or  by  ^a*  -f  6^';  and  ^{1  —  Jr%  or 
^  1  —  X*,  expresses  the  square  root  of  1  —  i*.  Inhti*a(l  of 
this  radical  sign,  we  may  use  the  fractional  exponent  ;, 
and  represent  the  square  root  of  a*  +  ^>  for  instance,  hv 

(o*  +  Ä«)^orby  ii"+frl^ 


CHAP.  VIII 


Of  the  Calculation  q/*  Irrational  Quantities. 

526.  When  it  is  required  to  add  together  two  or  more 
irrational  Quantities,  this  is  to  be  done,  according  to  the 
method  betöre  laid  down,  by  writing  all  the  terms  in  suc- 
cession, each  with  its  proper  sign  :  and,  with  regard  to  ab- 
breviations, we  must  remark  that,  instead  of  ^/a  -f  v^a,  for 
example,  we  may  write  Ä^u;  and  that  ^a  —  ^/a  =  0, 
because  these  two  terms  destroy  one  another.     Thus,  the 

Quantities  8  +  v^  and  1  -f-  ^/£,  added  together,  make 
+  %^%,  or  4  +  v'H;  the  sum  of  5  +  v'S  and  4  -  ^/3, 
is  9;  and  that  of  «v^»  +  ^^  and  ^/Î3  —  v%  is  8^/3  + 
«%/«. 

527.  Subtraction  also  is  very  easy,  «nee  we  have  only  to 
add  the  nro|MMed  numbers,  after  havm^  changed  their  signs  ; 
as  will  IK'  readily  seen  in  the  following  example,  by  sul>- 
tractin«;  the  lower  line  from  the  up{)er. 

4-   v242V8-3v  5+4v^6 
1  \%V1  -2v^3-5v  5f  6v^6 


328.  In  multiplication,  we  must  n-oollect  that  ^a  mul- 
tiphtil  by  >/<!  pnxiuc(*s  a  ;  and  that  if  the  numlier>  wlmli 
fcNlow  the  hign  ^/  art*  diffen'nt,  a»  a  and  /i,  wo  have  ^/ah  fur 
the  fmHluct  of  ^a  multi|)lied  by  ^/A.  Afurr  this,  it  will  Ix* 
easy  to  calculate  the  folkiwtng  exampk*»  : 


Cfebtr«  vin.  OF  ALG£BRA.  10& 

1  +  -V/2  4+2^2 

1  +  ^2  2-    -v/2 


l+x/2  8  +  V2 

-v/2+2  -4v/2-4 


1^.2v'2-f2=8+2^/2.       8-4  =  4. 

3^.  What  we  have  said  applies  'also  to  imaginary  quan- 
tities; we  shall  only  observe  farther,  that  \/—a  multiplied 
by  -v/ —  a  produces  —  fl.  If  it  were  reauired  to  fina  the 
cube  of  —  1  +  >x/  -  3,  we  should  take  the  square  of  that 
number,  and  then  multiply  that  square  by  the  same  number; 
as  in  the  following  operation  : 

^l+v/-3 
-1  +  ^-3 


-1+   ^/-3 


24.  V -3 


2+6=8. 

330.  In  the  division  of  surds,  we  have  only  to  express  the 
proposed  quantities  in  the  form  of  a  fraction  ;  which  may  be 
then  changed  into  another  expression  having  a  rational  de- 
nominator ;  for  if  the  denominator  be  a  -|-  >v/ft,  for  example, 
and  we  multiply  both  this  and  the  numerator  by  a  —  ^6,  the 
new  denominator  will  be  a^  —  6,  in  which  there  is  no  radical 
sign.     Let  it  be  proposed,  for  example,  to  divide  3  +  2v^ 

3-f-2\/2 
by  1-1-^/2:  we  shall  first  have  Yj~r7ö'^  ^^^^  multiplying 

the  two  terms  of  the  fraction  by  1  —  V^,  wc  shall  have  for 
the  numerator  : 

34-2v/2 
1-    ^/2 


3+2  V2 

-3v/^-4 


3-v/2-4=:-.V2-l; 


106  mLEUEVTA  SICT.  II. 

and  for  the  dcnomuiâlor  : 

l-V'« 


1+^/8 

Our  new  fradkm  therefore  u  — — —  ;  and  if  wc  again 

multiply  the  two  terms  by  —  1,  wc  shall  have  for  the  nu- 
Bwrator  ^C-f-1»  and  for  the  denominator  -f-1«  Now,  it  is 
easy  to  shew  that  v^  +  1  is  equal  to  the  proposed  firaction 

' ^  ;    for  v^8  -f- 1   being  multiplied  by  the  divisor 

1  +  v^  thus, 

14-VS 


!  +  •« 

•«  +  « 


we  have  l+CVS+2:=3+SvS* 
Another  example.     Let  8-5^  be  divided  by  3 -2^2. 
This,  in  the  first  instance,  is  j — qTTq  *  ^^  multiplying  the 

two  terms  of  thb  fraction  by  S  +  S  v^  we  have  for  the 
numerator, 

8-5V2 

3+2^2 


24-15v'S 

16^8-90 


and  ftir  the  denominator, 

3-V2 

9-8=1. 


/  ■ 


CHAP.  IX.  OF  ALGSBRA. 


Consequently^  the  quotient  will  be  44-\/^     The  trudfYir 
this  may  be  proved,  as  before,  by  multiplication  ;  thus, 

3-  V2 


la-Sv'g- 4=8-5^2: 

331.  In  the  same  manner,  we  may  transform  irraticmal 
fractions  into  others,  that  have  rational  denominators.     If 

we  have,  for  example,  the  fraction  -= — oTTß»*"*^  multiply  its 

numerator  and  denominator  by  5  +  S<v/6,  we  transform  it 

into  this, = =5+2  ^/6  ;  in  like  manner,  the  fraction 

Ä  .u    r       a+äv'— 8     1  +  •-S. 

assumes  this  form, 


»!«>  76=75= Î =  "  +  *^*^' 

332.  When  the  denominator  contûns  several  terms,  we 
may,  in  the  same  mannar,  make  the  radical  ngns  in  it  vanish 

1 

one  by  one.     Thus,  if  the  fraction  -rrrr >q_  /q  ^  P'^ 

posed,  we  first  multiply  these  two  terms  by  •lO  -{-  v^S 

J     1     .       1^     ^      .       V10+v'2+\/8      1. 

+  y/Sf  and   obtain  the  fraction  = — ^"Ta *  ^^^ 

5— "v^b 

multipl3ring  its  numerator  and  denominator  by  5  +  2v^6,  we 
have  5^10  +  11  v^«  +  V»  +  ^^/60. 


,...,,      >. 


CHAP.  IX. 

(y  Cubes,  and  of  Hue  Extraction  g^Cube  Roots. 

333.  To  find  the  cube  of  a  -|-  6,  we  have  only  to  multiply 
its  s(}uarc,  c^  +  2«ô  +  6*,  again  by  a  +  6,  thus  ; 

a*+2aÄ+6* 
a  -hÄ 


and  the  cube  will  be  aH3a*6+3a6*  +  fr*. 


>;  yw 


/ 

/ 


108  SLBIOCNTS  SECT«  II. 

Wc  nee  thercfurc  thai  it  contaius  the  cubes  of  the  two 
parts  of  the  root^  and»  beside  that,  80*6  -|-  Soft*;   which 

auantitv  is  equal  to  (Sab)  x  (a  -*-  b);  that  is,  the  triple  pro- 
uct  ot  the  two  parts,  a  and  6,  multiplied  by  their  sunu 

334.  So  that  whenever  a  root  is  composed  of  two  terms,  it 
is  easy  to  find  its  cube  by  this  rule  :  (ur  example,  the  num. 
ber5=3+2;  iu  cube  u  therefore  27 -^H  +  dSx 5)  =  125. 

And  if  7  -H  3  =  10  be  the  root;  then  the  cube  will  be 
348  +  27  +  (68  X  10)  s  1000. 

To  find  the  cube  of  36,  let  us  suppose  the  root  36  =  80 
+  6»  and  we  have  for  the  cube  required,  27000  +  216  + 
(540  X  36)  =  4665a 

S8S.  But  if,  on  the  other  hand,  the  cube  be  given,  namely, 
a*  +  8a%  ^  Sofr*  +  A*»  and  it  be  reauired  to  find  iu  root, 
we  must  premise  the  following  remarKs  : 

First,  when  the  cube  is  arranged  according  to  tj^e  powers 
of  one  letter,  we  easily  know  by  the  leading  term  a*,  the 
first  term  a  of  the  root,  since  the  cube  of  it  is  a'  ;  if,  there- 
fore, we  subtract  that  cube  from  the  cube  proposed,  we  ob- 
tain the  remainder,  Sa^b  -h  806^  -f  A',  which  must  furnish 
the  second  term  of  the  root. 

886.  But  as  we  alrewly  know,  from  Art  888,  that  the 
second  term  b  -h&«  we  have  prindpally  to  discover  how  it 
may  be  derived  from  the  above  remainder.  Now,  that  re- 
mainder may  be  expressed  by  two  factors,  thus,  (3a*  -f  Sab 
+  b*)  X  (A);  if,  thei^fore,  we  divide  by  8a'  -f  806  +  ^, 
we  obtain  the  secoml  part  of  the  root  -\-b^  which  is  re- 
quired. 

837.  But  as  this  second  term  is  supposed  to  be  un- 
known, the  di\îsor  also  is  unknown;  nevertheless  we  luive 
the  first  term  of  tliat  divisor,  which  is  sufficient  :  for  it  i& 
3a%  tliat  is,  thrice  the  square  of  the  first  term  already  found  ; 
and  by  means  of  this,  it  is  not  difficult  to  find  also  Uie  other 
part,  &,  and  then  to  complete  the  divisor  before  we  perform 
the  division  ;  for  this  purpose,  it  will  be  necessary  to  ioin  to 
80*  thrice  the  product  ot  the  two  tennis  or  3a^  and  b\  or 
the  M|uare  of*  the  second  term  of  the  root« 

•5i58.  Ia^i  u.h  apply  what  we  have  said  to  two  examples  of 
other  pven  cubes. 

/i'+12o*  +  48a-»-64  (/i  +  4 


12<i>  4^+64 


0. 


CHAP.  IX. 


O^  ALGEBRA. 


109 


ûO—Gû»  4. 15/i*-20a=^-+.  15a«-6fl  + 1  (c«— 2a-+.  1 


ß^ 


3û*— 6rt'-+.4ra«)   -6«*-+.  15a'— 20a' 

-6a*  +  12a'-  Sa^ 


3^*-12a»-»-12a2-f-3a2-6a  +  l)  3a'-12a^-hl5a'— 6a-f-l 

3a'  — 12a5-+.15a^-.6û-+.l 


0. 


399.  The  analysis  which  we  have  given  is  the  foundation 
of  the  common  rule  for  the  extraction  of  the  cube  root  in 
numbers.  See  the  following  example  of  the  operation  in  the 
number  2197  : 

2197(10  +  3  =  18 
1000 


300 

90 

9 

1197 

399 

1197 

0. 

Let  us  also  extract  the  cube  root  of  34965783  : 

34965783(300  +  20  +  7,  or  327 
27000000 


270000 

18000 

400 

796Ö783 

288400 

5768000 

307200 

6720 

49 

2197783 

313969 

2197783 

0. 


no  KLCMENTS 


•ICT.  II. 


CHAP.  X. 

OfÜu  higher  Powcn  g^  Compound  Quantities. 

540.  After  squares  and  cubes,  we  must  consider  higher 
powers,  or  powers  of  a  greater  number  of  degrees;  wnich 
are  fleoerally  represented  by  exponents  in  the  manner  which 
WW  befiire  expbuned  :  we  hare  only  to  remanber,  when  the 
root  is  compound,  to  enclose  it  in  a  parenthesis:  thus« 
(a  +  iy  means  that  a  +  &  is  raised  to  the  fifth  power,  and 
{a  —  6)^  represents  the  sixth  power  of  a  —  6,  and  so  on. 
We  shall  in  this  chapter  explain  the  nature  of  these  powers. 

541.  Let  a  -I-  A  be  the  root,  or  the  first  power,  and  the 
higher  powers  will  be  found,  by  multiplication,  in  the  fol- 
lowing manner  : 


(a+A)' 

=a+b 
a^b 

b' 

a^-^ab 
ab-^b 

('i+*)V 

a  +& 

(a^by, 

A" 

b^ 

(a^by 

■•-  4f  r  A"*  -♦ 

b* 

u*b-^  Ur//' 

*ab* 

^  \ab'  ^  b' 

a  ^5o«&^  \i\a'b'^\0a'b^^5ab^'i'lr 


CHAP.  X.  OF  ALGEBRA.  Ill 


flö + Bi^b  ■+.  10a*6"  -+.  lOa^fts  ^  5^7^  ^  ^,4 

a^6  f   5a^6«+10o»6»+10a«üy*+5ae*  +  Aö 


(a+e)ö=ia^+6ö56H.15Ä*6«^20a'y+lßa*6*+6aA5+66^  &c 

342.  The  powers  of  the  root  a  —  6  are  found  in  the  same 
manner;  and  we  shall  immediately  perceive  that  they  do 
not  differ  from  the  preceding,  excepting  that  the  Sd,  4th, 
6th,  &c  terms  are  affected  by  the  ûgn  minus. 

{a-byzza-b 
a  — i 


à'-ab 
a  —6 


a  —6 


a-fr 
a^-.4A*6+&i»6*-4a*é»+  a** 


(a-Ä}*=a*-5ii*6+l(W»fi»-l(ki»6'+öa**-ft^ 


-  a^6+  5a*6*-10a^y-f  10a«6*-5ao^+Äß 


Oi-.ô)6=ra6-6a^6-+.15a*6*-  20a'6î^l5a'ô*— 6a4»-4-é«,  &c 

Here  we  sec  that  all  the  odd  powers  of  b  have  the  sign 
—  ,  while  the  even  powers  retain  the  sign  -)-.     The  reason 


112  BLEMBNTS  SBCT.  II. 

of  this  i%  c\'ident  ;  for  «nee  -  A  i»  a  term  of  the  root,  the 
powers  of  that  letter  will  ascend  in  the*  following  aerie«,  —  b, 
+b\  -h\  -fb^^  —  **,  +*•,  fee.  which  clearly  $hews  that 
the  even  power»  muftt  be  aflTected  by  tlie  sign  -('>  ^nd  the 
odd  ones  by  the  contrary  si^  — . 

S4<8.  An  important  question  occurs  in  this  place  ;  namely, 
how  we  may  find,  without  being  obliged  to  perform  the  tame 
calculation,'  all  the  powers  either  o(  a  +  b^or  a  ^  b. 

We  must  remark,  in  the  first  place,  that  if  we  can  assign 
all  the  powers  of  a  +  A,  those  of  a  —  A  arc  also  found  ; 
tinoe  we  have  only  to  change  the  signs  of  the  even  terms, 
that  is  to  say,  of  the  seccmd,  the  fourtn,  tlic  sixth,  &c.  The 
business  then  is  to  establish  a  rule,  by  which  any  power  of 
it-|- A,  however  high,  may  be  determined  without  the  necessity 
of  calculating  all  the  preceding  powers. 

344.  Now,  if  from  the  powers  which  we  have  already  de- 
termined we  take  away  the  numbers  tluU  precede  each  term, 
which  are  called  the  coefficients^  we  ol>serve  in  all  the  tenuh 
a  singular  order  :  first,  we  see  the  first  term  a  of  the  n)ot 
raised  to  the  power  which  is  required;  in  the  following 
terms,  the  powers  of  a  diniinisli  continually  by  unity,  antl 
the  powers  of  b  increase  in  the  sauR*  proportion  ;  so  tHat  the 
sum  of  the  exponents  of  a  and  of  b  is  always  the  same,  and 
always  equal  to  the  exponent  of  the  power  required  ;  and, 
lastly,  we  find  the  term  b  by  itself  raised  to  the  same  power. 
If  therefore  the  tenth  power  of  a  -f  A  were  required,  we  are 
certain  that  the  terms,  without  their  coefiicicnts,  would  suc- 
ceed each  other  in  the  following  order  ;  a'%  o^A,  o"A^,  u'A*, 
4^b\  a»AS  a*lfi,  a'e,  a'»,  alP,  A'". 

345.  It  remains  therefore  to  shew  bow  we  are  to  de- 
termine the  coeflkients,  which  belong  to  those  terms,  or  the 
numbers  by  which  they  arc  to  be  multiplied.  Now,  with 
respect  to  the  first  term,  its  coefikaent  u  always  unity  ;  ami, 
as  to  the  second,  iu  coefiicient  is  constantly  the  exponent  of 
the  {»wer.  With  regard  to  the  other  terms,  it  is  not  so 
easy  to  olMi*rve  any  order  in  their  coefficients  ;  but,  if  wc 
continue  those  ooeificients,  we  shall  not  fail  to  discover  the 
law  bv  which  they  Are  formed;  as  will  appear  from  the 
folk>wuig  Table. 


cnÀv.  X. 


OF  AL6EBEA. 


118 


Powers«  Coefficients. 

Ist 1,  1 

«d 1,  «,    1 

8d 1,  3,  8,   1 

4th  ...    -    .     1,  4,  6,  4,   1 

fith  .    .    -    -       1,  5, 10,  10, 5, 1 

6th  -    -    -         1,6,15,20,15,6,1 

7th  -    -    .      1,  7,  «1,  85,  85,  «1,  7, 1 

8th  .    .        1,8,28,56,70,56,28,8,1 

9th    -    -    1,9,36,84,126,126,84,86,9,1 
10th    1,  10,  45,  120,  210,  252,  210, 120,  45, 10, 1,  8lc. 
We  see  then  that  the  tenth  power  of  a  +  6  will  be  a"'  + 

l(k^b+  iSaPb^  +  120a7ô3+  2100^6*+  252a*65+  210a^lfi+ 

1200^*^  +  45a*J8  ^  lOalfi  +  b^\ 

346.  Now,  with  regard  to  the  coefficients,  it  must  be  ob- 
served, that  for  each  power  their  sum  must  be  equal  to  the 
number  2  raised  to  the  same  power;  for  let  a  =  1  and  b  = 
1,  then  each  term,  without  tne  coefficients,  will  be  1  ;  con- 
sequently, the  value  of  the  power  will  be  amply  the  sum  of 
the  coefficients.  This  sum,  in  the  preceding  example,  is  1024, 
and  accordingly  (1  +  1)^0  =  2«>  =  1024.  It  is  the  same 
with  respect  to  all  other  powers  ;  thus,  we  have  for  the 

lstl-fl  =  2=2S 

2d  1+2+1=4=2», 

8d  1+3+34-1=8=2», 
4th  1+4+6+4+1  =16=2*, 
5th  1+5+10+10+5+1=82=25, 
6th  1+6+15+20+15+6+1=64=2«, 
7th  1+7+21+85+35+21+7+1=128=2',  &c 

347.  Another  necessary  remark,  with  regard  to  the  co- 
efficients, is,  that  they  increase  from  the  beginning  to  the 
middle,  and  then  decrease  in  the  same  order.     In  the  even 

Eowers,  the  greatest  coefficient  is  exactly  in  the  middle; 
ut  in  the  odd  powers,  two  coeffiâents,  equal  and  greater 
than  the  others,  are  found  in  the  middle,  belonging  to  the 
mean  terms. 

The  order  of  the  coefficients  hkewise  deserves  particular 
attention  ;  for  it  is  in  this  order  that  we  discover  the  means 
of  determining  them  for  any  power  whatever,  without  cal- 
culating all  the  preceding  powers.  We  shall  here  explain 
this  method,  reserving  the  demonstration  however  for  the 
next  chapter. 

348.  In  order  to  find  the  coefficients  of  any  power  })ID- 
posed,  the  seventh  for  example,  let  us  write  tne  following 
Tractions  one  after  the  other  : 


7       6       s       4      1       I       I 
TJ  T>  T>  T>  T>  7*  T' 


114  ILBM BNTâ  8BCT.  11. 

In  this  arrangement»  wc  perceive  that  the  numerators  begin 
by  the  exponent  of  the  power  reouired,  and  that  they 
diminish  successively  by  unity;  wnile  the  denominatcH^R 
(bUow  in  the  natural  order  of  the  numbers,  1,  2,  S,  4,  &c. 
Now,  the  first  coeffiâent  being  always  1,  the  first  fraction 
gives  the  second  cocfRcient;  the  product  of  the  first  two 
fractions,  multiplied  together,  reprnents  the  thiid  coefficient  ; 
the  DTodiict  of  the  three  first  fractions  represents  the  fcnirth 
coemcient,  and  so  on.     Thus,  the 

1st  coefficient  is  1  =1 

Sd     •    "    '    ■    TT  =7 

3d     -    -     .    -    I-l  =21 

7.6.5 

♦»»>--  -  -  rr:»  =^ 

7 . 6.5.4 
*"•■■--    1.2.3.4  =^ 

7.6.5.4.8.« 

1.2. 3. 4. 6. 6       "^ 
^,  7.6.5.4.3.2.1 

349.  So  that  we  have,  for  the  second  power,  the  fraction.H 
I-,  I  ;  whence  the  first  coefficient  is  1,  the  si*oond  \  =  i^  ami 
the  third  2  x  1=1. 

The  third  power  furnishes  the  firactions  },  \^  f  :  wherr- 
fbre  the 

1st  coefficient  =:  I  ;  8d=:;=:3; 

Sd=S.t=:S;  and4th=i|.i.|  =  1. 

We  have,  for  the  fourth  power,  the  fracUons  %  \^T»i* 
consequently,  the 

1st  coefficient  =  I  ; 
«d|  =  4;  3d  |.i  =  6; 

4th  4  .  t  •  I  =  ^;  md  5th  t  .  Î  .  »  .  i  =  I. 

850.  This  rule  evidently  renders  it  unnecessary  to  find 
the  aiefficients  of  the  nrcceding  powers,  as  it  enables  us  to 
discover  immediately  Uie  coefficients  whii*li  belong  to  an> 
one  propoicd.     Thus,  for  the  tenth  power,  we  write  iIh- 

fr*"*»«»«  V»  n  î>  i»  îf  i*  i>  i>  It  re.  by  means  of  whidi  wo 
find  the 


CHAP.  XI.  OF   ALGEBRA.  115 

1st  ooeflident  r=  1  ; 
«d  =  V  =  10;  7th  =  262  .  i  =  210; 

8d  =    10.^=    46;  8th  =  210  .  4^  =  120; 

4th=    4*5.4=120;  9th  =  120  .  f  =  46; 

6th  =  120  .  ^  =  210;         10th  =    46  .  ^  =  10; 
6th  =  210  .  4  =  262;  and  11th  =    10  .  ^  =:  1. 
861.  We  may  also  wnte  these  fractions  as  they  are, 
without  computing  their  value;  and  in  this  manner  it  is 
easy  to  express  any  power  of  a  +  6.    Thus,  (a  +  by^  an 

^  ^ .  J. .  ^4 + i»^ + ^.  +  ^^^^^ 

+  ""'.•  ^  '  T  ,L^»*^  +,»x.'   Whence  the  Uw  of  Ihe 
sucoeediDg  terms  may  be  easily  deduced. 


J  y 


CHAP.  XI. 


Of  the  Transposition  of  the  Letters,  on  whkh  the  demons 
stration  of  the  preceding  Rule  iajonnded. 

352.    If  we  trace  back  the  origin  of  the  coefiicients  which 
we  have  been  considering,  we  shall  find,  that  each  term  is 

firesented,  as  many  times  as  it  is  possible  to  transpose  the 
etters,  of  which  that  term  is  composed  ;  or,  to  express  the 
same  thing  differently,  the  coefficient  of  each  term  is  equal  to 
the  number  of  transpositions  which  the  letters  composing 
that  term  admit  of.  In  the  second  power,  for  example^  the 
term  ab  is  taken  twice,  that  is  to  say,  its  coefficient  isH; 
and  in  fact  we  may  change  the  order  of  the  letters  which 
compose  that  term  twice,  since  we  may  write  ab  and  ba. 

*  Or,  which  is  a  more  general  mode  of  expression, 

(a  -^  by  =  fl'^  ya'»-'*  -f  "* '^^"j^V-^&« 

n  .  (n-1)  .  (n-^)       ,^     n.  (w  -'l)  .  (n  -  2)  .  (it  -  3) 
"^  1.2.3  "  "*■  1.2.3.4 

a«-.^Ä*  &c         ^'(n-l)'(n-^).(n-'S) 1 

1.2.3.  4 n 

This  elegant  theorem  for  the  involution  of  a  compound  quantity 
of  two  terms,  evidentlv  includes  all  powers  whatever  j  and  we 
shall  afterwards  shew  how  the  same  may  be  applied  to  the  ex- 
traction of  roots. 

i2 


116  BLBMBIITS  tICT.  n. 

The  term  aa^  on  the  oootrvy,  it  fiMisd  only  once,  and  here 
the  order  of  the  letters  can  undergo  no  change,  or  trans- 
position.  In  the  third  power  of  o  -I-  A,  the  term  aab  may 
De  written  in  three  diffemt  ways  ;  thus,  ooi,  a&f ,  bma  ;  the 
cœflkâent  therefore  is  3.  In  tM  fecirth  power,  the  term  arb 
or  ëaah  admits  of  four  different  arrangements,  aacb^  aaha^ 
a&aa,6aaa;  and  consequently  the  ooemcient  is  4.  Tbeterm 
oaVb  admits  of  six  trannositiofis,  oaM,  oMo,  haba^  ahab^ 
bbaa^  baabf  and  its  coefficient  is  &  It  is  the  same  in  all 
other  cases. 

S5S.  In  fiKTt,  if  we  consider  that  the  fourth  power,  for 
example,  of  any  root  consisting  of  more  than  two  terms,  as 
fa  -f  6  -f  c  -f  d)^,  is  found  by  the  multiplication  of  the  four 
ttMrtors,  (a^  b  +  c  ^d)  {a  +  b  -^  c  -t-d)  {a -^  b  +  c  +  d) 

ia  -f-  6  -f  c  -f  d),  we  readily  see,  that  each  letter  of  the  first 
actor  must  be  multiplied  by  each  letter  of  the  second,  then 
by  each  letter  of  the  third,  and,  lastly,  by  each  letter  of  the 
fourth.  So  that  every  term  is  not  only  composed  of  four 
letters,  but  it  also  presents  itself,  or  enters  into  the  sum,  as 
many  times  as  those  letters  can  be  differently  arranged  with 
renect  to  each  other;  and  hence  arises  its  coefficient. 

854k  It  is  therefore  of  great  importance  to  know,  in  how 
many  (Uflerent  ways  a  given  number  of  letters  may  be  ar- 
ranged ;  but,  in  this  inquiry,  we  must  particularly  oonâdcr, 
whether  the  letters  in  question  are  the  same,  or  diffinrent  : 
ibr  when  they  «ne  the  same,  there  can  be  no  transposition  of 
them  ;  and  (or  this  reason  the  simple  powers,  as  a*,  a',  a\ 
8tc  have  all  unity  for  their  coefficients. 

855.  Let  us  mrst  suppose  all  the  letters  different  ;  and, 
beginning  with  the  wmpleit  case  of  two  letters,  or  ab^  we 
immediately  discover  that  two  transpositions  may  take  place, 
namely,  aSwoA  As. 

If  we  have  three  letters,  abcy  to  consider,  we  observe  that 
each  of  the  three  may  take  the  first  place,  while  the  two 
others  will  admit  of  two  transpositions  ;  thus,  if  a  be  the  first 
letter,  we  have  two  arrangements  abc^  atb  ;  if  6  be  in  the  first 
place,  we  have  the  arrangements  Aoc,  Ara  ;  lastly,  if  c  oc^ 
eupy  the  first  place,  we  have  also  two  arrangements,  namely, 
coo,  eba  ;  coniMquently  the  whole  number  of  arrangements 
U  8  X  2  =  6. 

If  there  be  four  letters  abed^  each  may  occupy  the  first 
fdace;  and  in  every  case  the  three  others  may  form  six 
«flSerent  arrangements,  as  we  have  juit  seen  ;  therefbre  the 
whole  number  of  transpositions  is4x6s84K4x8x 
t  X  1. 

If  we  have  five  letters,  aAcdr,  each  of  the  five  may  be  the 


CHAP.  XI.  OF  ALGEBRA.  117 

first,  and  the  four  others  will  admit  of  twenty-four  trans- 
positions ;  so  that  the  whole  number  of  transportions  wiU 
beSx  ^4  =  120  =  6x4x3x2x1. 

356.  Consequently,  However  great  the  number  of  letters 
may  be,  it  is  evident,  provided  they  are  all  different,  that  we 
may  easily  determine  the  number  of  transpositions^  and  that 
we  may'  for  this  purpose  make  use  of  the 'following  Table  : 


Number  of  Letters. 

Number  of  Transpositions. 

1 

. 

1  =  1. 

8 

. 

• 

8.1=8. 

3 

- 

- 

3.Ä.1  =  & 

4 

i. 

. 

4 .  3 .  8  .  1  =  84. 

5 

M 

■ 

1 

5. 

4  .  3  .  8  .  1  =  180. 

6 

- 

6. 

.5. 

,  4  .  8  .  8 .  1  =  780. 

7 

- 

7. 

,6 

.5. 

4.3.8.1  =  5040. 

8 

8. 

7. 

,6, 

.5. 

4.3.8.1  =  40380. 

9 

-     9.8. 

7. 

,6 

.5. 

,4.3.8.1=  368880. 

10    10. 9. 8. 7. 6. 5. 4. 8. 2.1  =  3628800. 

357.  But,  as  we  have  intimated,  the  numbers  in  this 
Table  can  be  made  use  of  only  when  all  the  letters  are  dif- 
ferent ;  for  if  two  or  more  of  them  are  alike,  the  number  of 
transpositions  becomes  much  less  ;  and  if  all  the  letters  are 
the  same,  we  have  only  one  arran^ment  :  we  shall  there- 
fore now  shew  how  the  numbers  m  the  Table  are  to  be 
diminished,  according  to  the  number  of  letters  that  are 
alike. 

358.  When  two  letters  are  ^ven,  and  those  letters  are^ 
the  same,  the  two  arrangements  are  reduced  to  one,  and 
consequently  the  number,  which  we  have  found  above,  is 
reduced  to  the  half;  that  is  to  say,  it  must  be  divided  by  2. 
If  we  have  three  letters  alike,  the  six  transpositions  are  re- 
duced to  one  ;  whence  it  follows  that  die  numbers  in  the 
Table  must  be  divided  »by  6  =  3.2.  1  ;  and,  for  the  same 
reason,  if  four  letters  are  alike,  we  must  divide  the  numbers 
found  by  24,  or  4  .  3  .  2  . 1,  &c. 

It  is  easy  therefore  to  find  how  many  transportions  the 
letters  cuiabbc,  for  example,  may  undei^  They  are  in 
number  6,  and  consequently,  if  they  were  all  different,  they 
would  admit  of  6.5. 4. 3. 2.1  transpositions;  but  since 
a  is  found  thrice  in  those  letters,  we  must  divide  that  num- 
ber of  transportions  by  3  .  2  . 1  ;  and  since  b  occurs  twice, 
we  must  again  divide  it  by  2.1:  the  number  of  trans- 


118  KUIllKliTS  «BCT.  11. 

poiitiom  required  will  therefore  be     I'll — L    j     =  6  . 

850.  We  nunr  now  rea£l  j  determine  the  coefficients  of 
all  the  terms  or  any  power;  as  for  example  of  the  serenth 
power  (a  +  by. 

The  first  term  is  o^,  which  occurs  onl^f  once  ;  and  as  all 

the  other  terms  have  each  seren  letters,  it  follows  that  the 

number  of  trannontions  for  each  term  would  be  7  .  6  .  5  • 

4.8.2.1,  if  all  the  letters  were  différent;  but  since  in  the 

second  term»  ^b^  we  find  six  letters  alike,  we  must  divide 

the  above  product  by  6  .  5  .  4  .  8  .  2  .  1,  whence  it  follows 

^      ,       _^  .      .  7.6-5.4.3.2.  I       7 
that  the  coefficient  u  —3 — = — r — 5 — ^    «     =  -i-. 

O.O.ik.O.X.l  1 

In  the  third  term,  o^A*,  we  find  the  tame  letter  o  five 

times,  and  the  same  letter  b  twice;  we  must  therefore 

divide  that  number  first  by  5.4.8.2.1,  and  then  bv 

^,       •  •      «         A»*        7.6.5.4.8.2.1 

2.1;  whence  results  the  coefficient  -r — 7 — s — s — i — s — î 

d.^.o.z.  1  .Se.  1 

7.6 

The  fourth  term  o*A*  oootain»  the  letter  a  four  tbnes,  and 

the  letter  b  thrice  ;  oooaequeotly,  the  whole  number  of  the 

tnntpontions  of  the  teren  leiten,  mutt  be  divided,  in  the 

first  idaoe,  by  4 .  3  .  S .  I,  and,  teoondly,  by  S  .  S  .  1,  and 

. .      , 7.6.5.  4.3.«. 1      7^^ 

theooefflaentbecome.«^    g    jj    J    3    j^    ,  =  ^-^-5. 

'V     it     K     A 

In  the  same  manner,  we  find  ,    o'  a'  a.  ^^  ^  coefficient 

1  •  X .  9 .  4 

of  the  fifth  term,  and  soof  the  rest;  by  which  the  rule  before 

given  is  demonstrated  *. 

860.  These  connderations  carry  us  farther,  and  shew  us 

*  From  Die  Theory  qfComhimatiom,  alio,  are  frequentlv  de- 
duced tlie  rules  that  have  just  been  considered  for  determining 
the  coefficients  of  terms  of  the  power  of  a  binomial  ;  and  this  is 
perlisps  attended  with  some  advantage,  as  the  whole  is  then  re> 
ducea  to  a  single  formula. 

In  order  to  perceive  the  difference  between  pmmmiatioms  and 
eombinasicms^  it  may  be  observed,  that  in  the  former  we  inquire 
in  how  many  different  wars  the  letters,  which  compose  a  certain 
formula«  may  change  place»;  whereas,  in  combinations  it  is 
only  necessary  to  know  how  many  timeii  these  letters  may  be 
taken  or  muluplied  together,  one  by  one,  two  by  two,  three  by 
three,  Ac 


CHAP.  XI.  OF    ALGKBAA.  119 

also  how  to  find  all  the  powers  of  roots  composed  of  mote 
than  two  terms  *.  We  snail  a}^Iy  them  to  the  third  power 
of  a  -|-  6  +  £  ;  the  terms  of  which  must  be  formed  oy  all 
the  possible  combinations  of  three  letters,  eadi  term  having 
for  its  coefficient  the  number  of  its  transpositions,  as  shewn. 
Art  352. 

Here,  without  performing  the  multiplicadon,  the  third 
power  of  (a  +  *  +  c)  will  be,  a?»  +  Sa*0  +  3aV  +  3a6*  + 
6aôc  +  3ac«  +  ft' +  36«  +  3Jc2  +  c' . 

Suppose  a  =  1,  5  =:  1,  c  =:  1,  the  cube  of  1  +  1  + 1»  or 
of3,wiU  be  1+3-1-3+8  +  6  +  8+1+8  +  3  +  1=27; 

Let  us  take  the  formula  abc  ;  here  we  know  that  the  letters 
which  compose  it  admit  of  six  permutations,  namely  abc,  acb,  Aoc, 
bca,  cab,  cba  :  but  as  for  combmations,  it  is  evident  that  by  taking 
these  three  letters  one  by  one,  we  have  three  combinations, 
namely,  a,  b,  and  c;  if  two  by  two,  we  have  three  combinations, 
abf  ac,  and  be  -y  lastly,  if  we  take  them  three  by  three,  we  have 
only  the  sinele  comoination  abc. 

Now,  in  the  same  manner  as  we  prove  that  n  different  things 
admit  of  1  x  2  x  3  x  4*-- n  different  permutations,  and  that  if 
r  of  these  n  things  are  equal,  the  number  of  permutations  is 

; — - — ;  so  likewise  we  prove  that  n  thinirs  may  be  taken 

1  x2x3x   -r  ^  ©        / 

nx(»l)— X(«— 2)— (n— r  +  l)         ,         -  .  ^ 

r  by  r,  — ^ — -— — ;; — -^ — ^ number  of  times  ;  or  fhat 

^  Ix2x3-r 

we  may  take  r  of  these  n  things  in  so  many  different  ways. 

Mence,  if  we  call  n  the  exponent  of  the  power  to  which  we  wish 

to  raise  the  binomial  a  +  ^,  and  r  the  exponent  of  the  letter  b 

in  any  term,  the  coefficient  of  that  term  is  always  expressed 

I     .1.    r         1    wx(»-l)x(n-2)— (m— r+1)  . 

by  the  formula i ; — ^ — rr- — ^ -•    Thus,  m  the 

^  1x2x3 r 

example,  article  359,  where  n  =  7,  we  have  a^l^  for  the  third 

term,  the  exponent  r  =  2,  and  consequently  the  coefficient  ss 

7  x6 

; — -  ;  for  the  fourth  term  we  have  r  =  3,  and  the  coefficient 

1  x2 

7  x6  x5 
=  — - — -,  and  so  on  ;  which  are  evidently  the  same  results  as 

the  permutations. 

For  complete  and  extensive  treatises  on  the  theory  of  com- 
binations, we  are  indebted  to  Fremde,  De  MotUmart,  James 
Bernoulli,  &c.  The  two  last  have  investigated  this  theory, 
with  a  view  to  its  great  utility  in  the  calculation  of  proba- 
bilities.   F.T. 

*  Hoots,  or  quantities,  composed  of  more  than  two  terms,  are 
called  polynamialê,  in  order  to  distinguish  them  from  binomiaUf 
or  quantities  composed  of  two  terms.     F.  T. 


m  XLtHfiHTft  SBCT.  Il* 

which  result  b  aocuimlei  and  ooofinnt  the  rule.  But  if  we 
had  fuppoeed  a  =:  l,  6  =:  1,  and  c  :=  -  1,  we  ahould  have 
found  lor  the  cube  ofl-t-l-^l^thatisofl, 

1+8-8  +  8-6  +  8  +  1-3-1-8-  r=l,  which 
b  a  ttJll  fiurthcr  oonfinnafian  of  the  rule. 


CHAP.  XII. 

Qf  <Ar  ExprcMJon  £f  Irrational  Powers  bgf  Infinite  Series. 

861.  As  we  have  shewn  the  method  of  finding  any  power 
of  the  root  a  +  6,  however  greftt  the  exponent  may  be,  we 
are  d>Ie  to  express,  ^eneraUy,  the  power  of  a  +  6,  whose 
exponent  b  undetermined  ;  for  it  b  evident  that  if  we  repre- 
sent that  exponent  by  n,  we  shall  have  by  the  rule  alrndy 
given  (Art  348  and  the  following): 

(•  +  *)-  =  «•  + ya^*+ y  .  îi^'«--^*«  +  y.i=i. 

96BL  If  the  same  power  of  the  root  a  —  6  were  required, 
we  need  only  change  the  ngns  of  the  second,  fourth,  sixth, 
&c  terms»  and  should  have 

-1        ...      n     «-I 


a 


ft-   **-r 


(o  -  *)•  =  a-  -  -  a"-»*  +  —  . 

IS— Ä  .    ,.    .   H     II— 1     n— 2    «—8 

90S.  These  formuks  are  remarkably  useful,  since  they 
serve  also  to  express  all  kinds  of  radicads;  for  we  have  shewn 
that  all  irrational  quantities  may  assume  the  form  of  powers 

whose  exponenu  are  fractional,  and  that  l/a  =  a^,{/a  s a^^ 
I 

and  ^a  n  a^,  &c.  :  we  have,  therefore, 

l/(a  +  A)  s  (a  +  by  ;  i/(a  +  A)  =(a  +  by  ; 

and  i/(a  +  A)  =  (fl  -h  A)î,  «ce- 

Consequently,  if  we  wish  to  find  the  square  root  of  a  +  A, 
we  have  only  to  substitute  for  the  exponent  n  the  fraction  ;, 
in  the  genenil  formula.  Art.  361,  and  we  sliall  have  first,  for 
the  coefficients. 


CHAP.  XII«  OF  AL6ABKA.    -  ISl 

-  tV;  —g—  =  -  A-    Then,  a"  =  äJ  =  v^aand  aw-i— 

-~-  ;  a"— •=:  — — ;  a  — '=  -r-— ,  8cc  or  we  mutht  express 
those  powers  of  a  in  the  following  manner  :  a"  =  \/£i  ;  a"— ^ 

a  a*       a*  a'       a'  '  a* 

364.  This  being  laid  down,  the  square  root  of  a  4.  6  may 
be  expressed  in  the  following  manner  : 

k/  CL  »y  OL  */ä 

-/{a  +  6)  =  v'a  +  4*^  -  i  .  i^'—  +  i  .  i-lft»^ 

865.  If  a  therefore  be  a  square  number,  we  may  assign 
the  value  of  s^  a^  and,  consequently,  the  square  root  of 
a  \  h  may  be  expressed  by  an  infimte  series,  without  any 
radical  sign. 

Let,  for  example,  a  =:  e%  we  shall  have  'v/a  =  c;  then 
,<,       ..  é  é»  b^  *• 

&c. 

We  see,  therefore,  that  there  is  no  number,  whose  square 
root  we  may  not  extract  in  diis  manner  ;  since  every  number 
may  be  resolved  into  two  parts,  one  of  which  is  a  square  re- 
presented by  c*.  If,  for  example,  the  square  root  of  6  be 
required,  we  make  6  =z  4  +  ^9  consequently,  c*  n  4,  e  =:  2, 
6  =  2,  whence  results 

If  we  take  only  the  two  leadiiLg  terms  of  this  series,  we 
shall  have  9,\  =  |,  the  square  of  which,  y,  is  ^  greater 
than  6  ;  but  if  we  consider  three  terms,  we  have  2  1^  =  4t9 
the  square  of  which,  ViV  »  ^  ^^  tiV  ^^^  small. 

36o.  Since,  in  this  example,  \  approaches  very  nearly  to 
the  true  value  of  v^6,  we  shall  taice  for  6  the  equivalent 
quantity  y  —  ^;  thus  c*  =  y  ;  c  =  4;  b  =  i;  and  cal- 
culating only  the  two  leading  terms,  we  find  ^6  =  ^  -f-  4. . 
I  I 

-7^.=  4  -  1  .  -7-  =  i  -  ^  =  îl^;  the  square  of  which 

T  Y 


Its  MLÊMmurn  tKCT.  tu 


firactkxi  being  VqV*  ^^  exceeds  the  square  of  ^/6  only 

bv  ^'  . 

^\  making  6  =  y^V  —  rÄ7>»^^^  =  fS*öd*  = 
<— ^-^;  and  «tiU  taking  only  the  two  leading  tenns»  we 


^OTi    _    49    _ 


llAV»    4/ß   —   ♦•  4-  •  ^^"^    —   ♦»    —    1        ^  _ 

IIBTC    W   —  YBT     I     T   •         4»         •"TO  l*4ViO  TTTrö 

==  ^rri»  the  square  of  i^ch  is  ViViVcTV  Tand  6,  when  re- 
duoed  to  the  same  denominator,  is  =:  yr^rco  «  ^  cn^v 
therefore  is  only  ig^igop, 

567.  Inthesamemanner,  we  may  express  the  cube  root  of 
a-(-A  by  an  infinite  series  ;  for  since  t/(a4-6)  =  (a  +  A>j-9  we 
shall  have  in  the  general  formula,  ii=|y  ana  for  the  coefficients, 
n       ^    «—1  J     n— 8  ^       ^    n— 8  _      ^    n  — 4 

—  -f-f,  &C.  and,  with  rq^ard  to  the  powers  of  a,  we  shall  have 

a"  =i/tf;  a*"-'=  — ;  a-—*  =^;  a"-^  =  -,-,fcc.  then 

a  a*  a' 

y«  ya  2/a 

a* 

568.  If  a  therefore  be  a  cube,  or  a  sc«,  we  have  Va  =ry 
and  the  radical  signs,  will  vanish  ;  for  we  shall  have 

'{^  +  *)  =  ^  +  T*'^""i*"JJ  +  iT  *7*""  vvr  •  "^ 

+,&c. 

369.  We  have  therefore  arrived  at  a  formula,  whidi  will 
enable  us  to  find,  bgf  approximation,  the  cube  root  of  any 
number  ;  since  every  number  may  be  resolved  into  two  parts, 
as  c'  +  Â,  the  first  of  which  is  a  cube. 

If  we  wish,  for  examplci  to  determine  the  cube  root  of  3, 
we  represent  2  by  1  -f  1,  so  that  c  s  1  and  6  =  1;  con- 
sequently, ^2  =:  1  +  I  -  ;.  +  ^V,  &c.  The  two  leading 
terms  of  this  series  make  1^  =  ^  the  cube  of  which  ty  is 
too  great  by  ;?:  let  us  therefore  make  2  =  Î4  -  j^,  we 
have  c  =  I  and  6  =  —  4^,  and  consequently  y  S  =:  |  -I- 


I  o 


-7^  :  these  two  terms  give  f  —  y\  si  ^,  the  cube  of 


which  »  î^^;i;  :  but,  2  =  f?«^^,  so  that  the  mar  is 
pjy^^ji  ;  and  in  this  way  we  miglit  still  approximate,  the 
aster  m  proportion  as  we  take  a  greater  numoer  of  terms  ^. 


É 


*  III  tlie  l^ilufopliical  Tranftsctions  fur  HiiH,  Dr.  Ilalley  Um 
flï%en  s  \ery  clcfcanf  and  general  methtKl  (or  cxtractioK  root*  of 


CHAP.  XIII.  OF   ALOJbBBA.  ISS 


CHAP.  XIII. 
Of  the  Resolution  ^Negative  Powers. 


a 
1 


nay  be  expressed 


by  a— ^  ;  we  may  therefore  express r  also  by  (a  +  ô)~*; 

so  that  the  fraction  — -i  may  be  considered  as  a  powjer  of 

a  +  6^  namely,  that  power  whose  exponent  is  ~  1  ;  from 
which  it  follows,  that  the  series  already  found  as  the  value 
of  (a  +  ^Y  extends  also  to  this  case. 

871.  Since,  therefore  --j--;  is  the  same,  as  (a  +  ô)~*,  let 
us  suppose,  in  the  general  formula,  [Art.  861.]  n  n—  1  ; 


n 


and  we  shall  first  have,  for  the  coefficients,  —  =  —  1; 

n—  1  n— 2  n— S  ^    •■  /•     i 

-g—  =  —  1;  -g—  =  —  J;  —2-  =  — l,&a  And,  for  the. 

powers  of  a,  we  have  a*  =  a— ^  rz  —  ;  a*-*  =  a~*  = 

'^;  «•-«  =  -^;  a'^z:^  &C.:  so  that  (a  +  Ä)-*  =  ^ 

1        b       *«       é»       é*       i*    „        ....     1. 
n r  +  iâ  —  *irH — K «•>  »e-  which  is  the  same 

series  that  we  found  befcnre  by  division. 
872.  Farther,  t-t-tTj  being  the  same  with  (a  +  6)—%  let 


any  degree  whatever  by  approximation  ;  where  he  demonstrates 
this  general  formula, 

Those  who  have  not  an  opportunitv  of  consulting  the  Philo- 
sophical Transactions,  will  find  the  rorroation  and  the  use  of  this 
forniula  explained  in  the  new  edition  of  Lemons  Elémentaires 
de  Mathématiques  by  M.  D'Abbé  de  la  Caille,  published  by 
M.  L'Abbé  Marie.  F.  T.  See  also  Dr.  Hutton's  Math.  Dic- 
tionary. 


1S4  BLBMXirrs  bbgt«  ii. 


OS  leduoe  this  quantity  alio  U>  an  infinite  teriet.    For 
purpose,  we  must  suppose  n  =  —  8;  and  we  shall  first  have, 

fiir  the  Goeflkaents,  Y  =  -1;  -g"  ="  ^'"T"  ^  ""  ^' 
—J-  r:  — ^  8uu;  and,  fiir  the  powers  of  a,  we  obtain  tf*= 
y;a*"'=^;«'^  =  -jr;«'^  =  ^f    8tc      We    have 

A  A*  A*  A^  ^  y 

S73.  Let  us  proceed,  and  suppose  ii  =i  —  3,  and  we  shall 
haire  •  i»ie.  «pi«»ng  the  ^due  of  ^-jlj^or  of  (a+A)-. 

Here  the  ooeflkients  will  be  —-  =  —  |;  — ^  =  —  îî  ^ö" 

s  —  4,  8ic.  and  the  powen  of  a  become,  a*  s:  — ?-;  a—*  = 

a 

I      .       I.        ....  I  I        8. A 

8.44»    8.4.5.y    a.iJt.6^      I  *  A»         4» 

6*  A>  4» 

If  now  we  make  n  =  —  4;  we  shall  have  for  the  oo- 

J,  &C.  And  for  the  powers,  a"  =  -r  ;  a*-»  =:  —  ;  n"'«  »  -^^ 

a^'  =  -j;  fl***  =  —J,  whence  we  obtain, 
_l I        4A      4JS.A*      *^A*!  V     -'  * 

374.    The  different    case»    that    have    been    considérai 


CHAP.  XIII.  OF   ALGEBKA.  1S6 

enaUe  us  to  oondude  with  certainty,  that  we'  shall  lunre^ 
generally,  for  any  negative  power  of  a  +  ft  ; 

1  1       m.6      tw.(m--l).6*     m.(m- l).(m-.2)^ 


&c.  And,  by  means  of  this  formula,  we  may  transform  all 
such  fractions  into  infinite  series,  substituting  fractions  also, 
or  fractional  exponents,  for  m,  in  order  to  express  irrational 
quantities. 

375.  The  following  considerations  will  illustrate  this  sub- 
ject still  farther  :  for  we  have  seen  that, 

a+b^  a     a«+  a'      a*"'"  a»  ""  a«  +'  ^^• 

If,  therefore,  we  multiply  this  series  by  a  +  ^t  the  pro- 
duct ou^ht  to  be  =  1  ;  ana  thb  is  found  to  be  true,  as  will 
be  seen  Dy  performing  the  multiphcation  : 

I        6        6*        6'        ft*        i*    ,     ^ 

a  +  ft 

"        ft   .    ft*        A^   ft*       **    .     , 

,    ft       ft»       ft»        ft*       ft*         ^ 


where  all  the  terms  but  the  first  cancel  each  other. 
376.  We  have  also  found,  that 

1  I        Äft   .    3ft*      4ft'       6ft*      6ft*    , 

And  if  we  multiply  this  series  by  (a  +  ft)«,  the  product 
ought  also  to  be  equal  to  1.  Now,  (a  +  6)«  =  a«  +  Soft 
+  ft*,  and 

I        2ft      3ft*     W  .  5ft*     6ft*  .       ^ 

a*        c?  ^  a^       (^^  cfi       a^  ^    ' 
a>+2aÄ+ft* 

"       ift       3ft«       40»       5ft*       6ft* 
26       4ft-   ,    6ft*       8ft*      10ft» 

,    ft»        Aft'   ,    3A*       4ft*    ,     ^ 

-I ; — +      &C. 

~  a*        a*  ^    a*         a*    ^  ' 


196  MiJÊÊaKKn  AB<*T.  III. 

which  gms  1  fiir  the  produet,  at  the  nttiire  of  the  thii^ 
rpquircd. 
S77.  If  we  multiply  the  aeries  which  we  found  for  the 

▼aluc  of      I  rvaf  by  a  +  &  only,  the  product  ought  to  an- 
awcr  to  the  firactioo  "^nrt  or  be  equal  to  the  teriea  ahready 

found,  namely, r+  --r  —  --r+  "ZS"»  ^^  «od  this  the 

actual  multiplicatioQ  will  confirm. 

1        26    ,    84=       W       64*    ^ 

a  ^  ««  "^    a'  «♦   +    a»  •  ^''' 

4       24-        36»        U* 


r  +  "TT  — ^  +  "*=:»  8«c.  as  required. 


SECTION  nr. 


O/*  Ratios  anJ  Proportions. 


CHAP.  I. 

Q/*  Arithinetical  Ratio,  or  îfihi'  Différence  bctwtcn  iwy 

Numbers. 

S7H.  Two  quantities  are  cither  equal  to  one  anotlicr,  or 
they  are  not.  In  the  latter  case,  where  one  is  matiT 
than  the  other«  we  may  consider  their  inei{uality  unoer  twt> 
different  points  of  view  :  we  may  ask,  how  mêtch  um* 
of  the  quantities  is  greater  than  tlic  other  r  Or  we  may  a-^k, 
hom  mamt^  timrt  the  tme  is  grvatcr  than  the  other  r     The 


CHAP.  I.  OF   AI|OBBBA.  187 

results  which  constitute  the  answers  to  these  two  questions 
are  both  called  rriations^  or  ratios.  We  usually  call  the 
former  an  arUhmetical  ratio^  and  the  latter  a  geometrical 
ratio,  without  however  these  denominations  havinff  any  con- 
nexion with  the  subject  itself.  The  adopticm  of  tfiese  ex- 
pressions has  been  entirely  arbitrary. 

379.  It  is  evident,  that  the  quantities  of  which  we  apeak 
must  be  of  one  and  the  same  kmd  ;  otherwise  we  coula  not 
determine  an^  thins  with  regard  to  thôr  equality,  or  in-^ 
equality  :  for  it  would  be  absurd  to  ask  if  two  pounds  and' 
three  ells  are  equal  quantities.  So  that  in  woat  follows, 
quantities  of  the  same  kind  only  are  to  be  considered; 
and  as  they  may  always  be  expre^ed  by  numbers,  it  is  of 
numbers  only  that  we  shall  treat,  as  was  menticmed  at  the 
berâining. 

»80.  When  of  two  given  numbers,  therefore,  it  is  re- 
quired how  much  the  one  is  greater  than  the  other,  the 
answer  to  this  question  determines  the  arithmetical  ratio  of 
the  two  numbers  ;  but  since  this  answer  consists  in  giving 
the  difference  of  the  two  numbers,  it  follows,  that  an  arith- 
metical ratio  is  nothing  but  the  difference  between  two 
numbers;  and  as  this  appears  to  be  a  better  expression,  we 
shall  reserve  the  words  raOo  and  relation  to  express  geo- 
metrical ratios. 

381.  As  the  difference  between  two  numbers  is  found  by 
subtracting  the  less  from  the  greater,  nothing  can  be  eaner 
than  resolving  the  question  how  much  one  is  greater  than 
the  other:  so  that  when  the  numbers  are  cfqual,  the  dif- 
ference being  nothing,  if  it  be  required  how  much  one  of  the 
numbers  is  greater  than  the  other,  we  answer,  by  nothing; 
for  example,  6  bring  equal  to  2  x  8,  the  difference  between 
6  and  2  X  8  is  0. 

382.  But  when  the  two  numbers  are  not  equal,  as  5  and 
8,  and  it  is  required  how  much  5  is  greater  than  9,  the 
answer  is,  2  ;  whidi  is  obtained  by  subtracting  8  from  fi. 
Likewise  15  is  greater  than  5  by  10;  and  SO  exceeds  8 
by  12. 

888.  We  have  therefore  three  things  to  conrider  on  this 
subject;  1st.  the  greater  of  the  two  numbers;  Sd.  the  less; 
and  8d.  the  difference  :  and  these  three  quantities  are  so  con- 
nected together,  that  any  two  of  the  three  being  given,  we 
may  always  determine  the  third. 

Let  the  greater  number  be  a,  the  less  6,  and  die  difference 
d  ;  then  d  will  be  found  by  subtracting  b  from  ^,  so  that 
d  =i  a  —  b;  whence  we  see  how  to  find  J,  when  a  and  b  arc 
given. 


1S8  BLSMV^i^  »(^T.  III. 

884.  But  if  the  differeiiee  and  the  leM  of  the  two  num. 
ben,  thai  ia»  if  d  and  b  were  giTen,  we  miffht  determine  the 

Cter  number  by  adding  together  the  cmEerence  and  the 
number,  wUch  ffiTes  o  s  &  -|-  d;  for  if  we  take  from 
A  4-  d  the  lew  numoer  6,  there  remains  d,  which  is  the 
known  cUfferenoe:  suppose«  fiir  «ample,  the  less  number 
is  18;  and  the  difference  8,  then  the  greater  number  will 
be  90. 

SS5.  Lasdy,  if  beside  the  difference  d,  the  greater  num- 
ber a  be  giren,  the  other  number  b  is  found  by  subtracting 
the  differwiee  from  the  greater  number,  wUdi  gives  b  zza 
—  d;  for  if  the  number  a  —  d  be  taken  from  the  greater 
number  a,  there  remains  df  which  is  the  given  difference. 

S86.  The  connexion,  therefore,  among  the  numbers,  a, 
&,  d,  is  of  such  a  nature  as  to  give  the  three  fcdiowing  re* 
suits:  1st.  d=:a  •>  A;  ad,  asr  6 -f.  d;  8d.  6  =:  a  — d; 
and  if  one  of  these  three  comparisons  be  just,  the  others 
must  necessarily  be  so  also  :  therefore,  generally,  if  2  ^  x+ 
y,  it  necessarily  follows,  that  ^  =r  z  —  jr,  and  x  -^  z  ^y. 

887.  With  regard  to  these  arithmetical  ratios  we  must 
remark,  that  if  we  add  to  the  two  numbers  a  and  b^  any 
number  c,  assumed  at  pleasure,  or  subtract  it  from  them,  the 
difligrence  remains  the  same;  thai  is,  if  d  is  the  difference 
between  a  and  6,  that  number  d  will  also  be  the  difference 
between  a  +  ^  and  6  -h  c,  and  between  a^c  and  6  —  r. 
Thus,  for  example,  the  difference  between  the  numbers  80 
and  18  being  8,  that  diflerence  wiU  remain  the  same,  what- 
ever numbed  we  add  to,  or  subtract  from,  the  numbers  SO 
and  12. 

888.  The  proof  of  thb  is  evident  :  for  if  a  —  A  =:  d,  we 
have  also  (n  4-  c)  —  (6  +  c)  =  d;  and  Ukewise  (a  —  r)  — 
(A  -  r)  =  il 

dK9.  And  if  we  double  the  two  numbers  a  and  6,  the  dif- 
ference will  also  become  double  ;  thus,  when  a  -  6  :=  d,  we 
shall  have  8»  -  86  =:  8d;  and,  generally,  via  —  fi6  =  nd, 
whatever  value  we  give  to  n. 


CHAP.  !!•  OF  ALORBRA.  ISd 


CHAP.  II. 

(y  Arithmetical  Proportion. 

890.  When  two  arithmetical  ratios,  or  relations,  are  equal, 
this  equality  is  called  an  arithmetical propartiofi. 

Thus,  when  a  -^  b  ^d  and  p  —  g  »  d,  so  that  the  dif- 
ference is  the  same  between  the  numbers  p  and  q  as  between 
the  numbers  a  and  6,  we  say  that  these  four  numbers  form 
an  arithmetical  proportion  ;  which  we  write  thus,  a  -^  b  =: 
p  —  a,  expressing  clearly  by  this,  that  the  difference  between 
a  and  b  is  equal  to  the  différence  between  p  and  q. 

391.  An  arithmetical  proportion  consists  therefore  of  four 
terms,  which  must  be  such,  that  if  we  subtract  the  second 
from  the  first,  the  remainder  is  the  same  as  when  we  sub* 
tract  the  fourth  from  the  third  ;  thus,  the  four  numbers  12, 
7»  9,  4,  form  an  arithmetical  proportion,  because  12«-' 
7  =  9-4. 

992.  When  we  have  an  arithmetical  proportion,  as  a  —  & 
=  p  —  9,  we  may  make  the  second  and  third  terms  change 
places,  writing  a  —  p  =  6  —  j  :  and  this  equality  ,will  be 
no  less  true  ;  for,  since  a  —  6  =  /?  —  g,  add  o  to  both  sides, 
and  we  have  a  =a  6  +|>  —  y  :  then  subtract  p  from  both 
sides,  and  we  have  a  —  p  zz  o  -^  q. 

In  the  same  manner,  as  12  —  7  =  9  —  4,  so  also  12  — 
9  =  7-4». 

393.  We  may  in  every  arithmetical  proportion  put  the 
second  term  also  in  the  place  of  the  first,  if  we  make  the 
same  transposition  of  the  third  and  fourth  ;  that  is,  if  a  -^ 
Ô  =  p  —  y,  we  have  also  6  —  a  =  gf— p;  for  6  —  a  is 
the  negative  of  a  —  6,  and  q  —  p  is  also  the  negative  of 

?  —  q  ;    and  thus,   since  12  -*  7  =  S  —  4,  we  have  also^ 
-  12  =  4  -  9. 

394.  But  the  most  interesting  property  of  every  arith- 
metical proportion  is  this,  that  the  sum  of  the  second  and 
third  term  is  always  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  first  and  fourtb« 
This  property,  which  we  must  particularly  consider,  is  ex- 
pressed also  by  saying  that  the  sum  of  ttie  means  is  equal 
to  the  sum  of  the  extremes.  Thus,  since  12  -  7=9  —  4, 
we  have  7  -f  9  =  12  +  4;  the  sum  being  in  both  cases  16. 

*  To  indicate  that  those  numbers  form  such  a  proportion^ 
some  authors  write  them  thus  :  12 . 7  :  :  9  .  i. 


180  ELEMENT»  »ECT.  111. 

S95.  In  order  to  demoattnUe  this  principal  property,  let 
a  —  6  =  p  —  J  ;  then  if  wc  add  to  Doth  b^  g,  we  nave 
a  -|-  9  =  ^  +  P  ;  that  is,  the  sum  of  the  6rst  and  fourth 
terms  is  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  second  and  third  :  and  in- 
▼eraely,  of  four  numbers,  a,  b,  p^  f,  arc  such,  that  the  sum 
of  the  second  and  third  is  equal  to  the  sum  <rf*  the  first  and 
fourth  ;  that  is,  if  6  -{-  /i  =:  a  -|-  9,  we  conclude,  without  a 
posnbiUty  of  mistake,  that  those  numbers  are  in  arithmetical 
proportion,  and  that  a  —  6  =  /^  —  9  ;  for,  since  a  -|-  9  =  6 
4*  Pt  if  we  subtract  from  both  sides  i  -{-  9,  we  (^tain  a  —  A 

Inius,  the  numbers  18, 13,  15,  10^  being  such,  tluit  the 
mm  of  the  means  (13  -{-  15  =  28)  is  equd  to  the  sum  of 
the  extremes  (18  +  10  =:  S8),  it  is  certain  that  tlicy  also 
form  an  arithmetical  proportion;  and,  consequently,  tliut 
18  -  13  =  15  -  10. 

806.  It  is  easy,  by  means  of  this  property,  to  resolve  tlu* 
following  question.  The  first  tlirce  terms  of  un  arithmetical 
proportion  being  given,  to  find  tlie  fourth  ?  LfCt  a,  b,  ;i,  be 
the  first  three  terms,  and  let  us  express  the  fourth  by  ^ 
which  it  is  required  to  determine,  then  a  -}~  7  =  ^  ~l~  P  ^  '>>' 
SttbUmcting  a  from  both  sides,  we  obtain  o  =  &  -{-  p  —  a. 

Thus,  the  fourth  term  is  found  by  adding  together  the 
«aoood  and  third,  and  subtracting  tlie  firU  from  that  sum. 
Suppose,  for  example,  tliat  19,  ^  13,  are  tlie  three  first 
given  terms,  the  sum  ol*  the  second  and  third  is  41  :  and 
taking  from  it  the  first,  which  is  19,  there  remains  ^  tor  tlio 
fourth  term  sought,  and  the  arithmetical  pn>|K>rüiai  uill  Ik.* 
represented  by  19  -  28  =  13  —  22,  or  bv  Ü8  -  19  =  ±i 
-  13,  or,  lastly,  by  28  -  i»  =  19  -.  13-  ' 

397.  When  in  arithmetical  pit>|)ortion  the  second  term  m 
equal  to  the  third,  we  have  only  three  numbers  ;  tlie  uro- 
perty  of  which  is  this,  that  the  first,  minus  tlie  hxxmiu,  is 
equiu  to  the  second,  minus  the  third  ;  or  that  the  diflen*nce 
between  the  first  and  second  number  is  eqiuü  to  the  dif- 
foreoce  between  the  second  and  thinl:  the  three  numbers 
19, 15,  11,  are  ot*  this  kind,  since  19  -  15  =  Li  -  11. 

998.  Three  such  numbi*rs  are  said  to  form  a  continued 
arithmetical  proportion,  which  is  Miiuetiines  written  thus, 
10  :  15  :  11.  Such  proportions  turv  alito  calli-d  arithmetical 
prügrcssions^  |Kirticularly  if  a  greater  numl)er  of  terms 
follow  each  other  according  to  tlie  mime  law. 

An  arithmetical  prygresaion  may  he  thither  increasing^  or 
decrecuing,  Tlie  tonner  distinction  is  applic«!  when  the 
tarais  go  on  iocreitotng  ;  that  is  to  say«  when  tlie  second  ex- 
ceeds the  first,  and  the  third  exceeds  the  second  bv  the 


CHAP.  ni.  OF  illiOBBflA.  181 

* 

snne  <p]antity;'a8  in  the  numbers  4,  7,  10;  and  the  de- 
creasing progression  is  that  in  which  the  terms  go  on  always 
diminishing  by  the  same  quantity,  such  as  the  numbèt«- 
9,  5i  1.  , 

399;  Let  us  suppose  the  numbers  o^  d,  c,  to  be  in  aridK 
metioal-  progression  ;  then  a  —  i  =  i  —  c,  whence  it  follows, 
from  the  equ^ity  between  the  sum  of  the  extreme!  and  that 
oB  the  means,  that  ^  r:  a  -)-  r  ;  and  if  we  subtract  a  from 
both,  we  have  ^  —  a  =&  c. 

400.  So  that  when  the  first  two  terms  a,  6,  of  an  arith- 
metical progression  are  given,  the  third  is  found  by  taking 
the  first  from  twice  the  second.  Let  1  and  3  be  the  first 
two  terms  of  an  arithmetiqal  progression,  the  third  will  be 
2x3  —  1  =  5;  and  these  three  numbers  1,  3,  5,  give  the 
proportion 

1-3  =  3-5. 

401.  By  following  the  same  method,  we  may  pursue  the 
arithmetical  progression  as  far  as  we  please  ;  we  have  only 
to  find  the  fourtn  term  by  means  of  tne  second  and  thirci, 
in  the  same  manner  as  we  determined  the  third  by  means  of 
the  first  and  second,  and  so  on.  Let  a  be  the  first  term,  and 
b  the  second,  the  third  will  be  26  —  a,  the  fourth  4&  —  Sa 

—  i  =  36  _  2^,  the  fifth  66  —  4a-  2A-|-a  =  4i-8â, 
the  sixth  8é  -  6a  —  3é  +  2a  =  5é  -  4a,  the  seventh  106 

-  8a  -  46-1-  3a '=  66  -  5a,  &c. 


CHAP.  III. 


<^  Arithmetical  Progressions. 

402*  We  have  alieady  remarked,  that  a  series  of  numfaen 
composed  ot  any  number  of  termsj  which  always  increase^  or 
decrease,  by  the  same  quantity,  is  called  an  arithmeikal 
progression^ 

Tiius,  the  natural  num))ers  written  in  tlieir  order,  a« 
1,  2^  3,  4, 5,  6,  7,  8,  9,  10,  &c.  form  an  arithmetical  pro- 
gression, because  they  constantly  increase  bjr  unity;  and 
the  series  25,  22,  19,  16,. la,  10, 7,  4, 1,  &c  is  also  such  a^ 
progression,  since  the  numbers  constantly  decrease  by  8* 

^WSw  The  number^  or  quantity,  by  which  the  terms  of  an 
arithmetîeal  progression  become  greater  or  less^  is  called  tbe 

jk2 


lâS  mUUUUITS  SKT.  ttf. 


_  80  that  when  the  first  term  mnd  the 

are  given,  we  may  continue  the  arithmetical  progretsion  to 
anylength. 

For  example,  let  the  fimt  term  be  2,  and  the  diiTerence  3, 
and  we  shall  have  the  foUowins  increasing  progression: 
S,  fi,  8,  II,  14,  17,  20,  23,  26, 1»,  &c.  in  which  each  term 
b  found  by  adding  tlie  diflerence  to  the  preceding  one. 

404«  It  is  usual  to  write  the  natural  numbers,  1,  ii^  3,  4, 
6f  &c.  above  the  terms  of  such  an  arithmetical  progression, 
in  order  that  we  may  immediately  perceive  the  rank  which 
any  term  holds  in  tne  progression^  which  numbers,  wlien 
wntten  above  the  terms,  are  called  indices  s  thus,  the  above 
example  will  be  written  as  follows  : 

Mices,  12545       07       8       9IO 

Jrith.Prog.  2,  5,  8,  II,  14,  17,  20,  23,  26,  29,  &c. 
where  we  see  that  29  is  the  a*nth  term. 

405.  Let  a  be  the  first  term,  and  J  the  difference,  the 
arithmetical  progression  will  go  on  in  the  following  onler  : 

12         3         4  5  6  7 

a^a±dya±2d,a±3d,a±id,a±5d^a±6d,kc. 
aeoording  as  the  series  is  increasing,  or  decreasing,  whence 
it  appeant  tlmt  any  term  of  the  progression  mii;ht  be  easily 
fiMind,  without  tne  necessity  ol  finding  all  the  precluding 
ones,  by  means  only  of  the  first  term  a  and  the  difference  d  ; 
thus,  for  example,  the  tenth  term  will  be  a  ±  9t/,  the  hun- 
dredth term  a  ±  99d,  and,  generally,  the  nth  term  will  be 
a  ±  (fi  —  \)d. 

406.  ^Vhen  we  stop  at  any  point  of  the  progression,  it  is 
of  importance  to  attend  to  the  first  and  the  last  term,  since 
the  index  of  the  last  term  will  represent  tlie  number  of 
tertns.  If,  therefore,  the  first  term  be  a,  the  différence  J, 
and  the  nuniljer  of  terms  n,  we  shall  have  for  the  last  term 
a  ±  (n  —  1  )d^  according  as  the  series  is  increasing  or  de- 
creasing,  which  is  consequently  found  by  multiplying  the 
diflereni*e  by  the  number  of  tenns  ffiiitia  cme,  and  adding, 
or  subtractini^,  that  product  from  the  first  term.  SuppoM.\ 
for  example,  in  an  a.toendii^  arithmetical  pmgressi<jn  of  a 
hundred  terms,  the  first  term  is  4,  an<l  the  difference  3;  then 
the  lost  term  will  Ik*  99  x  3  +  4  n  ^}()l. 

407.  When  we  know  tlie  fimt  tenn  «,  and  the  last  s,  with 
the  numlier  of  terms  n,  we  can  find  tiie  difference  d  ;  for, 
since  the  last  term  :  =:  a  ±  (m  —  l)i/«  if  we  subtract  a  from 
both  sides,  we  obtain  :  —  a  =  (n  —  \)d.  8o  that  by  uking 
the  differenoi»  between  the  first  and  last  term,  we  nave  the 
product  of  the  difference  multiplied  by  the  number  of  termn 
mimnê  1  ;  we  have  therefore  only  to  aivide  x  —  a  by  ti  —  I 


^# 


AP.  III.  OF  ALOKBHA.  ISS 

in  order  to  obtain  the  required  value  of  the  difference  d^ 
which  will  be .     This  result  furnishes  the  following 

rule:  Subtract  the  first  term  from  the  last,  divide  the  re- 
mainder by  the  number  of  terms  minus  1,  and  the  quoti^t 
will  be  the  common  difference  :  by  means  of  which  we  may 
write  the  whole  progression. 

408.  Suppose,  for  example,  that  we  have  an  increasing 
arithmetical  progression  of  nine  terms,  whose  first  is  %  and 
last  26,  and  that  it  is  required  to  find  the  difference.  We  mqtt 
subtract  the  first  term  2  from  the  last  26,  and  divide  the  re- 
mainder, which  is  24,  by  9  —  1,  that  is,  by  8  ;  the  quotient 
8  will  be  equal  to  the  difference  requirea,  and  the  whole 
progression  will  be  : 

1234Ô678      9 

2,  5,  8, 11, 14, 17,  20,  23,  26. 

To  give  another  example,  let  us  suppose  that  the  first 

term  is  1,  the  last  2,  the  number  of  terms  10,  and  that  the 

arithmetical  progression,  answering  to  tliese  suppositions, 

is  required;  we  shall  immediately  have  for  the  difference 

2-1 

jTT— •  =  4>  *^^  thence  conclude  that  the  progression  is  : 

I'i.345678910 

1     1'      1*     1 5      !♦      1 5      16      17      18      Q 

^f  ^-^  *y>  ■■•■y»  ^"ç^  ^-^  *-5^  ^--^j  ^-ç^  *»• 

Another  example.  Let  the  first  term  be  2|.,  the  last  term 
12{^,  and  the  number  of  terms  7  ;  the  différence  will  be 

12i,-24-      104-       ,  ,  ^  ,       , 

^_^  ■  =  -^  =  *^'  =  J *^,  and   consequently   the  pro- 
gression : 

12         3        4      5        6        7 
^  *A»  514,  7.V,  9^  lOfl,  12i. 
409.  If  now  the  first  term  a,  the  last  term  2,  and  the  dif- 
ference dj  are  given,  we  may  from  them  find  the  number  of 
terms  n  ;  for  since  »  —  a  =5  (n  —  l)d^  by  dividing  both 

sides  by  rf,  we  have  — ^  =:  »  —  1  ;  also  n  being  greater  by 

1  than  n  —  1,  we  have  n  ;=  — t 1-  1  \   consequently  the 

number  of  terms  is  found  by  dividing  the  difference  between 

the  first  and  the  last  term,  or  2:  -*  a,  oy  the  difference  of  the 

progression,  and  adding  unity  to  the  quotient. 

For  example,  let  the  first  term  be  4,  the  last  100,  and  the 

100—4 
difference  12,  the  number  of  terms  will  be  — =^ 1-  1  =  9  ; 


IM  BUMUKUT»  %UCt.  III. 

and  ibese  nine  lerms  will  be, 

12      345078       tf 

4,  16,  sa.  40,  fiS,  64»  76,  88,  100. 
If  the  first  tenn  be  S,  the  last  6,  and  the  ^fferenoe  1^,  the 

niioiber  of  lerms  will  be  —  -|-  1  =  4;  <uid  these  feur  terns 
wiUbe,  ^ 

12      3     4 

AgaiD,  let  the  first  Icrm  be  Sf,  the  last  7},  md  the  dif- 
fianeDoe  I^  the  number  of  terms  will  be        '  ■     -f  l  =r  4; 


which  are, 

*Hf  ^  ®t»   *T* 

410.  it  must  be  obsared,  however,  that  as  the  number 
of  terms  b  necessarily  an  integer,  if  we  bad  not  obtained 
such  a  number  for  n,  in  die  examples  of  Ûnt  preosding 
ardde,  the  questions  would  hare  been  absurd. 

Whenever  we  do  not  obtain  an  integer  number  ibr  the 

value  of  — n— ,  it  will  be  impossible  to  resolve  the  question  ; 

and  consequently,  in  order  that  Questions  of  this  kind  may 
be  possible,  ;  —  a  must  be  divisible  by  d. 

411.  From  what  has  been  said,  it  may  be  concluded,  that 
we  have  always  four  quantities,  or  things,  to  consider  in  an 
arithmetical  progresnoo  : 

Ist«  The  first  term,  a  ;  2d.  The  bst  term,  z  ; 

Sd.  The  dilTerenoe,  d;  and  4lh.  The  number  of  terms»  n. 

The  rdations  of  these  Quantities  to  each  other  are  such, 
that  if  we  know  three  of  tnem,  we  are  able  to  determine  the 
fourth;  for, 

1.  If  a,  J,  and  %  are  known,  we  have  x  r:  a  ±  (n  «»  l)dL 

&  If  x,  d!,  and  n,  are  known,  we  have 

a  =  «  —  (n  —  1  )d. 

8.  If  a,  1,  and  n,  are  known,  we  have  d  s 1« 

II— 1 

4.  If  If,  f ,  and  </,  arc  known,  we  have  m  s  — ^  f  1. 


CHAP.  IV.  OF   ALGEBRA.  185 


CHAP.    IV. 

Of  the  Summation  q^  Arithmetical  Progressions. 

412.  It  is  often  necessary  also  to  find  the  sum  of  an 
arithmetical  progression.  This  might  be  dope  by  addii^ 
ail  the  terms  together;  but  as  the  addition  would  be  vefj 
tedious,  when  the  progression  consisted  of  a  great  number 
of  terms,  a  rule  has  been  devised,  by  which  the  sum  may  be 
more  readily  obtained. 

413.  We  shall  first  consider  a  particular  given  progression, 
such  that  the  first  term  is  2,  the  difference  S,  the  mst  term 
29,  and  the  number  of  terms  10  ; 

1234      56      7      8      910 

2,  5,  8, 11,  14, 17^  20,  23,  26,  29. 

In  this  progression  wc  see  that  the  sum  of  the  first  and 
last  term  is  31  ;  the  sum  of  the  second  and  the  last  but  one 
31  ;  the  sum  of  the  third  and  the  last  but  two  81,  and  so  oH: 
hence  we  conclude,  that  the  sum  of  any  two  terms  equally 
distant,  the  one  from  the  first,  and  the  other  from  the  la^ 
term,  is  always  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  first  and  thé  last 
terra. 

414.  The  reason  of  this  may  be  easdly  traced;  for  if  we 
suppose  the  first  to  be  a,  the  last  sr,  and  tne  difiPerence  d,  the 
sum  of  the  first  and  the  last  term  is  a  -|-  z  ;  and  the  second 
term  being  a-^-d^  and  the  last  but  one  z  —  ci,  the  sum  of 
these  two  terms  is  also  a  +  z.  Farther,  the  third  time  bong 
a  +  2J,  and  the  last  but  two  z  —  9dy  it  is  evident  that  these 
two  terms  also,  when  added  together,  make  a  +  xr  ;  and  the 
demonstration  may  be  easily  extended  to  any  other  two 
terms  equally  distant  from  the  first  and  last. 

415.  To  determine,  therefore,  the  sum  of  the  progresâon 
proposed,  let  us  write  the  same  progression  term  by  term^ 
mverted,  and  add  the  corresponding  terms  together,  as 
follows  : 

2+  5-h  8+11  +  14+17+20+2S+26+29 
29+26+23+20+17  +  14+11+  8+5+2 

31+3I+31+3I+S1+31+31+31+31+S1 

This  series  of  equal  terms  is  evidently  equal  to  twice  thé 
sum  of  the  given  progression  :  now,  the  number  of  those 


186  EUUIIIMTS  SECT.  Ill 

equal  tenus  U  10,  as  in  tlic  pn^retaion,  and  their  turn  con- 
•equently  it  equal  to  10  x  91  s  310.  Hence,  as  this  sum 
b  twice  the  sum  cif  the  arithn^etical  progression,  the  sum  re- 
quired must  be  155. 

416.  If  we  proceed  in  the  same  manner  with  respect  to 
anjr  arithmetical  progression,  the  first  term  of  which  is  a,  the 
last  z^  and  the  number  of  tenns  n  ;  writing  under  the  given 
progression  the  same  progression  inverted,  and  adding  term 
to  term,  we  shall  have  a  series  of  n  terms,  each  of  whidi  will 
bs  esprctied  by  a  -f  x;  therefore  the  sum  of  thb  series  will 
ba  «(if  -r^  z),  which  is  twice  the  sum  of  the  proposed  aritlw 
■wtical  progression;  the  latter,  therefore,  will  be  repre- 

seated  by  ^  ^     . 

417.  This  result  furmshes  an  easy  method  of  finding  tlie 
sum  of  any  arithmetical  progression  ;  and  may  be  reduced  to 
the  following  rule  : 

Multiply  the  sum  of  the  first  and  the  last  term  by  the 
number  of  terms,  and  half  the  product  will  be  the  sum  of 
the  whole  progression.  Or,  which  amounts  to  the  same, 
floniltiply  the  sum  of  the  first  and  the  list  term  by  half  the 
number  of  terms.  Or,  multifdy  half  the  sum  of  the  first  and 
tbt  last  term  by  the  whole  number  of  terms. 

418.  It  will  be  necessary  to  illustrate  this  rule  by  some 
examples. 

Pint,  let  it  be  required  to  find  the  sum  of  the  pro^cs^on 
of  the  natural  numbers,  1,  2,  B,  &c.  to  100.     This  will  be, 

by  the  first  rule,  15^|i2}  :^  ul±o^  ^  ^f^ 

If  it  were  required  to  tell  how  many  strokes  a  dock  strikes 
in  twelve  hours  ;  we  must  add  together  the  number»  1,  2,  S, 
as  far  as  12;  now  this  sum  is  found  immediately  to  be 

— g —  =  6  X  Itf  =  78.     If  we  wished  to  know  the  sum  of 

the  same  progression  continued  to  1000,  we  sliould  find  it  to 
be  500500  ;  and  the  sum  of  this  progression,  cuniiiiued  to 
10000,  would  be  50005000. 

419.  Suppose  a  person  buys  a  horse,  on  condition  that  for 
the  first  nail  he  sliall  |Miy  5  pence,  for  the  second  8  pence,  for 
the  third  11  pence,  and  lo  on,  always  incrra.>ing  S  pence  more 
Ibr  each  nail,  the  whole  number  of  which  is  S2  ;  required 
the  pun*hase  of  the  horse  ? 

In  this  question  it  is  re(|uired  to  find  the  sum  of  an 
arithmetical  progression,  the  first  term  ot*  which  is  5,  the 
difference  8,  and  the  number  of  terms  88  ;  we  must  thens 


CHAP.  IV.  OF  ALQEBRA.  137 

fore  begin  by  detennining  the  last  term  ;  which  is  found  by 
the  rule,  in  Articles  406  and  411,  to  be5  +  (81  x  8)  ==  98; 

after  which  the  sum  required  is  eanly  found  to  be 5 

=  108  X  16  ;  whence  we  conclude  that  the  horse  costs  1648 
pence,  or  61.  lis.  4kL 

4S0.  Generally,  let  the  first  term*  be  a,  the  difference  d, 
and  the  number  of  terms  n  ;  and  let  it  be  required  to  find, 
by  means  of  these  data,  the  sum  of  the  whcAe  progression« 
As  the  last  term  must  be  a  ±  (n  —  I) J,  the  sum  of  the  first 
and  the  last  will  be  £a  ±  (n  —  1)J;  and  multiplying  this 
sum  by  the  number  of  terms  n,  we  have  ftna  ±  n{n  —  l)d; 

the  sum  required  therefore  will  be  »mi  ±  — 3 . 

Now,  this  formula,  if  applied  to  the  preceding  example, 

or    to    a  =:  5,    d  =  3,    and  n  =  32,   gives   5  x  32  -f 

32    31    3 

— ^-^  =  160  +  1488  =  1648;  the  same  sum  that  we 

obtained  before. 

421.  If  it  be  required  to  add  together  all  the  natural 
numbers  from  1  to  fi,  we  have,  for  finding  this  sum,  the  first 
term  1,  the  last  term  n,  and  the  number  of  terms  n;  there- 
fore the  sum  required  is  — 5—  = 5 — -,     If  we  make  n 

=  1766,  the  sum  of  all  the  numbers,  from  1  to  1766,  will 
be  883,  or  half  the  number  of  terms,  multiplied  by  1767  =: 
1560261. 

422.  Let  the  progression  of  uneven  numbers  be  proposed, 
1,  3,  5,  7,  he.  continued  to  n  terms,  and  let  the  sum  of  it  be 
required.  Here  the  first  term  is  I,  the  difference  3,  the 
number  of  terms  n  ;  the  last  term  will  therefore  be  1  -f- 
(n  —  1)2  =  2/1  —  1,  and  consequently  the  sum  required 

The  whole  therefore  consists  in  multiplying  the  number 
of  terms  by  itself;  so  that  whatever  numoer  of  terms  of  this 
progression  we  add  üMzether,  the  sum  will  be  always  a  square, 
namely,  the  square  of  the  number  of  terms  ;  which  we  shall 
exemplify  as  follows  : 

Indices,  12  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10,  &c. 
Proffress.  ly  3,  S,  7,  9,11,18,15,17,  19,  &c. 
Sum.         1,  4,  9, 16,  25,  36,  49,  64,  81,  100,  &c. 

423.  Let  the  first  term  be  1,  the  difference  3,  and  the 
number  of  terms  n  ;  we  shall  have  the  progression  1,  4,  7, 
lU,  &c.  the  last  term  of  which  will  be  l+(n— l)3=8fi-2; 


188  ULUUKVTë  SECT.  III. 

vtierefore  tbe  mm  of  the  fim  mid  the  last  term  it  8«  —  I, 
and  oooscquendy  the  turn  of  this  progrewion  it  cc|ual  to 

5 ■«  — 5 —  ;  mnd  if  we  suppoiic  n  =:  SO,  the  sum 

wUl  be  10  X  59  »  B90. 

4C4.  Agaio,  let  the  first  term  be  1,  tbe  difference  d^  and 
tbe  number  of  terms  fi  ;  then  the  hist  term  will  be  1  -f 
(H  —  i;d;  to  which  adding  the  first,  we  hare  S!  -f  (n  —  l)j, 
and  nniltipljnig  by  the  number  of  terma,  we  have  Sn  -f 
m(n  —  l)o;  whence  we  deduce  the  sum  at  the  progression 

«  +  — g— . 

And  by  makim;  d  succesnvcly  equal  to  I,  2,  3,  4,  &.c.« 
we  obtmn  the  following  particular  values,  as  shewn  in  tlie 
subiomed  Table. 


If  a  =s  1,  the  sum  is  w  H ^ —  =  — — 

^n(ii  -  1  ) 

A» 

.  8ii(w-l)      3w*— w 
1/  =  »,    .    .    .    n+      \      ^  =  — j^ 

a  =  4,    •    -    -    f •  + 5 —  =  sen-  —  w 

,                                    5fj(w— I)      5m--3i# 
€/  a  5,     -    -     -     fi  H j^ =  — j^  ~. 

Gw'fi—  l) 
J  =  6,     -    -    -     f I  i 5 —    =  OH*  -  2ii 

,      ^  7n(w-l)      7ii*-5fi 

d=7,    .    .    •    „  +  «__=__ 

.      -,  .  M«- 1)     9«'-7fi 

rf=9,    ...    HI-  _^^  =  ..-^ 


QtCSTIONS    rOR    rRACTltE. 

1.  Retiuircd  the  sum  of  an  increasing  arithmetical  pnv 
■msMun,  naving  3  for  its  first  term«  ^  for  tlie  oommon  dif- 
ference,  and  the  number  of  terms  £0.  Jns.  440. 


t.  Requmd  ibe  $U0  of  a  dcaroaeing  arnhmeckal  pro- 


OUAP.  V.  OF  ALOESKJl.  1S9 

sression,  having  10  for  its  first  term,  ^  for  the  aMBmon  dif- 
ference, and  the  number  of  terms  SI.  Ans.  140« 

3.  BÎequired  the  number  of  all  the  strokes  of  a  dodc  in 
twelve  hours,  that  is,  a  complete  revolution  of  the  index. 

Ans.  78. 

4.  The  clocks  of  Italy  go  on  to  S4  hours  ;  how  iMny 
strokes  do  they  strike  in  a  complete  revolution  of  the  index  t 

Ans.  »9^ 

5.  One  hundred  stones  being  placed  on  the  ground,  in  a 
straight  Tme,  at  the  dis^tance  of  a  yard  from  each  other,  how 
far  will  a  person  travel  who  shall  bring  them  one  by  one  to 
a  basket,  which  is  placed  one  yard  from  the  first  stone  ?  . 

Ans.  5  miies  and  1300  ^anb. 


CHAP.  V. 


Q^Figurate  *,  or  Polygonal  Numbers. 

4^.  The  summation  of  arithmetical  .progressons^  wlûch 
begin  by  1,  and  the  difference  of  which  is  1,  S,  3,  or  any 

*  The  French  translator  has  jusUy  observed^  in  his  note  at  tlicf 
conclusion  of  this  chapter,  that  algebraists  make  a  distinction 
between  figurate  and  polygonal  numbers  ;  but  as  he  has  not  en«* 
tered  far  upon  this  subject,  the  following  illustration  may  not 
be  unacceptable. 

It  will  be  immediately  perceived  in  the  following  Table,  tiiat 
each  series  is  derived  immediately  from  the  foregoing  obe, 
being  the  sum  of  all  its  terms  from  the  beginning  to  that  place  ; 
and  hence  also  the  law  of  continuation,  and  the  general  term  of 
each  series,  will  be  readily  discovered. 

Natural  I,  2,    3,    4,    5     -    -    a  general  term 


2 
n.(nH-l)..  (»-t-2) 

"2^3 


Triangular      1,  S,    6,  10,  15     -    • 

Pyramidal       1,  4,  10,  20,  35     -    - 

Triangular.  1        r    ie    «-    70             ri.{nJtl).(n-\^2).{n+S) 
pyramidal    /^  5,  15,  3o,  70 ^^ 

And,  in  general,  the  figurate  number  of  any  order  m  will  be  ex- 
pressed by  the  formula, 

n.^n-^l)  .  (n+2)  .  (a-f  3)  -     -  (n+m— 1) 

1.2      .       8.4       -     -  m        • 

Now,  one  oï  the  principal  properties  of  these  numbers,  and 


140 


KLKMKNTt 


SECT.  111. 


Other  inlcser,  leads  to  the  theonr  of  polygonal  number*, 
which  are  formed  by  adding  togeiner  the  terms  of  any  such 
piofpnessioo* 

4116.  Suppose  the  diftrence  to  be  1  ;  then,  snioe  the  fir»t 
t«m  is  I  aJsOy  we  shall  have  the  arithmetical  progression,  1, 
S»  8,  4,  0,  6,  7,  8,  9,  10,  11,  IS,  &c  and  if  in  this  pro- 
gression  we  take  the  sum  of  one,  of  two,  of  three,  &c.  terms, 
die  ibilowing  series  <rf*  numbers  will  arise  : 

1,  S,  6,  10,  15,  21,  98,  86,  45,  55,  66,  frc. 
fbrl=:l,  l+5lss8,l+Ä+8  =  6,  H«4 8  +  4  =  10,  &c. 

Which  numbers  are  called  triangular,  or  trigotwl  num- 
bers, because  we  may  always  arrange  as  many  points  in  tlu* 
form  of  a  triangle  as  they  contain  units,  thus: 

18  6  10  15 


•  •  •  • 


487.  In  all  these  triangles,  we  ace  how  many  points 
each  nde  contains  In  the  first  triangle  there  is  only  one 
noînt;  in  the  second  diere  are  two;  in  the  third  there  arc 
diree;  in  the  fotuth  there  are  four,  &c.:  so  that  the  tri- 
aitfular  numbers,  or  the  number  of  points,  which  is  simply 
cwed  the  triangle,  arc  arranged  according  to  the  number  ot* 
points  which  the  side  contains,  which  number  is  called  the 
näe;  that  is,  the  third  triangular  numlier,  or  the  third 
triangle,  is  that  whose  side  has  three  points;  the  fourth, 
that  whose  side  has  four  ;  and  so  on  ;  which  may  be  repre- 
sented thiu: 


which  Fermât  considered  as  very  interesting,  (ut  kis  motet  on 
Dkfàamtus,  page  16),  is  this  :  that  if  from  the  «th  temi  of  any 
series  the  (a  —  1  )  term  of  the  same  series  be  subtracted,  the  re- 
mainder mill  be  the  nth  term  of  the  preceding  series.     Thus,  in 

the  third  series  above  given,  the  wtn  term  is — • 

consequently»  the  (a  —  1  )  term,  by  substituting  (a  ^  1  )  instead 

of  ff,  if  L-Z— L  *  ^^ 1  ;  and  if  the  latter  be  subtracted  froiu 

the  former,  the  remainder  b       ^    ,  which  is  the  ath  term  of 

the  preceding  order  of  numbers.  The  same  law  will  be  observed 
between  two  consecutive  tenns  of  any  one  of  these  »urns. 


CHAP.  V.  OR  ALOSBRA.  141 

Side 


•  •  •  •  •  •  • 


•  •  •  • 


Triangle  < 

428.  A  question  therefore  presents  itself  here,  which  is, 
how  to  determine  the  triangle  when  the  side  is  given  ?  and, 
after  what  has  been  said,  this  may  be  easily  resolved. 

For  if  the  side  be  n,  the  triangle  will  be  1  +  2  +  3  +  4-j — n. 

Now,  the  sum  of  this  progression  is  — x—  ;   consequently 

the  value  of  the  triangle  is  — 5 —  *. 

n  =  l, 
Thus,  if  ^  **  Z  q'  >the  triangle 


and  so  on  :  and  when  n  =  100,  the  triangle  will  be  5050. 


429.  This  formula — g—  is  called  the  general  formula  cf 

triangular  numbers  ;  because  by  it  we  find  the  triangular 
number,  or  the  triangle,  which  answers  to  any  side  indicated 
by  n. 

This  may  be  transformed  into  — ^ —  ;  which  serves  also 

to  facilitate  the  calculation  ;  since  one  of  the  two  numbers  91, 

or  n-j-*  I9  must  always  be  an  even  number,  and  consequently 

divisible  by  2« 

12  X 13 
So,  if  n  =  12,  the  triangle  is  — - —  =  6  x  13=78;  and 

if  n  =  15,  the  triangle  is  — g —  =s  15  x  8  =  120,  &c. 

430.  Let  us  now  suppose  the  difference  to  be  2,  and  we 
shall  have  the  following  arithmetical  progression  : 

1,  3,  5,  7,  9, 11, 13, 15,  17, 19,  21,  &c. 
the  sums  of  which,  taking  successively  one,  two,  three,  four 
terms,  &c.  form  the  following  series  : 

1,  4,  9,  16,  25,  36,  49,  64,  81, 100,  121,  &c. 

^  M.  de  Joncourt  published  at  the  Hague,  in  1762,  a  Table 
of  trigonal  numbers  answering  to  all  the  natural  numbers  from 
1  to  20000  ;  which  Tables  are  found  useful  in  facilitating  a 
great  number  of  arithmetical  operations,  as  the  author  shews  in 
a  very  long  introduction.    F.  T. 


148  ftlplMEKTft  SECT.  III. 

th»  term  of  which  are  called  quadrangular  numbers»  or 
êjuares;  nnoe  they  rmreaent  toe  squares  of  the  natural 
numbersy  mb  we  have  aJrcad  v  seen  ;  and  this  denomination 
ts  the  more  suitable  from  tiiis  circumstance,  that  we  can 
always  form  a  souare  with  the  number  of  points  which  those 
lerms  indicate,  tlius  : 

It  4,  9,  18,  «5, 


481.  We  see  here,  that  the  ûde  of  any  square  contains 
precisely  the  number  of  points  which  the  square  nwi  in- 
dicates, llius,  for  example,  the  side  of  the  square  16  con- 
•iats  of  4  points  ;  that  of  the  square  S5  consists  of  5  imints  ; 
andy  in  general,  if  the  side  be  n,  that  is,  if  the  number  of  the 
terms  ct  the  progression,  1,  d,  5,  7,  &c.  which  we  have 
taken,  be  expressed  by  n,  the  square,  or  the  quadraugular 
number,  will  be  equal  to  the  sum  of  those  terms  ;  that  is  to 
flÉ*»  as  we  hare  already  seen.  Article  éStSt;  but  it  is  un. 
necessary  to  extend  our  consideration  of  square  numbers  any 
flnrtbcr,  having  already  treated  of  them  at  length. 

48S.  If  now  we  call  the  düTerencc  3,  and  take  the  sums 
in  the  same  manner  as  before,  we  obtain  numbers  which  are 
called  peniamHSf  or  pentagonal  numbens  tliough  they  can- 
not be  so  well  represented  by  point<(*. 

*  It  is  not,  however,  that  we  are  unable  to  represent,  h\ 
points,  polygons  of  any  number  of  sides  ;  but  the  rule  mhtch  I 
am  going  to  explain  for  this  puq>ose,  »cenui  to  liavc  e^capetl  all 
the  writers  on  algebra  whom  I  have  consulted. 

I  begin  with  drawing  a  small  polygon  that  has  the  number  of 
sides  required  \  this  number  remains  constant  for  one  and  the 
same  series  of  polygonal  numbers»  and  it  is  equal  to  1  pliu  the 
diünrence  of  the  anthmetical  progression  from  which  the  scries 
is  produced«  1  then  choose  one  of  its  angles,  in  order  to  draw 
from  the  angular  point  all  the  diagonals  ol'  this  polygon,  which, 
with  the  two  sides  containing  the  angle  that  has  betrn  taken«  are 
to  be  indefinitely  produced  ;  after  ttiat«  I  take  these  two  sides, 
and  the  diagonals  of  the  first  polygon  on  the  indefinite  linen, 
each  as  oAen  as  I  choose  ;  and  «(raw,  from  the  corre»(H>nding 
Doints  marked  by  the  compass,  lines  parallel  to  the  sides  oï  the 
first  polygon  ;  and  divide  then  into  as  many  eqnal  parts,  or  by 
aa  OMay  poinu  as  there  are  actually  in  the  diagonals  and  the 
two  sicbs  produced.  This  rule  is  general,  from  äe  trian|;le  up 
to  the  polygon  of  an  infinite  numbar  of  sides:  and  the  division 


CHAP.  V.  OF  ALQSBRA.  ,  143 

0 

Indicesy  1234-5      67      8      P&c. 

Arith.  Prog.  1,  4,    7,  10, 13, 16,  19,  2Ä,  25,  &c. 
Pentagon,       1,  5,  12,  22,  35,  51,  70,  92, 117,  &c. 
the  indices  shewing  the  side  of  each  penta^oD*. 

433.  It  follows  from  this,  that  if  we  make  the  side  n,  the 

1          u         11  1     3n«— n     «(8»- 1) 
pentagonal  number  wiil  be  — 5—  =  -■ — 5 . 

Let,  for  example,  n  =  7,  the  pentagon  will  be  70  ;  and  if 
the  pentagon,  whose  side  is  100,  be  required,  we- make  n.=: 
100,  and  obtain  14950  for  the  number  sought. 

434.  If  we  suppose  the  difference  to  be  4,  we  arrive  at 
hexagonal  numbers,  as  we  see  by  the  following  progressions: 

Indicesy  12      345      67         8        9&c. 

Arith.  Prog.  1,  6,    9,  13, 17,  21,  25,    29,    38,  &c. 
Hexagon,       1,  6,  15,  28,  45,  66,  91,.  120,  153,  &c. 
where  the  indices  still  shew  the  side  of  each  hexagon. 

435.  So  that  when  the  side  is  ti,  the  hexagonal  number  is 
2/1*  —  M  =  n(2//  —  1)  ;  and  we  have  farther  to  remark,  that 
all  the  hexagonal  numbers  are  also  triangular  ;  since,  if  we 
take  of  these  last  the  first,  the  third,  the  fifth,  &c.  we  have 
precisely  the  series  of  hexagons. 

436.  In  the  same  manner,  we  may  fipd  the  numbers 
which  are  heptagonal,  octagonal,  &c.  It  will  l)e  sufficient 
therefore  to  exhibit  the  following  Table  of  formulae  for  all 
numbers  that  are  comprehended  under  the  general  name  of 
polygonai  numbers. 

Supposing  the  ^de  to  be  represented  by  ?i,  we  have 
for  the 

2nH0» 

2 

3n-— n      n(3w.-l) 
vgon      .-^_=— ^— . 


Square  -  3 —  =  n^, 


4»^— 2n 
v'igon     -  — -5 —  =  2n*  -  w  =  w(2ii  —  1). 


viigon  - 


2 

5w^--3n_n(5r?-3) 
2        ""        2        • 


of  tliese  figures  into  triangles  might  furnish  matter  for  many 
curious  considerations,  and  for  elegant  transformations  of  the 
general  formulae,  by  which  the  polygonal  numbers  are  ex- 
pressed in  this  chapter  ;  but  it  is  unnecessary  to  dwell  on  them 
at  present.     F.  T. 


144  KLBMKXT«  8BOT.  III. 

Tiiigon     — X —  ts  Sn*  -  a»  =  n(9n  -  ft). 
ln*-5n     11(7» -5) 

8fi^— 6fi 
xgon      -  — 5 —  «  4fi'  -  8»  =2  ii(4fi  —  8). 


Kigon    - 


S 
9ii'-7ii_fi(9ft-7) 


xiigoa  -  5 =  5fi*  —  4»  =  n{Sn  —  4). 

•on  — 16fi      -%  -       ^  -«.         ^» 

xzgoo  •  5 «  9ä*  -  8fi  ss  fH9yt  —  8). 

23»* -Sin     »(23» -SI) 
xxvgon- ^ = g . 

(m  -  2)»*—  (•» — 4)»  ^ 
fngoQ i—^ •. 

487.  So  that  the  side  being  »,  the  fK-goiuü  number  will 

%_                    1  .     (•»— 2)»'— (•»— 4}»      ,  - 

be  repreacnted  by — = ;  whence  we  may  de- 
duce all  the  jpomble  polygonal  numbers  which  have  the  side 
».  Thus,  for  example,  if  the  bigonal  numbers  were  re- 
quired, we  should  have  m  s  2,  and  conseauently  the  number 
•ought  =:  n  ;  that  is  to  say,  the  bigonal  numbers  are  the 
natural  numbers,  1,  2,  8,  8ic.^ 

If  we  make  m  s  8,  we  have  — =—  for  thetriangular  num- 
ber required. 

If  we  make  m  =  4,  we  have  the  square  number  »%  &c. 

488.  To  illustrate  this  rule  by  examples,  suppose  that 
the  xxv-gonal  number,  whose  side  is  86,  were  required  ;  we 

*  The  general  expression  for  the  M«gonal  number  is  easily 
derived  from  the  summation  of  an  arithmetical  progression, 
whose  first  term  is  1 ,  common  dilTerence  d,  and  number  o(  terms 
a;  M  in  the  following  series  ;  vis.  1 -f  (1 -f  4tf)-f.(l-i-^W)-#-,  Ac. 

.V    M      .  ^     .  •    .    •  >L      (2-»-(if— l).i/)» 

(I  ^(ji»l)u/),thesum  of  which  it  expressed  by ; 

bol  in  all  cases^sM  —2,  therefore  substituting  this  value  for</,the 

2a -«^  («'—•).(« -2)     (M-2)a«— (M— i)a 
expression  becomes ^ — ^ a ^ — 

as  in  the  formula. 


CHAP.  V.  or  AL«£BBA.  145 

look  fint  in  the  Table  for  the  xxv-gonal  number,  whose 
side  b  w,  and  it  is  found  to  be 5 .    Then  making  n 

as  86,  we  find  14526  for  the  number  soufrfit. 

4S9.  Question,  A  person  bought  a  nouse,  and  he  is 
asked  how  much  he  paid  for  it    He  answers,  that  the  865^ 

Sonal  number  of  12  is  the  number  of  crowns  which  it  cost 
im. 

In  order  to  find  this  number,  we  make  m  =  865,  and 
n  =  IS  ;  and  substituting  these  values  in  the  general  formula, 
we  find  for  the  price  of  the  house  28970  crowns  *. 

*  This  chapter  is  entitled  *'  Of  Figurate  or  Polygonal  Num« 
hers.**  It  is  not  however  without  foundation  that  some  al* 
gebraists  make  a  distinction  between  J?gt£ra/e  numbers  and  jM(y- 
gonal  numbers.  For  the  numbers  commonly  called^^ro^e  are 
all  derived  from  a  single  arithmetical  progression,  and  each 
series  of  numbers  is  formed  from  it  by  adding  together  the 
terms  of  the  series  which  goes  before.  On  the  oUier  haad, 
every  series  oî  polygonal  numbers  is  produced  from  a  different 
arithmetical  progression.  Hence,  in  strictness,  we  cannot  speak 
of  a  single  series  of  figurate  numbers,  as  being  at  the  same  time 
a  series  of  polygonal  numbers.  This  will  be  made  more  evident 
by  the  following  Tables. 

TABLE  OP  FIGURATE  MUMBKas. 

Constant  numbers    -    -  1.  1.     1.     1.     1.  1.  &c. 

Natural     -----  1.  2.    3.    4.    5.  6.  &c. 

Triangular      -    -    -    -  1.  3.    6.  10.  15.  21.  &c. 

Pyramidal       -    -    -    -  1.  4.  10.  20.  35.  56.  &c. 

Triangular-pyramidal    -  1.  5.  15.  35.  70.  126.  &c 

TABLE  OF  POLYGONAL  KUMBKRS. 


DifT.  of  the  progr. 

1 
2 
3 
4 


Numbers 

triangular  1.  3.    6.  10.  15.  &c. 

square    -  -   1.  4.    9.  16.  25.  &c. 

pentagon  -  1.  5.  12.  22.  35.  &c. 

nexagon  -1.6.  15.  28.  45.  &c. 


Powers  likewise  form  particular  series  of  numbers.  The  first 
two  are  to  be  found  among  the  figurate  numbers^  and  the  third 
among  the  polygonal  ;  which  will  appear  by  successively  sob? 
stituting  for  a  the  numbers  1>  2,  3,  &c. 


TABLE  OF  POWERS. 

a9 

m 

m 

m 

• 

1. 

1. 

1. 

1. 

&c. 

a' 

• 

• 

m 

• 

2. 

8. 

4. 

5. 

&c. 

fl« 

* 

- 

m 

• 

4. 

9. 

16. 

25. 

&c. 

a« 

- 

• 

- 

- 

8. 

27. 

64. 

125. 

&c 

a* 

m 

* 

- 

- 

16. 

81. 

256. 

625. 

4lrc. 

1 

L 

\4ê  miMKMTft  IIVCT.  Itf. 


CHAP.  VI. 

(^^Geometrical  Ratia 

440.  The  Geomeirical  raiio  of  two  number«  U  found  bjr 
raolving  the  question.  Ham  «"My  time»  U  one  of  those 
number»  greater  tlian  the  other?  Thn  is  done  hj  dividing 
one  by  the  other;  and  the  quotient  wiU  express  the  ratio 
rsquired. 

441.  We  have  here  three  thinss  to  ooosder;  1st,  the 
first  of  the  two  given  numbers,  whicn  is  called  the  anieadeni  ; 
Hdijf  the  other  number,  which  is  called  the  cotuefueni; 
Sdly,  the  ratio  of  the  two  numbers,  or  the  quotient  arising 
jfmn  the  division  of  tlie  antécédent  by  the  consequent  For 
«ample,  if  the  relation  of  the  numoers  18  and  IS  be  le- 
quirsd,  18  is  the  antecedent,  18  is  the  consequent,  and  the 
ratio  will  be  4  ^  =  Ij  ;  whence  we  see  that  the  antecedent 
contains  the  consequent  once  and  a  half. 

440.  It  u  usual  to  represent  geometrical  relation  by  two 
points,  placed  one  above  tlie  other,  between  the  antecedent 
and  the  consequent.  Thus,  a  :  b  means  the  geometrical 
relation  of  these  two  numbers,  or  the  ratio  of  a  to  A. 

We  have  already  remarked  that  this  sign  is  employed  to 
represent  division  \  and  for  this  reason  we  make  use  of  it 
here  ;  because,  in  order  to  know  the  ratio,  we  must  divide 
a  by  A;  the  relation  expressed  by  this  sign  being  read 
simply»  a  is  to  A. 

449.  Relation  therefore  is  expressed  by  a  fraction,  whose 
nunseralor  is  the  antecedent,  and  whose  denominator  is  the 
consequent;  but  perspicuity  requires  that  this  fraction 
sboula  be  always  reduced  to  its  lowest  terms:  which  is 
done,  as  we  have  already  shewn,  by  dividing  both  the 
lUjr  and  denominator  by  their  gnaUit  common  di- 
Thus,  the  fraocion  44  becomes  U  by  dividiw  both 
by  6. 

The  al|(cbraisis  of  the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries  psid 
great  attention  to  these  different  kinds  of  numbers  and  tneir 
mutual  connexion,  and  they  discovered  in  them  a  variety  of 
curious  properties  -,  but  s«  their  utility  is  not  great,  they  are  now 
seldom  introduced  into  the  Systems  of  mathemstic».     F.  T. 

*  It  will  be  observed  that  we  luive  made  une  of  the  svmbol 
-f>  for  division«  as  is  now  usually  done  in  books  on  this  subject. 


CHAP.  VI.  OK  ALCXBUA.  147 

444.  So  that  rdations  only  differ  according  as  their  ratioa 
are  different  ;  and  there  are  as  many  different  kinds  of  geo- 
metrical relations  as  we  can  conceive  different  ratios. 

The  first  kind  is  undoubtedly  that  in  which  the  ratio 
becomes  unity«  This  case  happens  when  the  two  numbers 
are  equal,  as  in  3  :  3  :  :  4  :  4  :  :  a  :  a;  the  ratio  is  hero  1» 
and  for  this  reason  we  call  it  the  relation  of  equality. 

Next  follow  those  relations  in  which  the  ratio  is  another 
whole  number.  Thus,  4  :  S  the  raüo  is  S,  and  is  called 
double  ratio  ;  IS  :  4  the  ratio  is  3,  and  is  call^  triple  ratio  : 
24  :  6  the  ratio  is  4,  and  is  called  quadruple  ratio,  &c. 

We  may  next  consider  those  relations  whose  ratios  are 
expressed  by  fractions;  such  as  12  :  9,  where  the  ratio  is ^t 
or  1-^;  and  18  :  27,  where,  the  ratio  is  ^,  &c.  We  may  also 
distiujB^uish  those  relations  in  which  the  consequent  contains 
exactly  twice,  thrice,  &c.  the  antecedent  :  such  are  the  re- 
lations 6  :  12,  5  :  15,  &c.  the  ratio  of  which  some  call  ^6- 
du^^  subtriple^  8cc.  ratios. 

Farther,  we  call  that  ratio  rationed  which  is  an  expresable 
number  ;  the  antecedent  and  conseauent  being  integers,  such 
as  11  :  7,  8  :  15,  &c.  and  we  call  that  an  irroAmud  or  surd 
ratio,  which  can  neither  be  exactly  expressed  by  integers,  nor 
by  fractions,  such  as  y^  5  :  8,  or  4  :   v3. 

445.  Let  a  be  the  antecedent,  b  the  consequent,  and  d 
the  ratio^  we  know  '  already  that  a  and  b  being  given,  we 

find  d  =  -7-  :  if  the  consequent  b  were  given  with  the  mtk)^ 

we  should  find  the  antecedent  a  zz  bd,  because  bd  divided 
by  b  gives  d  :  and  lasdy,  when  the  antecedent  a  is  given,  and 

the  ratio  dj  we  find  the  consequent  6  =  -r  ;  for,  dividing 

the  antecedent  a  by  the  consequent  -^,  we  obtain  the  quo- 
tient d,  that  is  to  say,  the  ratio. 

446.  Every  relation  a  :  b  remains  the  same,  if  we  mul- 
tiply or  divicfe  the  antecedent  and  consequent  by  the  «one 
number,  because  the  ratio  is  the  same  :  thus,  for  example, 

let  d  be  the  ratio  of  a  :  6,  we  have  d  =  -r-  ;  now  the  ratio 

of  theralation  M:  ni  is  also  -r  =  d,andthatofthereIalkm 

a       b  ,      na       , 

—  :  —  IS  likewise  — r  =  d. 
n       n  nb 

447.  When  a  ratio  has  been  reduced  to  its  lowest  terms» 

l2 


148  ftLKMKNT»  8SCT.  III. 

il  k  6ify  to  pcnâve  «od  cnunctat»  the  waaüatL  For  ex* 
«.q>k  wh«  the  ratio  ^  hu  b«n  nduced  to  tbt  fi»cüoo 

<^,  w%mj  mibzzpi^arm:  bi:  piÇp  whidi  is  read«  a  it 

to  6  asp  is  to  Ç.  Thus,  the  ratio  of  6:  Sïmûg^  or  2,  we 
«nr  6  :  9  :  :  t  :  1.  We  hare  likewise  18  :  It  :  :  8  :  2,  and 
M  :  18  :  :  4  :  8»  and  80  :  45  :  :  S  :  8.  &c.  But  if  the  ratk> 
onmol  be  abri4ged|  the  relatioQ  wül  nol  beoome  more  eri- 
deat;  fbr  we  do  not  simplify  it  bj  Mjing  0  :  7  :  :  9  •  7. 

448L  On  the  other  hand,  we  maj  sometimes  diange  the 
rdatfoo  of  two  rery  great  numbers  into  ooe  that  smO  be 
moiw  Mnple  and  ericfent,  by  reduciiig  both  to  their  lowest 
terms.  Tliusi  for  example^  we  can  say,  S8844  :  144tt  :  : 
t:  1;  or.  10S66:  7044  ::  8  :  t;  or,  57000  :  2SS00  :: 
16:7- 

440.  In  order,  tlierefiire,  to  expre«  any  rriation  in  the 
dcarsst  manner,  it  is  necessary  to  reduce  it  to  the  smallest 
possible  numbers;  which  u  easily  done,  by  dividing  the  two 
tenns  of  it  by  theu*  greatest  common  divisor«  Thus,  to  re- 
duce the  reUtion  576fX>  :  S5200  to  that  cf  16  :  7,  we  have 
only  to  perform  the  single  operation  of  dividing  the  num- 
bers 57600  and  255MK)  by  8^,  which  is  thor  greatest 
common  divisor. 

4S0.  It  is  important,  therefore,  to  know  how  to  6nd  the 
greatest  common  divisor  of  two  given  numbers;  but  thu 
requires  a  Rule,  which  we  shall  explain  in  the  following 
chapter. 


CHAP.  VII. 


(^iké  Greatest  Common  Divisor  ^two  givm  Numbers. 

4SI.  There  are  some  numbers  which  have  no  other  com- 
BMD  divisor  than  unity;  and  when  the  numerator  and 
denominator  of  a  fraction  are  of  this  nature,  it  cannot  be 
reduced  to  a  more  convenient  form  *.  The  two  numbera 
48  and  35,  for  example,  have  no  common  divisor,  though 
each  ha»  it»  own  diviaors;  for  which  reason,  we  cannot 
expren  the  relation  48  :  .%S  more  simpi v,  because  the  division 
of  two  numbers  by  1  does  not  diminisfi  them. 

*  In  this  casv,  the  two  numbers  are  said  to  be  prime  to  each 
•Cher.    See  Art.  G6. 


CHAP.  Til.  OP  ALGEBM'  140 

459.  But  when  the  two  numbers  have  a  common  diviwr, 
it  is  fbund,  and  even  the  greatest  which  they  have,  by  the 
following  Rule  : 

IXvide  the  greater  of  the  two  numbers  by  the  less  ;  next, 
divide  the  preceding  divisor  bv  the  remainder  ;  what  remains 
in  this  second  division  will  afterwards  become  a  divisor  for 
a  third  diviaon,  in  which  the  remainder  of  the  preceding 
divisor  will  be  the  ^vidend.  We  must  continue  this  opera- 
tion till  we  arrive  at  a  division  that  leaves  no  renudnder; 
and  this  last  divisor  will  be  the  greatest  common  divisor  of 
the  two  given  numbers. 

Thus,  for  the  two  numbers  576  and  252. 

262)  676  (2 
604 


72)  262  (3 
216 


86)  72  (2 
72 

0. 
So  that,  in  this  instance,  the  greatest  common  divisor 
18  86. 

468.  It  will  be  proper  to  illustrate  this  rule  by  some  other 
examples;  and,  for  this  purpose,  let  the  greatest  common 
divisor  of  the  numbers  504  and  812  be  required. 
312)  504  (1 
812 

192)  812  (1 
192 


ISO) 

192(1 
120 

« 

7«)  lao  (1 

72 

48)  72  (1 
46 

24)  48 
48 

0. 

l: 


160  CUUUNTt  SECT.  III. 

80  that  M  U  the  greatasi  oomimm  dÎTÎior,  and  cuo* 
•aqiwnUy  the  rvlatmi  fiOé  :  818  it  reduced  to  the  (ana 
21  :  18. 

464w  Let  the  rdatkio  fits  :  5S9  be  giTcn,  and  the  gmUctt 
ooMnon  divisor  of  thcte  two  numben  be  required. 

599)  ess  (1 
589 


sa»  (6 

460 

~5)  98(1 
40 

47)  49(1 
47 

5) 

47  ( 
46 

123 

""») 

(« 

Whrrefore  1  it»  in  this  catet  the  greatest  oomiiKm  dÎTÎaor, 
and  Goniequeotly  we  cammt  ex|irea8  the  relation  6S5  :  fitt 
by  lew  numbers  nor  reduce  it  to  stmpler  terms. 

4ft5.  It  may  be  necessary»  in  this  place,  to  give  a  demon- 
stratkxi  of  the  foregoing  Kule.  In  order  to  this,  let  a  be 
the  grvaler,  and  b  the  ms  of  tKe  given  numbers  ;  and  let  d 
be  one  of  thtnr  common  divisors;  it  is  evident  that  a  and  b 
being  divislMe  by  d^  we  may  also  divide  the  quantities, 
«  —  6,  a  -  5tA,  a  —  36,  andf  m  general,  a  —  116  by  d. 

45(>.  The  amvenhe  is  no  Ins  true:  that  is,  if  the  numbers 
6  and  a  ^  nb  are  diviûble  by  d,  the  number  a  will  also  be 
divisible  bv  di  ïor  nb  being  divisible  by  c/,  we  could  not 
divide  a  ^  nb  by  d^  if  ù  were  not  aluo  divisible  by  d. 

457.  We  obiene  fartlier,  tluit  if  d  be  thefprairst  cummcm 
divisor  of  two  numbers,  b  and  a  —  nb^  it  will  alio  be  tlie 
greate»t  common  divisor  of  the  two  numbers  a  and  b  ;  for  if 
a  gn*ater  common  divinir  than  d  could  be  found  for  these 
numbers  •  and  (,  that  number  would  also  be  a  common 
divisor  of  b  and  a  —  fi&  ;  and  consequently  d  would  not  be 
the  greatest  common  divisor  of  these  two  numbers  :  but  we 
have  supfio«d  d  the  greatest  divisor  common  to  b  and 


CHAF.  TU.  OP  ALttEBM.  151 

a  --  nb;  therefore  d  must  also  be  the  greatest  common 
diyisor  of  a  and  b. 

458.  These  things  being  laid  down,  let  us  divide,  ac- 
cording to  the  rule,  the  greater  number  a  by  the  less  b  ; 
and  let  us  suppose  the  quotient  to  be  n  ;  then  the  remainder 
will  be  a  —  no,  which  must  necessarily  be  Jess  than  b  ;  and 
this  remainder  a  ^  nb  liaving  the  same  greatest  common 
divisor  with  6,  as  the  given  numbers  a  ana  b,  we  have  only 
to  repeat  the  division,  dividing  the  preceding  divisor  b  by 
the  remainder  a  '^  nb;  and  tne  new  remainder  which  we 
obtain  will  still  have,  with  the  preceding  divisor,  the  same 
greatest  common  divisor,  and  so  on. 

459*  We  proceed,  in  the  same  manner,  till  we  arrive  at  a 
diviâon  without  a  remainder;  that  is,  in  which  the  remainder 
is  nothing.  Let  therefore  p  be  the  last  divisor,  contained 
exactly  a  certain  number  of  times  in  its  dividend;  this 
dividend  will  evidently  be  divisible  by  p,  and  will  have  the 
form  mp  ;  so  that  the  numbers  p  ana  mp  are  both  divisible 
by  p:  and  it  is  also  evident  that  they  have  no  greater 
common  divisor,  because  no  number  can  actually  ne  di- 
vided by  a  number  greater  than  itself;  consequently,  this 
last  divisor  is  also  the  greatest  common  divisor  of  the  given 
numbers  a  and  b. 

460.  We  will  now  give  another  example  of  the  same  rule, 
requiring  thegreatest  common  divisor  of  the  numbers  17S8 
and  SS04.     The  operation  is  as  follows  : 

1728)  2804  (1 
1728 


576)  1728  (8 
1728 


0. 

Hence  it  follows  that  576  is  the  fpreatest  common  divisor» 
and  that  the  relation  1728  :  2804  is  reduced  to  8  :  4;  that 
is  to  say,  1728  is  to  2804  in  the  same  relation  as  8  is  to  4 


IIU  lUBMBMTt  «SCT.  111. 


CHAP.   VIII. 


QfGûoQitUkii  Proportions. 

461.  Two  mxoctriad  rdalkxis  «re  equal  when  thtrtr 
mtk»  are  cqiuu  ;  and  ibb  cciuality  of  two  relationa  U  called 
a  gwmetrical  jnvportion*  Thut|  for  example,  we  write 
m:b  :::ci  d^ata:  b::  cidp  to  indicate  that  the  relation 
«  :  6  it  equal  to  the  relation  c  :  di  but  this  is  more  àmfAj 
aapmsiJ  hj  saying  «istoiasctod.  The  following  is 
auch  a  mportiont  8 :  4  :  :  IS  :  6;  for  the  ratio  of  the  re- 
lation 8  :  4  is  TV  or  51,  and  this  is  also  the  ratio  of  the  re- 
ktkm  IS  :  & 

4AS.  So  that  a:  hi:  e  :  if  being  a  geometrical  proportion, 
the  ratio  muA  be  the  same  on  bou  âdcsy  ooniequently 

&  t  .AC 

--j^oB-^*;  and,  redprocaUy,  if  the  fractions -^  S -^f  we  have 

46b.  a  geometrical  proportion  consists  therefore  of  four 
tcrma,  sudi,  that  the  first  divided  by  the  second  gives  the 
same  ouotient  as  the  third  divided  by  the  fourth  ;  «id  hence 
we  deauoe  an  important  property,  common  to  all  geometrical 
proportions,  wbicn  is,  that  the  product  of  the  first  and  the 
last  term  is  always  coual  to  the  product  of  the  second  and 
third  ;  or,  more  stmpiv,  that  the  product  of  the  extremes  is 
equal  to  the  product  or  the  means. 

464.  In  order  to  demonstrate  this  property,  let  us  take 

o        c 
the  geometrical  proportion  mi  b  ::  e  id^  so  that  nr^'^ 

Now,  if  we  multifdy  both  these  firaelioos  by  b,  we  obtain 

it 
m  zz  --p,  and  multiplying  both  sides  farther  by  d^  we  have 

nd  =  Ar  ;  but  nJ  is  the  product  of  the  extreme  terms,  and 
be  is  that  of  the  moans,  which  two  products  are  found  to  be 
equal. 

468.  Rcdpcocall  V,  if  the  lour  numbers  a,  i,  c,  d^  are  such, 
that  the  product  or  the  two  extremes,  a  and  d,  is  equal  to 
the  product  of  the  two  means,  b  and  r,  we  arc  certain  that 
they  form  a  geometrical  proportion  :  for,  since  nd  s  Ar,  we 


CHAP.  VIII.  OF  ALGKBRA.  1S3 

have  only  to  divide  both  sides  by  bdj  which  gives  us  -rj  zz 

be         a        c 

■T^,  CM"  -T-  =  - , ,  and  consequently  a:  b  :  :  c  :  d. 

466.  The  four  terms  of  a  geometrical  proportion,  as 
a  :  b  ::  c  :  df  may  be  transposed  in  different  ways,  without 
destroying  die  proportion  ;  for  the  rule  being  always,  that 
the  product  of  the  extremes  is  equal  to  the  product  of  the 
means,  or  ad  zz  be,  we  may  sayy 

1st     b  :  a::  d:  c;         Sdly.  a  :  c  ::  b  :  d; 
Sdly.  d  :  b  :  :  c  :  a;         4thly . d  :  c  :  :  b  :  à. 

467.  Be^de  these  four  geometrical  proportions,  we  maj 
deduce  some  others  from  the  same  proportion,  a  :  b  ::  c  :  a; 
for  we  may  say,  a  +  b  :  a  ::  c  +  d  :  c,  or  the  first  term, 
plus  the  second,  is  to  the  first,  as  the  third,  plus  the  fourth, 
IS  to  the  third  ;  that  is,  a  +  b  :  a  :  :  e  +  d  :  c. 

We  may  farther  say,  the  first,  minus  the  second,  is  to  the 
first,  as  the  third,  minus  the  fourth,  is  to  the  third,  or  a  -r- 
b  :  a  ::  c  -^  d  :  e.  For,  if  we  take  the  product  of  the  ex- 
tremes and  the  means,  we  have  ae  —  be  ^  ac  ^  ad,  which 
evidently  leads  to  the  equality  adzzbe. 

And,  in  the  same  manner,  we  may  demonstrate  that  à  -f- 
ft  :  6  :  :  c  +  d  :  d  ;  and  that  a— ft:6::c  —  did, 

468.  All  the  proportions  which  we  have  deduced  from 
a:  b:i  c:  d  may  be  represented  generally  as  follows  : 

wa  +  fÄ  :  pa  -|-  j6  :  :  »nc  -|-  nd  :  |M?  +  qd* 
For  the  product  of  the  extreme  terms  is  mpae  +  npbc  + 
mqad  +  nqbd\  which,  since  ad  zz  be,  becomes  mpae  -f-  f^pàc 
-f*  mqbc  +  nqbd;  also  the  product  of  the  mean  terms  is 
mpac-^- mqbc-^-npad']' nqod;  or,  since  ad  =  be,  it  ig 
mpae  +  mqbc  +  npbe  +  nqbd\  so  that  the  two  productsare 
equal. 

469«  It  is  evident,  therefore,  that  a  ^ometrical  pro^ 
portion  beine  given,  for  example,  6  :  8  :  :  10  :  5,  an  infinite 
number  of  oUiers  may  be  deduced  from  it«  We  shall,  how- 
ever, give  only  a  few  : 

3:  6::  5:  10;       6:  10::  8:  5;       9:6::  15:  10; 
3:  3::  5:    5;       9:  15::  3:  5;       9  :  8  :  :  15  :    5. 

470.  Since  in  every  geometrical  pn^rtion  the  product  of 
the  extremes  is  equal  to  the  product  of  the  means,  we  maj, 
when  the  three  first  terms  are*  known,  find  the  fourth  from 
them.  Thus,  let  the  three  first  terms  be  24  :  15  :  :  40  to 
the  fourth  term  :  here,  as  the  product  of  the  means  is  000, 
the  fourth  term  multiplied  by  the  first,  that  is  by  24,  must 


IM  KLUISXT^  »KIT.  III. 

alio  make  000  ;  cootequentlvi  by  dividing  600  by  84  the 

quotient  £5  will  be  the  fburtn  term  rcquiml,  and  the  whole 

proportion  will  be  S4  :  15  :  :  40  :  25.     In  general,  thera- 

forey  if  the  three  first  terms  are  a  :  &  :  :  r;  we  put  d  for 

the  unknown  fourth  letter  ;  and  since  ad  =  Ac,  we  divide 

At 
both  sides  bj  a,  and  bave  if  »  —  ;  so  that  the  fourth  term 

Ac 

is  —,  which  is  found  by  multipijring  the  second  term  bj  the 

third,  and  dividing  that  product  bj  the  first« 

471.  This  is  the  foundation  of  the  cdebratad  Rule  of 
1%ree  in  Aritbnietic;  for  in  that  rule  we  suppose  three 
munbers  given,  and  seek  a  fourth,  in  gcoinetrical  pn>- 
portioo  witn  those  diree;  so  that  the  first  may  be  to  the 
ssoond»  as  the  third  is  to  the  fourth. 

4Tt.  But  here  it  will  be  necessary  to  pay  attention  to  some 
nrticular  circumstances.  First,  if  m  two  pvportioos  the 
first  and  the  third  terms  are  the  same,  as  m  o  :  6  :  :  c  :  d^ 
and  a  -.jT'-  •  c  :  g^  then  the  two  second  and  the  two  fourth 
larms  wiD  also  be  in  geometrical  proportion,  m>  that  b:  d:: 
jf'g%  tor  the  first  proportion  bemg  transformed  into  this, 
a  :  c  :  :  A  :  d,  and  tne  second  into  tnis,  a  :  c  :  :/\  g^  it  fol- 
lows that  the  relations  b  :  d  and/  :  g  are  equal,  since  each 
of  them  is  equal  to  the  rektion  a  :  c.  Thus,  for  example, 
if  5  :  100  :  :  S  :  40,  and  5  :  15  :  :  S  :  6,  we  must  have  100  : 
40::  15:  6. 

473.  But  if  the  two  proportions  are  such,  that  the  mean 
terms  are  the  same  in  both,  1  say  that  the  first  terms  will  be 
in  an  inverse  proportion  to  the  fourth  terms:  that  is,  if 
m:  b::  c  :  df  andy  :  5  :  :  c  :  g,  it  follows  that  a  \f\  :  g  :  d. 
Let  the  proportions  be,  for  example,  S4  :  8  :  :  9  :  S,  and 
6:  8:  :  9:  15^  we  have  24  :  6  ::  IS  :  S;  the  reason  is  evi- 
dent  ;  for  the  first  proportion  gives  ad  z^bc;  and  the  second 
pvas^  =  Ar  ;  thmfore  ad  ^/gt  and  a  \f\  :  g:  d^or  a  \ 

474.  Two  proportions  being  given,  we  may  always  \no- 
duee  a  new  one  by  separately  multiplying  the  first  term  of 
the  one  by  the  first  term  or  the  otner,  the  «econd  by  the 
second,  and  so  on  with  respect  to  the  other  terms,  l^hus, 
the  proportions  m:  b::  c  :  d^  and  #  iJT:  :g:  k  will  furnish 
tUs,  ü€  :  df:  :  €g  :  dA\  far  the  first  giving  ad  ss  be,  «nd  the 
saeond  giving  dk  ^Jg^  va  hnve  also  adeA  s:  bc/g\  but  now 
odA  m  the  product  of  the  extrêmes,  and  bcA  '^  ibe  product 
of  ika  means  in  the  new  proportion  ;  so  that  the  two  products 
bci^g  «quel,  the  pmpoilian  is  true. 


CHAP.  IX.  or  ALGKBEA.  lAff 

475.  Let  the  two  proportions  be  6  :  4  :  :  15  :  10  and  9  : 
IS  :  :  15  :  20/  their  combination  will  -give  the  proportion 
6  X  9  :  4  X  12  :  :  15  X  15  :  10  X  Ä0, 

or  54  :  48  :  :  225  :  200» 
or    9:    8::      9:      8. 

476.  We  shall  observe,  lastly,  that  if  two  products  are 
equal,  ad^ibcy  we  may  reciprocally  convert  this  equality 
into  a  geometrical  proportion  ;  for  we  shall  always  have  one 
of  the  ractors  of  the  first  product  in  the  same  proportion  to 
one  of  the  factors  of  the  second  product,  as  the  other  factor 
of  the  second  product  is  to  the  other  factor  of  the  first  pro- 
duct :  that  is,  in  the  present  case,  a  :  c  :  :  b  :  d,  or  a  \q  ii 
e  :  d.  Let  8  x  8  «  4  x  6,  and  we  may  form  from  it  this 
proportion,  8  :  4  :  :  6  :  3,  or  this,  8  :  4  :  :  6  :  8.  Likewise^ 
if  S  X  5  =  1  X  15,  we  shall  have  S  :  15  :  :  1  :  5,  or  5  .  1  :  : 
15  :  S,  or  S  :  1  :  :  15  :  5. 


CHAP.  IX. 


Observations  on  the  Rules  ^Proportion  and  their  Utill^. 

477.  This  theory  is  so  useful  in  the  common  occurrences 
of  life,  that  scarcely  any  person  can  do  without  it.  There 
is  always  a  proportion  between  prices  and  commodities  ;  and 
when  diflerent  kinds  of  money  are  the  subject  of  exchange, 
the  whole  consists  in  determining  their  mutual  relations. 
The  examples  furnished  by  these  reflections  will  be  very 
proper  for  illustrating  the  principles  of  proportion,  ana 
shewing  their  utility  by  the  application  of  them. 

478.  If  we  wished  to  know,  for  example,  the  relation 
between  two  kinds  of  money  ;  suppose  an  old  louia  d^or  and 
a  ducat  :  we  must  first  know  the  value  of  those  pieces  when 
compared  with  others  of  the  same  kind.  Thus,  an  obi 
louis  l)eing,  at  Berlini  worth  5  rixdoUars  and  8  drachms,  and 
a  ducat  being  worth  8  rixdoUars,  we  may  reduce  these  two 
values  to  one  denomination;  either  to  rixdoUars,  whidi 
gives  the  proportion  IL  :  ID  :  :  &fR  :  8R,  or  :  :  16  :  9;  or 
to  drachms»  in  which  case  we  have  IL  :  ID  :  :  128  :  72  :  : 
16  :  9  ;  which  proportions  evidently  give  the  true  relatioo  of 
the  old  louis  to  the  ducat  ;  for  the  equality  of  the  products 
of- the  extremes  and  the  means  gives,  in  liotb  cases,  ft  louis 


156  RLRMKKT8  SftC*T.  III. 

SM  16  duoUt;  and,  bjr  mmtu  of  this  cooipariioii,  we  nuLj 
Aiwgg  «117  fuin  of  old  loiiit  into  ducats»  and  nos^Tena. 
Thus,  suppose  it  were  rcquiied  to  find  how  nuuij  ducats 
there  are  in  1000  old  louis,  we  hare  this  proportion  : 

Lou.    Lou.       Due      Due* 
As  9  ;  1000  :  :  16  :  ITHf,  the  number  sought 

If,  on  the  contnury,  it  were  required  to  find  how  many  old 
louis  d'or  there  are  in  1000  ducats,  we  have  the  following 

Duc«    Duc     Lou. 
As  16  :  1000  :  :  9  :  MS},  louis.   Ans. 

479l  At  Petcnburgh  the  ralue  of  the  ducat  varies,  and 
dapends  œ  tha  course  of  «change  ;  which  ootirse  déterminas 
the  value  of  the  ruble  in  stinars,  or  Dutdi  haHpenoe,  106  of 
wliidi  make  a  ducat  So  that  when  the  exdumge  is  at  45 
stiTcrs  per  ruble,  we  have  this  proportion  : 

As45:  105::  S:  7; 

and  hence  this  equality,  7  rubles  =:  S  ducats. 
Henoe  again  we  shall  find  the  value  of  a  ducat  in  rubles  ; 

Du.  Du.    Ru. 
As8  :  1  ::  7  :  S|  rubles; 

thai  is,  1  ducat  u  equal  to  Sf  nibl^i 

But  if  the  exchange  were  at  50  stivers,  the  proportion 
would  be, 

As  50  :  105  :  :  10  :  SI  ; 

which  would  give  21  rubles  =:  10  ducats;  whence  1  ducat 
=  ftfV  rubles.  Lastly,  when  the  exchange  is  at  44  stivers, 
we  have 

As  44:  106::  1  :Sf^  rubles; 

winch  n  cq|iud  to  S  rubies,  8ft/^  copecks. 

460.  It  ibllaws  also  from  this,  tnal  we  may  compare  dif- 
fimnt  kinds  of  money,  which  we  have  frequently  occaâon  to 
do  in  biUs  of  exchange. 

Suppose,  fisr  example,  that  a  person  of  Petcrsburgh  has 
1000  niUas  to  be  paid  to  him  at  Berlin,  and  that  he  wishes 
to  know  the  value  of  th»  sum  in  ducats  at  Berlin. 

The  exchange  is  at  47^  ;  that  is  to  say,  one  ruble  makes 
47}  stivers;  and  in  Holland,  90  stivers  make  a  fiorin ;  ft| 
Dutch  florins  make  a  Dutch  dollar:  also,  the  exchange  of 
HoOand  with  Berlin  is  at  14«;  thatbtosay,  ibr  100  Dutch 
doHars,  I4t  doUars  are  paid  at  Berhn  ;  and  lastly,  the  ducat 
is  worth  8  doHam  at  Berhn. 

461.  To  rr^ilvc  the  question  proposed,  let  u»  proceed 


CHAP.  IX,  OF  ALGEBRA«  157 

Step  by  step.  Beginning  therefore  with  the  stivers,  since 
1  ruble  =  47^  stivers,  or  S  rubles  =  95  stivers,  we  shall 
have 

Ru.     Ru.       Stiv. 
As  2  :  1000  :  :  95  :  47500  stivers; 

then  again, 

Stir.      Stiv.      Flor. 
As  M  :  47500  :  :  1  :  2875  flmns. 

Also,  niice  S^  florins  =  1  Dutch  dollar,  or  5  florins  =8  t 
Dutch  ddlars;  we  shall  have  '' 

Flor.    Flor.    D.D. 
As  5  :  2S75  :  :  S  :  950  Dutch  dollars. 

Then,  taking  the  dollars  of  Berlin,  according  to  the  ei- 
change,  at  142,  we  shall  have 

D.D.    D.D.    Dollars. 
As  100  :  950  :  :  142  :  1S49  dollars  of  Beriin. 

And  lastly, 

Dol.    Dol.       Du. 
As  3  :  1349  :  :  1  :  449f  ducats, 

which  is  the  number  sought. 

482.  Now,  in  order  to  render  these  calculations  still  more 
complete,  let  us  suppose  that  the  Be)rlin  banker  refuses^ 
under  some  pretext  or  other,  to  pay  this  sum,  and  to  accept 
the  bill  of  exchange  without  five  per  cent,  discount;  that  is, 
paying  only  100  instead  of  105.  In  that  case,  we  must 
make  use  of  the  following  proportion  : 

As  105  :  100  :  :  449f  :  428|4  ducats; 

which  is  the  answer  under  those  conditions. 

483.  We  have  shewn  that  six  operations  are  necessary  in 
making  use  of  the  Rule  of  Three;  but  we  can  gr&ÊÛy 
abridge  those  calculations  by  a  rule  which  is  called  the  Mme 
ofRäuction^  or  Double  Ride  of  Three.  To  explain  which» 
we  shall  first  consider  the  two  antecedents  of  eacl^  of  the  ox 
preceding  operations  : 


1st  2  rubles 
2d.    20  stivers 
3d.   5Dutchflor. 
4th.  100  Dutch  doll. 
5th.  8  dollars 
6th.  105  ducats 


95  stivers. 

1  Dutch  florin. 

2  Dutch  dollars. 
142  dollars. 

1  ducat. 
100  ducats. 


If  we  now  look  over  the  preceding  calculations,  we  shall 
observe,  that  we  have  always  multij^ied  the  fi;iven  sum  by 
the  third  terms,  or  second  antecedents,  and  divided  the  pro- 
ducts by  the  first:  it  is  evident,  therefore,  that  we  snail 


IM  BLBMKKTS  MCCT.  111. 


arme  at  tht  Mme  ramlfi  by  multiiilyiiig  at  one»  tha  Mmi 
paopmad  by  tha  product  of  all  the  thifd  tann«,  and  dinding 
hj  the  proauct  of  all  the  6»!  teniM  :  or,  which  amounts  to 
taa  same  thing,  that  we  have  only  to  make  the  following 
proportion  :  As  the  product  of  all  the  first  terms  is  to  the 
given  number  of  rubles,  «o  is  the  product  of  all  the  second 
terms,  tç  the  numlier  of  ducats  parable  at  Berlin. 

484.  This  ealculation  is  abridged  still  more,  when 
amongst  the  first  terms  some  are  found  that  have  comnKm 
divisors  with  the  second  or  third  terms;  fur,  in  this  case^  we 
dêitit>y  those  terms,  and  substitute  the  quotient  ariiung  from 
tlie  diviiion  bj  that  oomoion  divisor.  'I  he  preceding  ex* 
aasple  will,  in  thu  manner,  a»ume  the  following  form. 

As  (tJ».ff.100^  105)  :  1000  :  :  (95.2.14JL100)  : 

1000.95.S.143.100        ^    ^  ...        t^ 

àjÊtULlùùSf^  ;  and  after  cancelling  the  common  di- 
visors in  the  numerator  ami  denominator,  this  will  become 
ÎÎ^J^  =  »W*  «  4£8tnu«ts,  as  befoie. 

485w  The  method  which  must  be  observed  in  using  the 
Buk  of  Reduction  is  this  :  we  begin  with  the  kind  of  money 
îa  question,  and  compare  it  with  another  which  is  to  be^n 
tka  «est  lelatioD,  in  which  we  compare  tins  second  kind 
arilh  a  third»  and  so  on.  Each  relation,  therefore,  begins 
with  the  same  kind  as  the  preceding  relation  ended  with  ; 
and  the  operation  is  continued  till  we  arrive  at  the  kind  of 
BBOoey  which  the  answer  requires  ;  at  the  end  of  which  wc 
must  reckon  the  fractional  remainders. 

486.  Let  us  give  some  other  examples,  in  order  to  facilitate 
tba  practice  of  tliis  calculation. 

Ir  ducau  gain  at  Hambursh  1  per  cent,  on  two  dolhirs 
faaaeo;  that  u  to  say,  if  60  ducats  are  worth,  not  100,  but 
101  dollars  banco;  ami  if  the  exchange  between  Harobuivh 
and  Königsberg  is  119  drachms  of  Poland;  that  is,  if^l 
dollar  banco  is  equal  to  119  Polish  drachms;  how  many 
Polish  florins  are  equivalent  to  1000  ducats  ? 

It  being  understood  that  SO  Polish  drachms  make  1 
Pèlishfkmn, 

Here      1  :  1000  :  :  S  dollars  banco 
100      —       101  doUars  banco 


1       —       110  Polish  drachms 
SO       —       1  Polisli  florin  ; 


tharauNe, 


«HAP.  X.  WF  ALOXB»A.  149 

(100.30)  :   1000  :  :   (8.101.119)  :  '"^j^j|^"^  = 

^l^^^^y^  =  8012Î.  Polish  florins.     Jns, 

487.  We  will  propose  another  example,  which  may  still 
farther  illustrate  this  method. 

Ducats  of  Amsterdam  are  brought  to  Leipsic,  having  in 
the  former  city  the  value  of  5  flor.  4  stivers  current  ;  that  is 
to  say,  1  ducat  is  worth  104  stivers,  and  5  ducats  are  worth 
26  Dutch  florins.  If,  therefore,  the  agio  of  the  bank  at 
Amsterdam  is  5  per  cent  ;  that  is,  if  105  currency  are  equal 
to  100  banco;  and  if  the  exchange  from  Lcipsic  to  Am- 
sterdam, in  bank  money,  is  133^  per  cent  ;  tnat  is»  if  for 
100  dollars  we  pay  at  Leipsic  lââ^  dollars  ;  and  lastly,  2 
Dutch  dollars  making  5  Dutch  florins;  it  is  reauired  to 
determine  how  many  dollars  we  must  pay  at  Leipsic,  ac- 
cording to  these  exchanges,  for  1000  ducats  ? 
By  me  rule, 

5  :  1000  :  :  26  flor.  Dutch  curr. 
105      —      100  flor.  Dutch  banco 
400      —      5S3  doll,  of  Leipuck 
5      —      2  doll,  banco; 
therefore. 

As  (5.105.400.5)  :  1000  :  :  (26.100.58S.2)  : 
1000.26.100.588.2      4.26.533      ^^^  ,  ^  „ 

-5JÔ540Ô:5— =  —Zl-  =  ^^'^  ^^^•^^  *^  ""^ 
ber  sought 


CHAP.  X. 

Q^  Compound  Relations. 

488.  Compound  ReUUUms  are  obtained  by  multiplying 
the  terms  cf  two  or  more  relatioDS,  the  antecedents  by  the 
antecedents,  and  the  consequents  by  the  consequents;  we 
then  say,  that  the  relation  oetween  those  two  products  is 
compounded  of  the  relations  given. 

Thus  the  relations  a  :  b^  c  :  dj  e  ij*^  give  the  compound 
relation  ace  :  bdf^. 

*  Each  of  these  tliree  ratios  is  said  to  be  one  of  the  rooii  of 
the  compound  ratio. 


160  BLBllSIITft  taCT.  111. 

489.  A  relâtiao  eonünimiff  almiyt  the  WÊxatf  wboi  we 
dhrkk  both  iu  terms  bv  t&  «une  niurixr»  in  otder  to 
•bffidfp  it,  we  maj  greetJy  fi^ifitate  the  «bore  campoâtkMi 
bj  oomiMuring  tbe  antaoMMits  end  tbe  oomtqiioits,  tat  tbe 
pmrpete  of  making  tucb  reductions  as  we  perftrmed  in  tbe 
lui  chapter. 

For  example,  we  find  tbe  oompound  rriation  of  tbe  ibl- 
loirf^g  given  idations  tbus: 

Edaikmi  givtn^ 
lfl:SS,t8:88,and05:56L 

Whicb  becomes 

br  fiiT*r*^l*"g  tbe  common  divisors. 
So  tbal  t  :  5  is  tbe  compound  relation  reqinrsd« 
46(1  Tbe  same  operation  is  to  be  peribrmed,  wben  it  is 
required  to  calcukte  generaUr  by  letters;  and  tbe  most  re- 
nwrkaUe  case  is  tbal  in  wbic»  each  antecedent  is  equal  to 
tbe  consequent  of  tbe  preceding  relation.  If  tbe  given  re- 
lations arc 

a  :  b 
b  :  e 
e  :  d 
d  :  e 
€  :  a 
tba  compound  rebtion  is  1  :  1. 

461.  The  uülity  of  diese  principles  wiU  be  perceived, 
wben  it  b  observed,  that  the  relation  between  two  square 
fields  is  compounded  of  the  relations  of  tbe  lengths  and 
tbe  breadths. 

Let  the  two  fields,  for  example,  be  A  and  B  ;  A  having 
800  feet  in  length  bv  60  feet  in  breadth  ;  the  length  of  B 
beÎM  660  feet,  and  fu  breadth  100  feet  ;  the  irbuioo  of  the 
lei^  wUl  be  500  :  360,  and  that  of  the  braidths  60  :  100. 
So  tbal  we  have 

(500.60)  :  (360.100)  =  5:6 

¥rbcrefbre  the  field  A  is  to  the  field  B«  as  5  to  6. 

461  Again,  let  the  field  A  be  790  ftet  long«  86  feet 
broad;  andletthefieldHbe660fcet  kng,  and  90  feet 
broad  ;  tbe  relations  will  be  compounded  in  the  following 


Relation  of  the  lengths    7f0  :  660 
Rclsticm  of  the  breadths    88  :     90 

and  by  caocrlUng,  the 

Rektion  «/  the  fields  A  and  R  is  16  :     15. 


CHAP.  X»  OF  ALGEBKA.  161 

49S.  Farther,  if  it  be  required  to  compare  two  rooms 
with  resfject  to  the  space,  or  contents,  we  ooserve,  that  that 
relation  is  compounded  of  three  relations  ;  namely,  that  of 
the  lengths,  breadths,  and  heights.  Let  there  be,  for  ex- 
ample, a  room  A,  whose  length  is  36  feet,  breadth  16  feet, 
ana  height  14  feet,  and  a  room  B,  whose  length  is  42  feet, 
breadth  24  feet,  and  height  10  feet;  we  shäl  have  these 
three  relations  : 

For  the  length     36  :  42 

For  the  breadth  16  :  24 

For  the  height    14  :  10 
And  cancelling  the  common  measures,  these  become  4 :  6. 
So  that  the  contents  pf  the  room  A,  is  to  t1ie  contents  of  the 
room  B,  as  4  to  5. 

494.  When  the  relations  which  we  compound  in  this 
mannerare  eaual,  there  result  multiplicate  relations.  Namely, 
two  equal  relations  give  a  dupliaùe  ratioy  or  ratio  of  the 
êqiuires  ;  three  equal  relations  produce  the  triplicate  ratio, 
or  rcUio  of  the  cubes;  and  so  on.  For  example,  the  re- 
lations a  :  b  and  a  :  b  ^ve  the  compound  relation  a^  :  6'  ; 
wherefore  we  say,  that  the  squares  are  in  the  duplicate  raüo 
of  their  roots.  And  the  ratio  a  :  b  multiplied  twice,  giving 
the  ratio  o^  :  6^,  we  say  that  the  cubes  are  in  the  triplicate 
ratio  of  their  roots. 

495.  Geometry  teaches,  that  two  circular  spaces  are  in  the 
duplicate  relation  of  their  diameters;  this  means,  that  they 
are  to  each  other  as  the  squares  of  their  diameters. 

Let  A  be  such  a  space,  having  its  diameter  45  feet,  and 
B  another  circular  space,  whose  diameter  is  30  feet  ;  the  first 
space  will  be  to  the  second  as  45  x  45  is  to  30  x  äO  ;  or, 
compounding  these  two  equal  relations,  as  9  :  4.  Therefore 
the  two  areas  are  to  each  other  as  9  to  4. 

496.  It  is  also  demonstrated,  that  the  solid  contents  of 
spheres  are  in  the  ratio  of  the  cubes  of  their  diameters  :  so 
tnat  the  diameter  of  a  globe,  A,  being  1  foot,  and  the 
diameter  of  a  globe,  B,  being  2  feet,  the  solid  content  of  A 
will  bo  to  that  of  B,  as  1^  :  ^^;  or  as  1  to  8.  If,  therefore, 
the  spheres  are  formed  of  the  same  substance,  the  latter  will 
weigh  8  times  as  much  as  the  former. 

497.  It  is  evident  that  we  may  in  this  manner  find  the 
weight  of  cannon  balls,  their  diameters,  and  the  weight  of 
one,  being  given.  For  example,  let  there  be  the  ball  A, 
whose  diameter  is  2  inches,  anu  weigiit  5  pounds  ;  and  if  the 
weight  of  another  ball  Ik?  required,  whose  diameter  is  8 
inches,  we  have  this  proportion, 

2^:  8'  ::  5  :  320  pounds, 


102  BLmiKTH  tcrr.  in. 

which  gives  the  weight  of  the  bttll  B  :  and  for  another  ball 
C,  whme  diameter  it  15  inches,  we  should  have, 

a      c 
40B.  When  the  ratio  of  two  fraction%  as  -^  :  -^v  is  re- 
quired, we  may  always  express  it  in  integer  numbers  ;  for 
we  have  only  to  multiply  tiie  two  fractions  by  M,  in  order 
to  iAsUàn  the  ratio  ad  :  oe^  which  in  ec{ual  to  the  other  ;  and 

a      c 
from  hence  results  the  proportion  j-  :  -jr  :  :  ad  :  be.    If, 

therefore,  ad  and  be  have  common  divisors,  the  ratio  may  be 
redueed  to  fewer  terms.     Thus  U  •  Î4  •  '•  (15^)  :  (24.35) 
:  :  9  :  10. 
409.  If  we  wislied  to  know  the  ratio  of  the  fractionn 

—  and  -TT»  it  is  evident  tliat  we  should  have  —  :  —r  -  -  b  : 
ab  ab 

a  ;  which  is  expressed  by  saying,  that  two  fractions,  which 

have  unity  (or  tneir  numerator,  are  in  the  rccijnvcal^  or  in- 

verêc  rauo  of  tlieir  denominators:  and  the  same  thing  is 

said  of  two  fractions  which  have  any  common  numerator  ;  for 

e       f 

—  I  -rr  :  :  b  :  a.     But  if  two  fractions  have  their  deno- 

a       b 

mmators  equal,  as  —  :  — ,  they  are  m  the  dtrcci  ratio  ot 

the  numerators;  namely, as  a  :  b.     Tims  I  :  -,V  '  :  i%  •  iV* 

or  6  :  S  :  :  îi  :  1,  and  V  •  V  :  :  10  :  15,  or  2  :  3. 

500.  It  has  Ikvu  observed,  in  the  free  descent  of  bodies 
that  a  body  falls  about  16  English  fei*t  in  a  stvoml,  that  in 
two  siTomfji  of  time  it  falls  from  the  height  of  64  feet,  and  in 
three  accdiuIs  it  falls  144  feet.  Hence  it  is  concluded,  that 
the  heightsi  are  to  each  other  as  the  squares  of  the  times  ; 
andf  recipTYically,  that  the  times  are  in  tne  subduplicate  ratk» 
of  the  hnglits  or  as  the  square  wot»  of  the  heignts  *. 

If,  then'furt*,  it  lie  nt|inrcd  to  determine  how  long  a  stom* 
will  be  in  falling  (Vom  the  height  of  2304  feet  ;  we  have  16  : 
2804  :  :  1  :  144,  the  M|uarc  of  the  time;  and  aMisequently 
the  time  re<|inred  i»  1^  MXt>iut>. 

501.  If  it  be  re<)uiretl  to  determine  liow  far,  or  throiigli 

*  The  »pace,  through  which  a  heavy  body  cletcenils,  in  the  la- 
titude ol*  i.omloii,  and  in  tlic  t\m  »econd  ol'timt*,  has  been  found 
by  rxprriment  to  be  lf>,  Kngh^ti  I'lvt  .  but  in  calculatiun* 
where  Krc«it  accuracy  u  not  ri*i|uircd,  tlic  Iractiuii  nui)  In- 
omitted. 


CHAP,  X.  OF  ALGEBRA.  163 

what  hdght,  a  stone  will  pass  by  descending  for  the  space  of 
an  hour,  or  3600  seconds  ;  we  must  say. 

As  1^  :  8600»  :  :  16  :  207360000  feet, 

the  height  required. 

Which  being  reduced  is  found  equal  to  S9S7S  miles  ;  and 
consequently  nearly  five  times  greater  than  the  diameter  of 
the  earth. 

502.  It  is  the  same  with  regard  to  the  price  of  precious 
stones,  which  are  not  sold  in  the  proportion  of  their  weight  ; 
every  body  knows  that  their  prices  follow  a  much  greater 
ratio.  The  rule  for  diamonds  is,  that  the  price  is  in  the 
duplicate  ratio  of  the  weight  ;  that  is  to  say,  the  ratio  of 
the  prices  is  equal  to  the  square  of  the  ratio  of  the  weights. 
The  weight  of  diamonds  is  expressed  in  carats^  and  a  carat 
is  equivalent  to  4  grains  ;  if,  therefore,  a  diamond  of  one 
carat  is  worth  10  livres,  a  diamond  of  100  carats  will  be 
worth  as  many  times  10  livres  as  the  square  of  100  contains 
1  ;  so  that  we  shall  have,  according  to  the  Rule  of  Three, 

x\s  1  :  10000  :  :  10  :  100000  liv.     Ans. 

There  is  a  diamond  in  Portugal  which  weighs  1680  carats; 
its  price  will  be  found,  therefore,  by  making 

V  :  1680*  :  :  10  :  28224000  livres. 

503.  The  posts,  or  mode  of  travelling,  in  France,  furnish 
sufficient  examples  of  compound  ratios  ;  because  the  price  is 
regulated  by  the  compound  ratio  of  the  number  of  norses, 
and  the  number  of  leagues,  or  posts.  Thus,  for  example, 
if  one  horse  cost  20  sous  per  post,  it  is  required  to  find  how 
much  must  be  paid  for  28  horses  for  4^^  posts. 

We  write  first  tlie  ratio  of  the  horses      -     -     1  :     28 
Under  this  ratio  we  put  that  of  the  stages     -    2  :       9 

And,  compounding  the  two  ratios,  we  have  -     2  :  252 

Or,  by  abridging  the  two  terms,  1  :  126  :  :  1  liv.  to  126  fr. 
or  42  crowns. 

Again,  If  I  pay  a  ducat  for  eight  liorses  for  3  miles,  how 
nmch  must  I  pay  for  thirty  horses  for  four  miles?  The 
calculation  is  as  follows  : 

8  :  30 
3  :     4 

Hy  compounding  these  two  ratios,  and  abridging, 
1  :  5  :  :  1  due.  :  5  ducats;  the  sum  required. 

504.  The  same  composition  occurs  when  workmen  are  to 
be  paid,  since  those   pavments  generally   follow  the  ratio 

M  2 


ICI  FLKMKXTü  tlCT.  Iff. 

compoumliHl  of  the  numhcn'  of  workmen  and  thai  of  the  day* 
which  thoy  liavc  been  employed. 

If«  for  example,  25  mhis  per  day  be  fn%'en  to  one  mason, 
and  it  is  required  what  must  be  paul  to  x4  masons  who  have 
worked  for  50  davs  ^^  i^te  the  calculation  thus  : 

1  :  84' 

1   :  50 


1  :  laOO  :  :  85  :  «SOOOO  sous,  or  1500  francs. 
In  thene  examples,  five  thini^  being  given,  the  rule  which 
serves  to  resolve  them  is  calico,  in  books  of  arithmetic.  The 
RuW  of  Five,  ivr  Dinible  Rule  of  Three. 


C  HAP.  XI. 

(jy* Geometrical  Prugressiimn. 

505.  A  MTii*^  of  numbers,  which  are  always  bettmiing  ;è 
certain  nuinlkT  of  times  greater,  or  leikü,  is  called  n  ^>^*(>- 
metrical  progn-sston^  lK*cause  eaeii  tenu  is  constantly  tc»  tlu' 
following  one  in  the  same  geometrical  ratio  :  and  the  number 
which  e\|nv^Si*s  how  many  tinu^s  each  term  is  greater  than 
the  priH*i*ding,  \a  called  i\ui  ex/foficnt^  or  ratio.  Thus  ^hrn 
the  Mrvt  term  is  1  and  the  exponent,  or  ratio,  is  t?,  the*  getv 
metrical  pnigreœion  liecoroes. 

Terms       I    •.>    3     ^      A      6     7         g         i)      Ac. 

Pn^r,     1,  o,  4,  8,  16,  3S,  64,  ISW,  5256,  &c. 

The  nuinlieni  1,  8,  3,  &c.  alwavs  marking  the  place  which 
each  term  Imld«  in  the  pnigression. 

506.  If  we  HupiKüie«  in  general,  the  first  term  to  U*  u. 
and  tla*  ratio  /;,  we  have  tlie  following  gvonM*trical  |)nw 
grusfti«»)  ' 

I«   .*•     t>,     4,     Of      0«      I,     o    ....  II. 
Pn^.  «,  #i'/,  f/A\  ah\  «//*,  «A*,  n^,  alt  ....  oA*— *. 

So  that,  when  tlif«  progresjiion  cfmsi«4ji  of  n  teniis  llu 
last  tenn  U  ab  — \  \\v  must,  howe%*er,  n*niark  here,  that  il 
the  ratio  h  Ik*  greater  than  unity,  the  terms  increase  con- 
tinually ;  il'/i  s  K  the  tennn  aiv  all  ei|ual;  lastly,  if  ^  U 
less  than  1,  or  a  fracticm,  tlu*  tenun  continually  decft*as4* 
'llius,  «hen  «i  ss  1,  ami  A  ^  |,  we  liave  this  gvometrical 
piv]|(fesMon  ; 


CfiAP.  XI.  OF  ALGEBRA.  165 

1         I         I         I  1  i  I  I  ttrp 

■*5  -ï»  T'  T>  T^J  TT>  Za^  Tâ8>  ***'• 

507.  Here  therefore  we  have  to  consider  : 

1.  The  first  term,  wliich  we  have  called  a, 

2.  T^he  exponent,  which  we  call  b, 

3.  The  number  of  terms,  which  we  have  expressed  by  n. 

4.  And  the  last  term,  which,  wc  have  alreaoy  seen,  is  ex- 
pressed by  aé*~^ 

So  that,  when  the  first  three  of  these  arc  given,  the  last  term 
is  found  by  multi[Jying  the  n  —  1  power  of  ft,  or  6*"S  by 
the  first  term  a. 

I£,  therefore,  the  50th  term  of  the  geometrical  progression 
1,  2,  4,  8,  &c  were' required,  we  should  have  a  s  1,  6  ^  S, 
and  n  =  SO.;  consequently  the  50th  term  would  be  2*^;  and 
as  2^  =  512,  we  shall  have  2^*^  =  1024  ;  wherefore  the  square 
of  2*®,  or  2®*,  =  1048576,  and  the  square  of  this  number, 
which  is  1099511627776,  =  2*°.  Multiplying  therefore  this 
value  of  2^  by  2»,  or  512,  we  have  2^  =  5629499534«1^12 
for  the  50th  term. 

508.  One  of  the  principal  questions  which  occurs  on  this 
subject,  is  to  find  the  sum  of  all  tlic  terms  of  a  geometrical 
progression  ;  we  shall  therefore  explain  the  method  of  doing 
this.  Let  there  be  given,  first,  tne  following  progression, 
consisting  of  ten  terms  : 

1,  2,  4,  8,  16,  32,  64, 128,  256,  512, 

the  sum  of  which  we  shall  represent  by  5,  so  that 

^=1  +  2+4  +  8  +  16  +  32+64  +  128+256  +  512; 

doubling  both  âdes,  we  shall  have 

a?=2  +  4+8 +  16  +  32  +  64  +  128  +  256  +  512+ 1024; 

and  subtracting  from  this  the  progres^on  represented  by  ^, 
there  remains  s  =  1024  —  1  =  1023  ;  wherefore  the  sum 
required  is  1023. 

509.  Suppose  now,  in  the  same  progression,  that  the 
number  of  terms  is  undetermined,  that  is,  let  them  be  ge- 
nerally represented  by  7«,  so  that  the  sum  in  question,  or 

s,  =l+2  +  2'  +  2H2* 2—' 

If  we  multiply  by  2,  we  have 

2*=2+2'  +  2H2* 2', 

then  subtracting  from  this  equation  the  preceding  one,  we 
have  *  =  2"  —  1.  It  is  evident,  therefore,  that  the  sum  re- 
quired is  found,  by  multiplying  the  last  term,  2*"^  by  the 
exponent  2,  in  order  to  have  2'*,  and  subtracting  unity  from 
that  product^ 

510.  This  is  made  still  more  evident  *  by  the  following 


106  BLmCKTM  SECT.  tU. 

examples,  in  which  we  subititulc  Aucccssively  for  ti,  the 
numbers  1,  2,  3»  4,  &c« 

1  =  1;  lH-«=iS;l-»-«^4  =  7;lH'Se-»-4H-8=15; 
l-»-«  +  4^8  +  16  =  SI;l+«H'4H-8-hl6  +  3«Ä 

fis,  aie. 

511.  On  this  subject,  the  foUowinff  question  is  generally 
proposed.  A  man  offers  to  sell  his  horüo  on  the  following 
oooditjon  ;  that  is,  he  demands  1  penny  for  the  first  nail,  2 
for  the  second,  4  for  the  third,  8  tor  the  fourth,  and  so  on, 
doubling  the  price  of  each  succeeding  nail.  It  is  required 
to  find  Uie  price  of  the  horse,  the  naib  being  82  in  number  ? 

This  question  is  evidently  reduced  to  finding  the  sum  of 
all  the  terms  of  the  geometrical  progression  1,  2,  4,  8,  16, 
8Cc  continued  to  the  SSA  term.  Now,  that  last  term  is  2^  ; 
and,  as  we  have  alrc^iy  found  8^  =  1048576,  and  ^^  » 
1084,  we  shall  hnvc  V>  x  S'«»  =  8»  ^  107S741824;  and 
ttuMplytng  again  by  51,  the  last  term  2"'  =  2147483648; 
doubling  tnerefore  this  numl)er,  and  subtracting  unity  from 
the  product,  the  sum  required  becomes  48949u7295  pence  ; 
whidi  being  reduced,  we  have  17895697/.  1^.  8c/.  tor  the 
price  of  the  horse. 

512.  Let  the  ratio  now  be  5,  and  let  it  be  reciuirod  to  find 
tlie  sum  of  the  geometrical  progression  1,  3,  9,  27,  81, 5M8, 
789,  consisting  of  7  terms. 

Calling  the  sum  s  as  betöre,  we  have 

1  =  1  -h  8  -h  9  -h  27  -  81  H-  ii48  t  72a 

And  multiplying  by  8, 

8#  =  8  -h  9  -h  27  +  HI  -^  248  -  729  ^  iilHT. 

Then  Kubtracting  the  tbrmer  series  from  tlu*  latter,  we  have 
8«  =  2187  -  1  =  2186:  so  that  the  double  of  the  sum  is 
8186,  and  coiise(|uently  the  sum  required  in  lOitA, 

518.  In  the  Jiame  pnign^on,  let  the  luimber  of  terms  lie 
«I,  and  tlie  sum  s  ;  m>  that 

J  =  1  -h  8  ♦  8     •  8'  +  8*  4 8'-'. 

If  now  wi-  multiply  by  «J,  we  have 

.if  =  8  ^  8^   -  8    -^  8*  ^   ....  8\ 

Then  subtracting  from  thi»  expression  the  %'alue  ot*  ji,  a:> 

before,  we  shall  have  2*  =  8*  —  1  ;  therefore  i  =      ^    .  Si 

that  the  sum  required  is  tuund  by  multiplyinij^  the  laM  tenu 
by  S,  subtracting  1  from  the  product,  aiHl  lUviding  the  re* 
maimk*r  by  2  ;  a<*  will  a|>pear,  also,  trom  the  followuig  par- 
tktilar  cases: 


CHAP.  XI.  OF  ALOBBRA.  167 

(1x8)— 1 


2 
(3x3)- 1 


=      1 


1+3      -        -        -    ^-^-     =      * 
1+3  +  9        -        -    ^--1    =13  ' 

1+3  +  9  +  27       -    iiuÇbll=    40 

1+3  +  9  +  27  +  81  ^^^--i  =  121. 

514.  Let  us  now  suppose,  generally,  the  first  term  to  be 
/7,  the  ratio  6,  the  number  of  terms  n,  and  their  sum  ^, 
so  that 

^  =  fl  -h  aft  +  oô'  +  aft»  +  oô*  -h  ....  aft-^^ . 
If  we  multiply  by  6,  we  have 

ftjf  =  aft  +  aft«  -h  aft'  +  aft*  +  aft*  + aft", 

and  taking  the  diiference  between  this  and  the  above  equa- 
tion, there  remains  (ft  —  1  )  0*  =  aft''  —  a  ;  whence  we  easily 

,   ,         ,  .J  a.(ft"-l)    ^ 

deduce  the  sum  required*  =  — ,  ^      .  Consequently,  the 

sum  of  any  geometrical  progression  is  found,  by  multiplying 
the  last  term  by  the  ratio,  or  exponent  of  the  progression, 
and  dividing  the  difference  between  this  product  and  the 
first  term,  by  the  difference  between  1  and  the  ratio. 

515.  Let  there  be  a  geometrical  progression  of  seven 
terms,  of  which  the  first  is  3  ;  and  let  the  ratio  be  S  :  we 
shall  then  have  a  =  8,  ft  =  2,  and  n  =  7;  therefore  the  last 
term  is  3  x  2^,  or  3  x  64,  =  19^  ;  and  the  whole  pro- 
gression will  be 

3,  6,  12,  34,  48,  96,  192. 

Farther,  if  we  multiply  the  last  term  19S  by  the  ratio  % 
wc  have  384  ;  subtracting  the  first  term,  there  remains  381  ; 
and  dividing  this  by  ft  —  1,  or  by  1,  we  have  881  for  the 
sum  of  the  whole  progression. 

516.  Again,  let  there  be  a  geometrical  progression  of  six 
terms,  of  which  the  first  is  4  ;  and  let  the  ratio  be  4  :  thcD 
the  progression  is 

If  we  multiply  the  last  term  by  the  ratio,  we  shall  have 
\^g^  ;  and  subtracting  the  first  term  =  A:J.  the  remainder  is 
Vft'  ;  which,  divided  by  6  —  1  =  ^,  gives  ^|  '  =  83 J.  for 
the  sum  of  the  series. 


16B  BLBMSirrii  sbct.  hi. 


517.  When  the  expunenl  is  lew  than  1«  ami,  roii!ie<|iu*nilv, 
when  the  termn  of  the  progrcMun  cuntinunlly  cliniiinsh,  tfu* 
sum  of  Mich  a  dccreuMng  progre«ion,  carrktl  on  to  infinity, 
may  be  aocuratclv  exprcsaed. 

For  example,  fct  the  first  term  be  1,  the  ratio  \^  and  the 
MUD  «,  so  that  : 

,  =  1    r    ;   4    i  +  ^   -t    ,'e  -»^  V,  ^    s\f  ÄCC. 

ad  infinitum. 

If  we  mtdtiply  by  8»  we  have 

ad  infinitum  :  and,  subtracting  the  preceding  progression, 
there  remains  «  =  2  for  the  sum  or  the  proposed  infinite 
pramssion« 

ol8w  If  the  first  term  be  1,  the  ratio  {,  and  the  sum  s; 
so  that 

J  =  I  -f  I   i    •   -r  /;   ♦   gV  -J"  >  &^»  ad  infinitum  : 
Then  multiplying  tlR*  whole  by  3,  we  have 

3«  =  «3  ^  1  ^  ;  -h  •  ^  ^\  -^yHu.mà  infinitum  ; 

and  subtracting  the  value  of  ^,  there  remains  2«  =  S  ;  where- 
fbre  the  sum«  ==  1;. 

519.  Let  tliere  be  a  progression  whose  sum  is  «,  the  first 
term  2,  and  the  ratio  |  ;  so  that 

s  =  «-»-}-»-J-»-|4-»-  //r-f,^c.ad  infinitum. 

Multiplyuig  by  f ,  we  have 

♦t  =  •  H-  g  -»-  J  +  ;  -H  i  Î  -h  ,V^  -h ,  ÄCC.  ad  infinitum  ; 

and  subtr^ting  from  this  progression  ^,  there  remains  \s  = 
{.  :  wherefore  tfie  sum  required  is  H. 

690.  If  we  suppose,  in  general,  the  first  term  to  be  /i«  and 

may  bi*  lens  than  1,  and  consequently  r  greater  tlian  /;;  tin 

sum  of  the  |irogressioa,  carried  on  ad  infinitum,  will  Ik- 

found  thu»  : 

^-  ,  ab       iUr      ab^      ab* 

Make  ä  =  <i  +   —  f         -♦•  — r  -»•  --r  +»  **^*- 

Then  multiplying  by  — ,  we  shall  have 

b         ab      ab*      ab'      ab'  ^      .. 

— #  =        f--+-Tf-r4,  ÔCC.  ad  mnmtum  • 
e  r        c*        c^       c* 

and  subtracting  this  ct|uation  from  the  preceding,  tlwre  re« 
mam»  (i  t  — -)#  ss  h. 


CHAP.  Xf.  OF   AL6SBBA.  1G9 

Consequently^  s  = =  _-^  by  multiplying  both  the 

c 
numerator  and  denominator  by  c. 

The  sum  of  the  infinite  geometrical  progression  proposed 
is,  therefore,  found  by  diviaing  the  first  term  a  by  1  minus 
the  ratio,  or  by  multiplying  the  first  term  a  by  the  de- 
nominator of  the  ratio,  and  dividing  the  product  by  the 
same  denominator  diminished  by  the  numerator  of  the 
ratio*. 

521.  In  the  same  manner  we  find  the  sums  of  progressions, 
the  terms  of  which  are  alternately  afiected  by  the  sigps  + 
and  — .     Suppose,  for  example, 

ab  ^  cif'      aJf^  .  ab^ 

Multiplying  by  — ,  we  have. 

If 

b         ab     a¥     atf^     ab^   ^ 
c  c        €r        cr        c* 

And,  adding  this  equaüon  to  the  preceding,  wc  c^tain 

(1  H )s  =  a:  whence  we  deduce  the  sum  required,  f  = 

a  ac 


r,  or  *  = 


•     9    VTA     O     ,  . 

c 

52Z.  It  is  evident,  therefore,  that  if  the  first  term  a  =  4, 
and  the  ratio  be  -^  thai:  is  to  say,  6  =  2,  and  c  =  5,  we  shall 
find  the  sum  of  the  progresaon  ^  -f  ^  -f  ..«^  -f  ^^  -|.^ 
&C.  =  1  ;  since,  by  subtracting  the  ratio  from  1,  mm  re- 
mains 4>  and  by  dividing  the  first  term  by  that  remainder, 
the  quodent  is  1. 

It  is  also  evident,  if  the  terms  be  alternately  positive  and 
negative,  and  the  progresaon  assume  this  form  : 

T  ~  TT    I    -At  ""  T^T    l>  ^^' 

that  the  sum  will  be 


a 


c 


—  JL  -  3 

~   7    —  y 


523.  Again  :  let  there  be  proposed  the  infinite  progression, 

*  Thiä   particular  ca^e   is    included   in   the  general   Rule, 
Art.  511. 


170  BLBMBIiTft  HBCT.  III. 

The  first  term  is  here  ^\^  and  the  ratki  is  ,?^  ;  then^foit» 
»iubtracting  this  last  from  1,  there  remains  ,^,  and,  if  wc 
divide  the  first  term  b^  this  fraction,  we  liave  -f  for  tlie  sum 
of  the  given  fNPogressMHi.  So  that  taking  only  one  term  of 
the  pitigre«sioD,  namely,  ^^y  ^  ^>'>^^  would  be  Ve* 

And  taking  two  terms,  ^  +  t^  =  rVe»  (here  wouU 
scUl  be  wanting  rrv  ^  mÂke  the  sum,  whidi  we  have  seen 

5S4.  Let  there  now  be  given  the  infinite  progression, 

9  "^  Tiff  "*"  Tvv  "^  TVfTu  "^  Treirc  "^  »  *^* 

The  first  term  is  Oy  and  the  ratio  i»  f'c^    So  that  I  minus 

g 

tlie  ratio  is  ,\  ;  and  —  ^  10,   the    sum   rci)uircd  :    whic  li 
series  is  expressed  !)v  a  decimal  fraction,  thus,  OiKKKKKK)^ 

Ql  ESTIONS    FOR    PRACTICE. 

1.  A  ser\'ant  ogrrt^  with  a  master  to  hcrvc  him  rlovcn 
3rcars  without  any  other  rewanl  for  his  service  than  tlic  pro- 
duce ol*  <Hic  imiin  of  wlieat  for  the  first  year  ;  and  that  product 
to  be  sown  the  second  year,  and  so  on  from  year  to  year  till 
the  end  of  the  time,  allowinic  the  increase  to  lie  only  in  a  t(*ti- 
fold  proportion.     Wliat  was  the  Kum  of  the  whole  |Ht)duce  ? 

.4fw.  lllllIlUllO^rrainH. 

N.  B.  It  is  fartlaM*  nx|uired,  to  reduce  thi:«  uuiiiIht  of 
grains  to  the  proper  measures  of  capacity»  and  tliiti  by  sun- 
|XHtn(^  an  average  price  of  wheat  to  compute  the  value  of  tlK* 
corns  m  money. 

Jt  A  iH^nant  agreed  with  a  gcntlenuin  u>  scne  liini  twilw 
niontlis,  provided  he  would  give  him  a  farthing  for  his  lin^t 
month\n  sen'ice,  a  iienny  for  the  second,  and  «IdL  for  tlu- 
ibM,  Slc.     What  did  his  wages  amount  to? 

Jm.  />K25/.  Hi.  n\iL 

3.  One  SfSMiif  on  /fidMiFi,  having  fin»t  invented  the  ^anu- 
of  cliess,  sIktwchI  it  to  hiü  prince,  wiio  was  to  dcliglitcd  with 
it,  that  Ik*  pronuMnl  him  any  n*ward  he  nhcHild  ask  ;  u|M)n 
wliidi  Seasa  rec]iii*stcd  that  he  miglit  Ik.*  alkiwetl  one  grain  ol' 
wheat  for  the  nnt  squart*  on  tlie  cliess  lioani,  two  for  tlio 
second,  and  so  on,  doubling  continually,  to  64^  tlu*  whole 
number  of  squares.  Now,  sup|iosing  a  pint  to  conuiin  7<>S4) 
of  those  grains,  ami  ihr*  quarter  to  lie  worth  lA  7v.  (W.«  it  i^ 
required  to  «impute  thi*  value  uf  tlu*  wImJc  ^ul^  <»f  grains. 

Aha.  MlH\^HHa»y 


CäAF.  XII.  OF  ALGEBRA.      .  171 


CHAP.    XII. 

Q^  Infinite  Decimal  Fractions. 

525.  We  have  already  seen,  in  logarithmic  calculations, 
that  Decimal  Fractions  are  employed  instead  of  Vulgar 
Fractions:  the  same  are  also  advantageously  employed  in 
other  calculations.  It  will  therefore  be  very  necessary  to 
shew  how  a  vulgar  fraction  may  be  transformed  into  a  de- 
cimal fraction  ;  and,  conversely,  how  we  may  express  the 
value  of  a  decimal,  by  a  vulgar  fraction. 

526*  Let  it  be  required,  in  general,  to  change  the  fraction 

y-,  into  a  decimal.     As  this  fraction  expresses  the  quotient 

of  the  division  of  the  numerator  a  by  the  denominator  6,  let 
us  write,  instead  of  a,  the  quantity  a*0000000,  whose  value 
docs  not  at  all  differ  from  that  of  £r,  since  it  contains  neither 
tenth  parts,  hundredth  parts,  nor  any  other  parts  whatever. 
If  we  now  divide  the  quantity  by  the  number  A,  according 
to  the  common  rules  of  division,  observing  to  put  the  point 
in  the  proper  place,  which  separates  the  decimal  and  the  in- 
tegers, we  shall  obtain  the  decimal  sought.  This  is  the 
whole  of  the  operation,  which  we  shall  illustrate  by  some 
examples. 

Let  there  be  given  first  the  firaction  i^  and  the  division  in 
decimals  will  assume  this  form  : 

2)1-0000000       ^ 

0-5000000  ""  ^' 

Hence  it  appears,  that  \  is  equal  to  0-5000000  or  to  0-5  ; 
which  is  sufficiently  evident,  since  this  decimal  fraction  re- 
presents -j5^  which  is  equivalent  to  -i- 

527.  Let  now  y  be  tne  given  fraction,  and  we  shall  have, 

3)1-0000000       , 

0-3333333  ""  ^' 

This  shews,  that  the  decimal  fraction,  whose  value  is  ^, 
cannot,  strictly,  ever  be  discontinued,  but  that  it  goes  on,  ad 
infinitum,  repeating  always  the  number  3;  which  agrees 
with  what  has  been  already  shewn.  Art  523  ;  namely,  that 
the  fractions 


I  o 


+   1  Ö  o  -^  tAô  ^  TTT^-ô»  &c.  ad  infinitum,  =  |. 


172  BUUIEMT»  8tCT.  UV 


The  dccunal  frKtkm  which  expreties  the  value  àf  yj 


I» 


«Ifo  ouotinued  ad  infinitum  ;  for  we  have« 

8)8'0000000       ^ 
0^6666666""^ 

Which  ia  alao  evident  from  what  we  have  just  said,  becauM* 
*b  the  double  off 
528.  If  j-  be  the  fraction  proposed,  we  have 

♦)100000Q0       ^ 

So  that  i  is  equal  to  (HUJOOOOO,  or  to  0^  :  which  is 
evidently  true,  since  ,V»  ^  pV»  +  tIo  =  iVo  =  I 
In  like  manner,  we  should  have  for 


the  fraction  }. 


LIJJJ  I  I 


0*7500000  ""  ^ 


So  that  I  =  0^5  :  and  in  fact 


7i  f         Tf^l 


The  fraction  \  is  changed  into  a  decimal  fraction,  by 

4)5-0000000 


s 


f'  J  J 


Now,  1  -h  AV  =  i. 

589.  In  the  same  manner,  -f  will  be  found  equal  to  0^  ; 
|s0-4;  1=0«;  |»0«;  I  =  1;  ^  =  \%  &c. 

When  the  denominator  in  6,  we  find  '  =:  Q-lGGGBßß,  &cc . 
wUdi  is  equal  to  0-666066  -  0-5:  but  0^66666:=  ^  and 
0-5  =  ;,  wherefore  0*1666666  =:*-;;orJ-i  =  i. 

We  find,  also,  *  s  0-SSSSSS,  &c  =  |;  Init  ;  Unmii^s 
0-5000000  =  |;  also,  ^  =:  0-88SS8S  =:  O^SSS«»  ^  0-5, 
thatbtosay,!-^  i;or*4-J  =  i, 

590.  When  the  denommator  b  7,  the  dcvinmi  fractions 
baOGOK*  more  complicated.  For  example,  wc  find  ^ 
0*148857;  however  it  must  lie  observed  that  these  mx 
figures  an*  oontinuallv  reiieated.  To  be  convinced,  tlu^rt^ 
fine,  that  this  decinuu  fraction  precisely  ex|)n*Mies  the  value 
of  f,  we  may  transform  it  into  a  fçcomirtncal  progressicHi, 
whose  first  term  is  iVcVcVct  the  ratio  lieing  ^^z-i-ztt  ;  a«<l 


Trcox  c  e 


^t^fffiaoteuxKaÛj,  the  sum  =  ,     "":—  =  lîiîi^U  -  y 

/  531.  We  may  prove,  in  a  manner  still  nuNT  c*afty,  timt 
ihe  decimal  fraction,  whkrii  we  have  fiHiiMl,  i«  exactly  inpial  In 
}  ;  fur,  by  substituting  for  it*  value  the  IcttiT  a,  %v  liavc 


CHAP.  XTI.  OF  ALGEBRA.  173 

S  =  0142857142857142857,  &c. 

10*  =  1-  42857142857142857,  &c- 

100*  =  14-  2857142857142857,  &c. 

1000*  =  142-  857142857142857,  &c, 

10000*  =  1428-  57142857142857,  &c- 

100000*  =  14285-  7142857142857,  &c. 

1000000*  =  142857-  142857142857,  &c. 

Subtract  *  =     0'  142857142857,  &c, 

999999*  =  142857. 

And,  dividing. by  999999,  we  have  *=  ItîlU  =  y* 
Wherefore  the  decimal  fraction,  which  was  represented  by  *, 

is  =  y. 

532.  In  the  same  manner,  ^  may  be  transformed  into  a 
decimal  fraction,  which  will  he  0*28571428,  &c.  and  this 
enables  us  to  find  more  easily  the  value  of  the  decimal 
fraction  which  we  have  represented  by  *  ;  because  0*28571428, 
&c.  must  be  the  double  of  it,  and,  consequently,  =  2*.  Now 
we  have  seen  that 

100*  =  14-28571428571,  &c. 
So  that  subtracting      2*=    028571428571,  &c. 

there  remains  98*  =14 
wherefore      *  =  ^  =  ^. 

We  also  find  f  =  042857142857,  &c.  which,  according 
to  our  supposition,  must  be  equal  to  3*  ;  and  we  have  found 
that 

10*  =  1-42857142857,  &c. 
So  that  subtracting      3*  =  0428571 42857,  &c. 

we  have    7*  =  1,  wherefore  *  ==  4-. 

533.  When  a  proposed  fraction,  therefore,  has  the  de- 
nominator 7,  the  decimal  fraction  is  infinite,  and  6  figures 
are  continually  repeated;  the  reason  of  which  is  easy  to 
perceive,  namely,  that  when  we  continue  the  division,  a  re- 
mainder must  return,  sooner  or  later,  which  we  have  had 
already.  Now,  in  this  division,  6  different  numbers  only 
can  form  the  remainder,  namely  1,  2,  3,  4,  5,  6  ;  so  that, 
at  least,  afler  the  sixth  division,  the  same  figures  must  return  ; 
but  when  the  denominator  is  such  as  to  lead  to  a  divinon 
without  reminder,  these  cases  do  not  happen. 

534.  Suppose  now  that  8  is  the  denominator  of  the 
fraction  proposed:  we  shall  find  the  following  decimal 
fractions  : 


174  ILllllCIITS  ftBCT.  III. 

I  =  O-ttW;  *  s  0-75;  }  =  (Hnr5,  &c. 
595.  If  the  denominator  be  9|  we  hare 

I  =  Olli,  &c  •  =  0-S2SÎ,  &c  i  =  0-3S3,  &c. 

And  if  the  deoombator  be  10,  we  have  ^V  ^  0*1»  t%  = 
0*Sy  y'^  =  0*3.  Thb  is  evident  from  the  nature  of  decimals 
at  alao  that  tU  =  OH)I;  ,V.  =  0-37;  ^Vc%  =  0-250; 
^,»^  =  0-0024,  &c. 

896.  If  11  be  the  demmnator  of  the  given  fraction,  wv 
shall  have  ^^  =  0-0909090,  &c.  Now,  suppose  it  were  re- 
quired  to  find  the  value  of*  this  decimal  fraction  :  let  us  call 
it  s,  and  we  shall  have 

#  =  0-090909, 

lOf  =  00-909090, 

100*  =  9-0iK)90. 

If«  therefore,  we  subtract  from  the  lost  the  value  of  5,  hi* 

shall  have  99*  =  9>  and  consequently  *  ~    ",  -    ,',  :  thus, 

also, 

/,  =  0  18I8I8,  Kc. 

,^  =  0-545454,  &c. 

587.  There  are  a  great  number  of  dccinuil  frncticnis, 
therefore,  in  which  one,  two,  or  more  figures  amstimtlv 
recur,  ami  whii*h  i-ontinuc  thus  to  infinity.  Such  fnKrtion^ 
are  curious,  ami  we  shall  »hew  how  their  value»?«  may  N» 
easily  found*. 

*  Themse  recurring  decimal»  furnish  many  intcrcYtitiv:  rr 
searches;  I  had  entered  upon  them,  before  1  »nw  the  pre»«iit 
Algebra,  Slid  «hould  |Hfrha{Mi  have  |irosecuti-il  my  iinjiiin.  h.u' 
I  not  likewise  found  a  Memoir  in  the  PhiUisuphiad  1  rttti*ait:>  .  « 
for  I7(il>,  entitled  The  Theory  q/'  circulai i»g  Fraction»,  I  •►Im!' 
content  myself  with  stating  here  tlie  reasoning  with  \\\\h\\  1 

began. 

n 

Let  -r  be  any  real  fraction  irreducible  to  lower  iiTtn«     \tm\ 
d 

suppose  it  were  required  to  find  how  many  di^cimal  )>l.ict>  %%« 

roust  reduce  it  to.  lH*fore  the  same  term»  will  rctuni  a«:aiit 

la  order  to  detenu i ne  this,   I   begin  by  sup}H>sin^   that    l(Vi 

is  greater  than  di  if  that  mere  not  the  ease,  atul  onl)  10(>*/  <m 

IODOm  ></,  It  would  Ik*  nect*«sarv  to  bi*gin  with  trvuig  to  reiUuv 

\On      l(K)/i  .  i/ 

-5-  or  — ■-  .  Ac.  to  k'î»»  ter  nil»,  or  to  a  traction  -,  . 
ad  a 

Till»  being  «*»labluhed«  I  »d\  tliat  the  saiiH*  |»ert(Hl  can  return 

only  when  the  Mime  retnamder  a  returns  m  the  continual  division. 


CHAP«  XIU  OF   ALGKBRA.  175 

Let  US  first  suppose,  that  a  single  figure  is  constantly  re- 
peatedy  and  let  us  represent  h  by  tf ,  so  that  s  =  O'aaaaaaa. 
We  have 

1Ô«  =:i  a*aaaaaaa  «... 
and  subtracting     «  =  (yaaaaaaa  . .     . 

we  have  d^r  =  a  ;  wherefore  *  =  — . 

y 

538.  When  two  figures  are  repeated,  as  ab,  we  have  s  = 
O'obabab.  Therefore  100*  =  ab'ababab;  and  if  we  sub* 
tract  8  from  it,  there  remains  99*  =  ab  ;  consequently,  s  ^ 
ab 

W 

When  three  figures,  as  abc,  are  found  repeated,  wc  hav^ 

s  =  O'abcabcabc  ;  consequently,  1000*  =  abcabcabc;  and 

subtracting  *  from  it,  tnere  remains  999*  =  abc;  where- 

^  abc 

iore  *  =  ^r^,  and  so  on. 

Whenever,  therefore,  a  decimal  fraction  of  this  kind  oc-. 

Suppose  that  when  this  happens  wc  have  added  s  cyphers,  and  that 

7  is  the  integral  part  of  the  quotient^  then  abstracting  from  the 

,    ,,  ,         n  xlQI  n       .       „  n 

ponit,  wc  shall  have ; — =o-f  — -;  wherefore  o  =  -;-  x    (lO* 

da  'a 

~  1).  Now^  as  q  must  be  an  integer  number,  it  is  required  to 
determine  the  least  integer  number  for«,  such  that  -r  x  (10'  — 

1 ,  or  only  that  — - — ,  may  be  an  integer  number. 

This  problem  reauires  several  cases  to  be  distinguished  :  the 
first  is  that  in  which  d  is  a  divisor  of  10,  or  of  100,  or  of  1000, 
&c.  and  it  is  evident  that  in  this  case  there  can  be  no  circulating 
fraction.  For  the  second  case,  we  shall  take  that  in  which  d  is 
an  odd  number,  and  not  a  factor  of  any  power  of  10  ;  in  this 
case,  the  value  of  5  may  rise  to  </  —  1,  but  frequently  it  is  less. 
A  third  case  is  that  in  which  d  is  even,  and,  consequently,  with- 
out being  a  factor  of  any  power  of  10,  has  nevertheless  a  com- 
mon divisor  with  one  of  those  powers  :  this  common  divisor  can 

only  be  a  number  of  the  form  2*"  ;  so  that  if,  —  =  e,  I  say,  the  pe- 

riod  will  be  the  same  as  for  the  fraction  --r ,  but  will  not  com- 

a 

mence  before  the  figuré  represented  by  c.  This  case  comes  to 
the  same  therefore  with  the  second  case,  on  which  it  is  evident 
the  theory  depends.     F.  T. 


176  SLBMKirrt  sKctv  ni. 

curs  it  M  eiury  to  find  its  Taiue.  Let  there  be  given,  for 
example,  0  ^i&fiäQß  :  its  value  will  be  ^^  ^  fj^  by  dividuifii 
both  Its  terms  by  S7. 

This  fraction  ought  to  give  again  the  decimal  fraction 
proposed  ;  and  we  may  ea^y  be  convinced  that  this  is  the 
real  result,  by  dividing  8  by  9,  and  then  that  quotient  by  S, 
because  27  s  3  x  9  :  thus,  we  have 

9)  8-000000 


0-89e296t&c. 

which  is  the  decimal  fraction  that  was  proposed. 
599*  Suppose  it  were  requirtd   to  reduce  the   fraction 

i — 3 — Ô — 7 — = — F — s — ZI — «""liÂ«    ^  •    decimal.      The 
Ix8x3x4xax6x  ix8x9xi0 

operation  would  be  as  follows  : 

8)  1 


I  I    I  I     I  I  I  i:i  I 


3)  0*50000000000000 

4)  0  166(i666G66G6(i(i 

5)  0O41666(i6666airi 

6)  0-008333J33adi^*i; 

7)  0-00138888888888 

8)  0K)00198412e9841 

9)  0<)OOOÄ480158730 
10)  0H)0000CTr>5731{)'i 

0<H)00()027557819 


CHAP»  Xm.  OF  ALGEBRA«  177 


CHAP.  XIIL 

Of  the  Calculation  ^Interest ''^* 

540.  We  are  accustomed  to  express  the  interest  of  any 
principal  by  ver  cents^  signifying  now  much  interest  is  an- 
nually paid,  for  the  sum  of  100  pounds.  And  it  is  very 
usual  to  put  out  the  principal  sum  at  5  per  cent,  that  is,  on 
such  terms,  that  we  receive  5  pounds  interest  for  every  100 
pounds  principal.  Nothing  therefore  is  more  easy  than  to 
calculate  the  interest  for  any  sum  ;  for  we  have  only  to  say, 
according  to  the  Rule  of  Three  : 

As  100  is  to  the  principal  proposed,  so  is  the  rate  per 
cent  to  the  interest  required.  Let  the  prindpal,  for  ex- 
ample, be  860/.,  its  annual  interest  is  found  hy  this  pro- 
portion; 

As  100  :  6  :  :  860  :  43. 

Therefore  43/.  is  the  annual  interest. 

541.  We  shall  not  dwell  any  longer  on  examples  of 
Simple  Interest,  but  pass  on  immediately  to  the  calculation 
of  Compound  Interest;  where  the  chief  subject  of  inquiry 
is,  to  what  sum  does  a  given  principal  amount,  after  a 
certain  number  of  years,  the  interest  being  annually  added 
to  the  principal.  In  order  to  resolve  this  question,  we  begih 
witli  the  consideration,  that  100/.  placed  out  at  5  per  cent, 
becomes,  at  the  end  of  a  year,  a  principal  of  105/.  :  therefore 
let  the  principal  be  a  ;  its  amount,  at  the  end  of  the  year, 
will  be  found,  by  saying  ;  As  100  is  to  a,  so  is  105  to  the 
answer  ;  which  gives 

*  The  theory  of  the  calculation  of  interest  owes  its  first  im-  M^ 
provements  to  Leibn^itz,  who  delivered  the  principal  elements  ' 
of  it  in  the  Acta  Eruditorum  of  Leipsic  for  1683.  It  was  after- 
wards the  subject  of  several  detached  dissertations  written  in  a 
very  interesting  manner.  It  has  been  most  indebted  to  those 
mathematicians  who  have  cultivated  political  arithmetic;  in 
which  are  combined,  in  a  manner  truly  useful,  the  calculation 
of  interest,  and  the  calculation  of  probabilities,  founded  on  (he 
data  furnished  by  the  bills  of  mortnlity .  We  are  still  in  want  of 
a  good  elementary  treatise  of  political  arithmetic,  though  this 
extensive  branch  of  science  has  been  much  attended  to  in 
Englandj  France,  and  Holland.     F.  T. 

N 


ITS  BLKMEirrs  tXCT.  III. 

105a     Sla 

548.  So  that,^  when  we  add  to  the  original  principal  its 
twentieth  part,  we  obtain  the  amount  of  the  principal 
at  the  end  of  the  first  year:  and  adding  to  this  its  twentieth 
part,  we  know  the  amount  of  the  given  principal  at  the  end 
of  two  yearty  and  to  on.  It  it  easy,  therefore,  to  compute  the 
suocessiTe  and  annual  increases  of  the  principal»  ana  to  con- 
tiBiie  this  calculation  to  any  length. 

MS.  Suppose,  for  example,  that  a  prindnal,  which  is  at 
present  lOOlk.,  is  put  out  at  five  per  cent  ;  that  the  interest 
IS  added  every  year  to  the  prinapal  ;  and  that  it  were  re» 
ijuhed  to  find  its  amount  at  any  time.  As  this  calculation 
must  lead  to  ft-actioos,  wc  shall  employ  decimals,  but  with. 
out  carr^rii^  them  farther  than  the  tnousandth  parts  of  a 
pound,  smoe  smaller  parts  do  not  at  present  enter  into  con« 
skleration.  * 

The  given  prindpal  of  lOOOL  will  be  worth 
after  I  year     -    -    .    lOM». 

625, 


after  t  years    •    •    «    1108*5 

65-1S5, 


after  3  years    -    -    •     llSTiStl 

57-881, 


after  4  years    •    -    •     1215  50C 

00^775, 


after  5  years    .    -    -     1^6*5281,  &c. 
which  Mims  are  formed  by  always  adding  V?  of  tlie  pre- 
ceding principal. 

544.  VVe  may  continue  the  same  method,  for  any  niimlxT 
of  years;  but  when  this  numl)cr  is  very  great,  the  calcu- 
lation beoomcs  long  and  tedious;  but  it  may  always  be 
abridged,  in  the  folbwin^  manner  : 

Let  the  present  prinapal  be  a,  and  since  a  principal  of 
90L  amounts  to  21/.  at  the  end  of  a  year,  the  princi{)al  a  will 
amount  to  {^  •  a  at  the  end  of  a  year  :  and  the  same  prin- 

opal  will  amount,  the  following  year,  to ^  .  a  =  (J  ^ )*  .  n. 

Aiso,  this  principal  of  two  years  will  amount  to  (  J  ;/>'  .  a,  the 
year  after  :  whidi  will  thoicforc  be  the  |)rinci|ial  ol*  tliree 
years  ;  and  still  increasing  in  the  same  manner,  the  given 


CRAP.  XIII.  OF    ALGEBRA.  179 

{»incipal  will  amount  to  {^^Y  .  a  at  the  end  of  four  years  ; 
to  (Hy  .  a,  at  the  end  of  five  years;  and  after  a  century, 
it  wUl  amount  to  {^^^  •  a  ;  so  that,  in  general,  (tv)*  •  ^ 
will  be  the  amount  of  this  principal,  after  li  years  ;  and  this 
formula  will  serve  to  determine  tne  amount  of  the  principal, 
after  any  number  of  years. 

545.  The  fraction  |4,  which  is  used  in  thfs  calculation, 
depends  on  the  interest  having  been  reckoned  at  5  per  cent«, 
and  on  *-*  being  equal  to  4|4-  ^^^  -^^  ^^^  interest  were 
estimated  at  6  per  cent,  the  principal  a  would  amount  to 
4^4  .  a,  at  the  end  of  a  year;  to  (441)*  •  ^j  ^^  ^^^  ^^^  ^^ 
two  years  ;  and  to  4-§4*  •  ^f  ^t  the  end  of  n  years. 

If  the  interest  is  only  at  4  per  cent,  the  prindpal  a  will 
amount  only  to  (-r^J)*  .  a,  after  n  years. 

546.  Wnen  the  principal  a,  as  well  as  the  number  of 
years,  is  given,  it  is  easy  to  resolve  these  formulae  by  loga- 
rithms. For  if  the  question  be  according  to  our  first  sup- 
position, we  shall  take  the  logarithm  of  (54)*  •  ^»  which  is 
IT  log*  (HY  +  log.  a  ;  because  the  given  formula  is  the 

Eroduct  of  (^)*  and  a.  Also,  as  (^lY  is  a  power,  we  shall 
ave  log.  (1^)»  =  n  log.  |4  :  so  that  the  logarithm  of  the 
amount  required  is  n  log.  |4  -|-  log,  a  ;  and  farther,  the 
logarithm  of  the  fraction  |4  =  log.  21  —  log,  8D. 

547.  Let  now  the  principal  be  1000/.  and  let  it  be  required 
to  find  how  much  this  principal  will  amount  to  at  the  end  of 
100  years,  reckoning  the  interest  at  5  per  cent. 

Here  we  have  n  =  100  ;  and,  consequently,  the  logarithm 
of  the  amount  required  will  be  100  log.  *  J^  +  log.  1000, 
which  is  calculated  thus  : 

log.  2\  =  1-32^193 
subtracting  log.  20  =  1 -3010300 

log.\i=i  0-0211893 
multiplying  by         *    100 

100  /cgf.  *i  =  2-1189300 
adding  log.  1000       =  30000000 

gives  5*1189300  which  is  the  loga- 

rithm of  the  principal  required. 

We  perceive,  from  the  characteristic  of  this  logarithm, 
that  the  principal  required  will  be  a  number  consisting  of 
six  figures,  and  it  is  found  to  be  131501/. 

548.  Agûn,  suppose  a  principal  of  3452/«  were  put  out  at 
G  per  cent,  what  would  it  amount  to  at  the  end  of  64 
years? 

n2 


180  SLtXBVTS  aicT.  in. 

We  hare  here  a  s  845S,  and  n  ss  64.    Wberdbre  the 
logarithm  of  the  «mooot  aought  is 

Mlog.\{+log.  S468,  whidi  is  calculated  thus  : 

tog.  S3  ^  l-784a759 
subtncting  fa^.  00  s  1-0989700 

iûg.\i=:wmata9 

mukiplying  bj  64 

64te*Us  1-6195776 
i^.  M5S  :=  8-5S80708 

which  gim  5*1576484 

And  taking  the  number  of  this  logarithm,  we  find  the 
amount  reouired  equal  to  14S76S/. 

MSl  Wnen  the  number  of  years  is  very  grent,  as  it  is  re- 
i|uiml  to  multiolv  this  number  hy  the  Iq^rithm  of  a  frac- 
taoOt  a  consderaole  error  might  anse  from  the  logarithms  in 
the  Tables  not  being  calculated  beyond  7  figures  c?  decimals  ; 
fior  which  reason  it  will  be  necessary  lo  employ  Iwarithms 
OMtied  to  a  greater  number  of  figures,  as  in  the  loUowing 
eiample. 

A  principal  of  IL  beui|;  placed  at  5  per  cent,  compound 
mtcrest,  for  500  years,  it  is  required  to  find  to  what  sum  this 
principal  will  amount,  at  the  end  of  that  period. 

We  haTc  here  a  s  1  and  n  s=  500  ;  consequently,  the 
logarithm  of  the  principal  sought  is  equal  to  500  log.  i-l  -^ 
tog*  1,  which  proQuces  this  calculation  : 

loff.  SI  :s  1SS2219S94733919 
subtracting  log.Mzx  1*901029995669981 


&]^.  »4  rr  OOSl  180299069938 
multiply  by  500 

000  fog.  *£  s  10-591649534969000,    the    logo. 
of  the  amount  required  ;  which  will  be  found  cqualto 
89888200000/. 

^  560.  If  we  not  only  add  the  interest  annually  to  the  |)rin- 
cipal,  but  also  increase  it  every  year  by  a  new  sum  A,  the 
onffinal  principal,  which  we  call  a,  would  increase  each  year 
in  Uie  following  manner  : 

•ft«- 1  y«r»  U«  +  *. 

aft4r2yüars,(îira  +  ••A  +  ^ 

afU-r  3  ycwrs,  Ctlfa  f  {Ufb  +  Hi  ^  6, 


CHAP.  Xni.  OF  ALGEBRA.  181 

after  4  years,  (^ya  +  (^Yb  +  {^Yb  +  üb  +  b, 
after  n  years,  (*iYa  +  (UY^'b  +  {HY^b  +  Ub,  &c 

This  amount  evidently  conâsts  of  two  parts,  of  which  the 
first  is  (liYa;  and  the  other,  taken  inversely,  forms  the 
series  b  +  \ib  +  {UYb  +  (liYb  +  .  .  .  .(HY-'b;  which 
series  is  evidently  a  geometrical  progression,  the  ratio  of 
which  is  equal  to  H,  and  we  shall  therefore  find  its  sum,  by 
first  multiplying  the  last  term  (ü)*"^6  by  the  exponent  H; 
which  gives  (|4)*é.  Then,  subtracting  the  first  term  Ä,  there 
remmns  (^ô)"*  —  b  ;  and,  lastly,  dividing  by  the  exponent 
mintis  1,  that  is  to  say  by  -^y  we  shall  find  the  sum  required 
to  be  ^(^Yb  —  206  ;  therefore  the  amount  sought  is, 
(UYa  +  mUYb  -  206  =  (UY  X  (a  +  206)  -  206. 

551.  The  resolution  of  this  formula  reqidres  us  to  cal- 
culate, separately,  its  first  term  (|^)*  x  (a  +  206),  which  is 
n  log.  14  +  log.  {a  +  206)  ;  for  the  number  which  answers 
to  this  logarithm  in  the  Tables,  will  be  the  first  term  ;  and 
if  from  this  we  subtract  206,  we  shall  have  the  amount 
sought. 

552.  A  person  has  a  principal  of  1000/.  placed  out  at 
five  per  cent,  compound  interest,  to  which  he  adds  annually 
100/.  beside  the  interest  :  what  will  be  the  amount  of  this 
principal  at  the  end  of  twenty-five  years  ? 

We  have  here  a  =  1000;  6  =  100;  n  =  25;  the  openu 
tion  is  therefore  as  follows  : 

log.  ^  =  0-021189299 

Multiplying  by  25,  we  have 

25  Ajs?.  ^  =  0S297324760 
log.  (a  +  90b)  =  S-4m213136 

And  the  sum  =  4*0068537885. 

So  that  the  first  part,  or  the  number  which  answers  to  this 
logarithm,  is  101591,  and  if  we  subtract  206  =^2000,  we 
find  that  the  principal  in  question,  after  twenty-five  years, 
will  amount  to  81 59*1/. 

553.  Since  then  this  principal  of  1000/.  is  always  in- 
creasing, and  after  twenty-five  years  amounts  to  8159-rQ/. 
we  may  require,  in  how  many  years  it  will  amount  to 
lOOOOOOZ. 

Let  n  be  the  number  of  years  required  :  and,  since  a  = 
1000,  6  =  100,  the  principal  will  be,  at  the  end  of  n  years, 
(I-IY  .  (3000)  -  2000,  which   sum   must  make   1000000; 
from  it  therefore  results  this  equation  ; 
3000 .  (14)*  -  2000  =  li 


II 


IM  BIiBHIVT»  8KCT.  IIU 

And  ftddifig  SOOO  to  both  ndes,  we  bave 

8000  •(;•)•=  100S00O. 

Then  dÎTiding  boch  «des  by  3000,  wc  haTc  (VS>*  =  3S4. 
Taking  the  logarithms  n  log.  \  \  =  Icff.  3iÎ4  ;  and  di- 

loff.  834 
Tiding  by  log,  \i,  we  obcaîn  n  =  ^'  , ,  >     Now,  Icff.  334 

=s  «5237465,  and  log.  fj  =  OH»!  1893;  therefore  n  = 

iwSTlHCH ^  '^^  ^'^y >  ^^  ^^  multiply  the  two  tenns  of  this 

fraction  by  10000000,  we  shall  have  n^  y  \^  {ff ,  =  lig 
vears,  1  month,  7  days  ;  and  this  is  the  time«  in  which  the 
principal  of  1000/.  will  be  increased  to  1000000/. 

554.  But  if  we  sujiposed  that  a  person,  iu^^tead  of  annually 
increasing  his  prinapsl  by  a  certain  fixed  sum,  diminished 
ity  by  spending  a  certain  sum  every  year,  we  should  have 
the  following  gradations,  as  the  values  of  that  principal  a, 
year  after  yi*ar,  supposing  it  put  out  at  5  per  cent,  com- 
pound interest,  and  representing  the  sum  which  b  annually 
taken  from  it  by  A  : 

aAtr  1  year,  it  would  be  * 'a  —  /r, 

after  «  yeans  (U^'«  -  li*  -  ^ 

after  3  yeans  (l!)*a-  (ll)b  -  »^A  -  6, 

after»iyears,(iirii-(-)-'A-  (Î:)^A-.--(Î')*-^. 

555.  This  princi{>al  consists  of  two  imrts,  one  of  which  u 

(*  •)•  .  r/,  and  the  other,  which  must  In?  subirai  ti-il  fnun  it, 
taking  the  terms  inversely,  fomij»  the  following  ^lonuirical 
progressitm  : 

Now  we  have  already  fourni  (Art.  550.)  that  the  sum  <  f  this 
progri-s^ion  is5Ä)(J-i)'Ä  —  204;  if,  therefore,  we  bubtravi  this 
quantity  fn»m  (g^)".a,  we  shall  liave  for  the  principal  re- 
quired, atU*r  N  yean»  z: 

(  ;  ;  )•  •  ('«  —  20i)  +  ftOb. 

556,  We  might  have  deduced  tliis  formula  immediately 
from  tluit  of  Art.  5.^0.  For,  in  the  name  manner  a»  we  an- 
nually addi*tl  the  sum  A,  in  the  former  Mi|>|M!Hition  ;  m),  in 
the  present,  we  subtract  i\\e  sante  sum  ö  e\  cry  year.  We 
have  therefice  nnly  to  put  in  the  former  formula,  -  //  every 
when*,  instead  of  t  b.  Hut  it  mu^t  here  Im?  |uirticularly  re- 
marked,  tluit  if  206  \%  gn*ater  tlian  «/,  tlie  first  |iart  l»ceomeA 
negative,  and,  conM^iuently,  the  |>ritK*i|)al  h  ill  continually 
dtminisb.  Thii^  will  W  enHil\  |H-rci*ived  ;  for  if  we  annually 
take  away  from  the  priuci|ial  more  than  is  added  ti»  a  by  the 
interest,  it  is  eTideot  that  thb  principal  must  continually  Ik- 


CHAP.  XIII. 


OF  ALGEB&A.  -188 


come  less,  and  at  last  it  will  hß  absolutely  leduceâ  tu 
nothing  ;  as  will  appear  fcpm  the  following  exannple  : 

557.  A  person  puts  out  a  principal  of  lOOOOOJ.  at  6  per 
cent  interest;  but  he  spends  annually  60001.;  which  is 
more  than  the  interest  of  his  principal,  the  latter  bein^  only 
5000/.;  consequently,  the  principal  will  continually  dimmish; 
and  it  is  required  to  determine,  in  what  time  it  will  be  all 
spent 

Let  us  suppose  the  number  of  years  to  be  n,  and  nnœ 
a  =  100000,  and&  =  6000,  we  know  that  after  n.  years  the 
amount  of  the  principal  will  be  -  20000  (|^)*  +  ISOOOO, 
or  120000  -  20000(*^)*,  where  the  factor,  -80000,  is  the 
result  of  a  -  206;  or  100000  -  120000. 

So  that  the  principal  will  become  nothing,  when  20000(^^)" 
amounts  to  120000  ;  or  when  20000(4^)»  =  120000.  Now, 
dividing  both  sides  by  20000,  we  have  {HY  =z  6;  and 
taking  the  logarithm,  we  have  n  log*  (4^)  =  log.  6;  then 

dividing  by  log.  |4,  we  have  n  =  y     \,,  orn  =    -    -    - 

0'778151 3 

0~02ÎÎ893  '  ^"^'  consequently,  n  =  36  years,  8  months, 

22  days  ;  at  the  end  of  which  time,  no  part  of  the  principal 
will  remain. 

558.  It  will  here  be  proper  also  to  shew  how,  from  the 
same  principles,  we  may  calculate  interest  for  times  shorter 
than  whole  years.  For  this  purpose,  we  make  use  of  the 
formula  (|4^)" .  a  already  founu,  wnich  expresses  the  amount 
of  a  principal,  at  5  per  cent,  compound  interest,  at  the  end 
of  n  years  ;  for  if  the  time  be  less  than  a  year,  the  exponent 
n  becomes  a  fraction,  and  the  calculation  is  performed  by 
logarithms  as  before.  If,  for  example,  the  amount  of  a 
principal  at  the  end  of  one  day  were  required,  we  should 
make  n  =  ^^  ;  if  after  two  days,  n  =  -^-Jt'  ^^^  ^  ^^- 

559.  Suppose  the  amount  ot  100000/.  for  8  days  were 
required,  the  interest  being  at  5  per  cent« 

Here  a  =  100000,   and  n  =  y^^,  consequently,   the 

amount  sought  is  (|^)^^^  x  100000  ;  the  logarithm  of  which 

quantity  is  log.  {iyV^'^  +  log.  100000=^-^  loj;.  i-%  +  leg. 
100000.  Now,  locr.  li  =  0-0211893,  which,  multiplied  by 
T6T^  gives  O'OOOéôM,  to  which  adding 

log.  100000=50000000 


the  sum  is  5*0004644, 


IM  ELIMXlfTS  SXCT.  UU 

The  natural  number  of  this  logarithm  b  found  to  be 
100107.  So  that,  subtracting  the  prindpal,  100000  (mm 
this  amount,  the  interest,  for  eight  dajs,  is  107/. 

MO.  To  this  subject  belong  also  the  calculation  of  the 
present  value  of  a  sum  of  money,  which  is  payable  only  after 
a  term  of  years.  For  as  201^  m  ready  money,  amounts  to 
SIL  in  a  year;  so,  reciprocally,  a  sum  of  21/.,  which  cannot 
be  received  till  the  end  of  one  year,  is  really  worth  only  20L 
If,  therefore,  we  express,  by  a,  a  sum  whose  payment  is  due 
at  the  end  of  a  year,  the  present  value  of  this  sum  is  ^4^  ; 
and  therefore  to  find  the  present  worth  of  a  principal  a, 
payable  a  year  hence,  we  must  multiply  it  by  \y  ;  to  find  its 
value  two  years  before  the  time  of  payment,  we  multiply  it 
br  (tt)  '^  «  <^  Û1  general,  its  value,  n  years  before  the  time 
or  payment,  will  be  expressed  by  (|i)*c. 

o6l.  Suppose,  for  example,  a  man  has  to  receive  for 
five  snocesaive  years,  an  annual  rent  of  100/.  and  thai  he 
wishes  to  give  it  up  for  ready  money,  the  interest  being  at 
0  per  cent  ;  it  is  required  to  find  how  much  he  is  to  re- 
eave.  Here  the  calculations  may  be  made  in  the  following 
manner: 

For  100/.  due 

after  1  year,  he  receives  95  2S9 
after  S  years  ...  90*704 
after  3  years  ...  86385 
after  4  years  •  .  .  82-^2 
after  5  years     .    -    -    78*355 

Sum  of  the  5  terms  =:  43^-955 

6o  that  the  possessor  of  the  rent  can  claim,  in  ready  money, 
only  432-955/. 

SGSL  If  such  a  rent  were  to  last  a  greater  number  of 
yeari,  the  calculation,  in  the  manner  we  nave  |NTformed  it, 
would  become  very  tedious;  but  in  that  case  it  may  be 
ftcilitated  as  follows: 

Let  the  annual  rent  be  a,  commencing  at  present  and 
lasdng  II  years,  it  will  be  actually  worth 

Which  is  a  gvometrical  prügreKMon,  and  the  h  hole  is  re- 
duced to  finding  its  sum.  We  tlierefore  multiply  the  last 
term  by  the  exponent,  the  product  of  which  is  (îi)*'*^'a; 
then,  subtracting  the  first  term,  there  remainK  ( ,  °  }*^  *a  —  a  ; 
and,  lastly,  dividing  by  tlie  cx|M»nent  minus  1,  that  is,  by 
~*  %'if  o^9  which  amountA  to  the  Mune,  multiplying  by  -  21, 
we  shall  hate  the  sum 


CHAP.  Xni.  OF  ALOSBEA.  185 

-21  .  {\^y+'  .  a  +  21a,  or,  21^  -  21  .  (^)"+* .  a; 

and  the  value  of  the  second  tenn,  which  it  is  required  to 
subtract,  is  easily  calculated  by  logarithms. 

aUESTIONS   FOR   PRACTICE. 

1.  What  will  375/.  10^.  amount  to  in  9  years  at  ßper 
cent,  compound  interest  ?  Afis.  634/.  Ss. 

2.  What  is  the  interest  of  1/.  for  one  day,  at  the  rate  of 
6  per  cent.  ?  Ans.  00001869863  parts  of  a  pound. 

3.  What  will  365/.  amount  to  in  875  days,  at  the  rate  of 
4  per  cent.  ?  'Ans,  400/. 

4.  What  will  256/.  10«.  amount  to  in  seven  years,  at  the 
rate  of  6  per  cent,  compound  interest  ?  Ans.  385/.  13s.  7jd» 

5.  What  will  563/.  amount  to  in  7  years  and  99  days,  at 
the  rate  of  6  per  cent,  compound  interest  ?  Ans.  860/. 

6.  What  is  the  amount  of  400/.  at  the  end  of  3i  years,  at 
6  per  cent,  compound  interest  ?  Ans.  490/.  11*.  7fdL 

7.  What  will  320/.  IO5.  amount  to  in  four  years,  at  5  per 
cent,  compound  interest?  Ans.  389/.  11*.  4} A 

8.  What  will  650/.  amount  to  in  5  years,  at  5  per  cent. 
compound  interest.^  Ans.  829/.  11*.  lid. 

9.  What  will  550/.  10*.  amount  to  in  3  years  and  6 
months,  at  6 per  cent,  compound  interest?  Ans.  675/.6s.Sd. 

10.  What  will  15/.  10*.  amount  to  in  9  years,  at  3f  per 
cent,  compound  interest?  Ans.  21/.  2*.  4iid. 

11.  What  is  the  amount  of  550/.  at  4  oer  cent  in  seven 
months?  •      Ans.  5621.  16*.  8d. 

12.  What  is  the  amount  of  100/.  at  7*37  per  cent,  in  nine 
years  and  nine  months  ?  Ans.  200/. 

13.  If  a  principal  x  be  put  out  at  compound  interest  for  x 
years,  at  x  per  cent,  required  the  time  in  which  it  will  gain  x. 

Ans.  8*49824  years. 

14.  What  sum,  in  ready  money,  is  equivalent  to  600L 
due  nine  months  hence,  reckoning  the  interest  at  5  per  ceni.f 

Ans.  678/.  6*.  Sid. 

15.  What  sum,  in  ready  money,  is  equivalent  to  an  an- 
nuity of  70/.  to  commence  6  years  hence,  and  then  to  continue 
for  21  years  at  6  per  cent  f  Ans.  669/.  14*.  OjdL 

16.  A  man  puts  out  a  sum  of  money,  at  ßpf^  cent.,  to 
continue  40  years  ;  and  then  both  principal  and  interest  are 
to  sink.     Wnat  is  that  per  cent,  to  continue  for  ever? 

Ans.  52  per  cent. 


186  &LBMKIITf  tlCT.  IT. 


SKCTIÜN  IV. 

Q^Algcbrmic  Equations,  and  qfihc  BeaolutioD  of  thou 

Equation». 


CHAP.  L 

Of  the  Solution  Q/^ProUems  tn  gcnend. 

563.  The  principal  object  of  Algebra,  as  well  as  of  all  the 
other  branches  of  Blatlieomtics,  is  to  determine  the  value  of 
quantities  that  were  before  unknown  ;  and  tliis  is  obtained 

Sr  oonndering  attentively  the  conditions  given,  which  are 
ways  expressed  in  known  numbers.  For  tliis  n*ason. 
Algebra  has  been  defined,  The  scimce  which  troches  how  to 
determine  unknown  quantities  by  meane  of  those  that  are 
Içnown, 

56é.  The  above  definition  agrees  with  all  that  has  been 
hitherto  laid  down  :  for  we  have  always  seen  that  the  know* 
letlge  of  certain  ciuantities  leads  to  tliat  of  tither  quantities, 
which  before  might  have  been  considered  as  unknown. 

Of  this,  Addition  will  readily  furnish  an  example  ;  for,  in 
order  to  find  the  sum  of  two  or  more  given  numbens  we  had 
to  seek  for  an  unknown  numtMrr,  wha'h  slioiild  be  et|iial  to 
tluMc  known  numbers  taken  togethiY.  In  Subtraction, 
we  lought  (or  a  number  which  should  Iw  initial  to  the  dif- 
ference of  two  known  number«.  A  multitude  of  other  ex- 
amples are  presented  by  Multi{^icatioii,  Division,  iIk*  in- 
volutioD  of  powers,  and  the  Extraction  of  nx^s;  the  <|ues- 
tion  being  always  reduced  to  finding,  by  nu^ns  of  known 
qiMUÜties,  otlnrr  quantities  which  are  unknown. 

565.  In  the  last  secticm,  also,  cUfferent  qui^^tioni«  were  re* 
solvcxl,  in  which  it  was  required  ti>  deU'nniiie  a  numlxT  that 
ooukl  not  be  deduced  from  the  knowledge  of  otlK*r  given 
numl^vrs,  except  under  certain  conditions.  All  thone  ques- 
tions were  reuuced  to  finding,  by  the  aid  of  «ome  given 
numbiTS,  a  ihw  number»  wliich  siHHild  liave  a  artoin  ct*n- 
ncxioQ  with  tliem  ;  ami  this  ooniK'Xion  was  detenuiiied  hv 


CÜAP.  I^  OF  ALCIBBBA.  187 

certain  conditions,  or  properties,  which  were  to  agree  with 
the  quantity  sousbt. 

566.  In  Algebra,  when  we  have  a  question  to  resolve, 
we  represent  the  number  sought  by  one  of  the  last  letters  of 
the  alphabet,  and  then  consider  in  what  manner  the  ^ven 
conditions  can  form  an  equality  between  two  quantities 
This  equality  is  represented  by  a  kind  of  formula,  called 
an  equatioHy  which  enables  us  finally  to  determine  the  value  of 
the  number  sought,  and  consequently  to  resolve  the  question« 
Sometimes  seveSral  numbers  are  sought  ;  but  they  are  found 
in  the  same  manner  by  equations. 

567.  Let  us  endeavour  to  explain  this  farther  by  an  ex^ 
ample.  Suppose  the  following  question,  or  probkm,  was 
proposed  : 

Twenty  persons,  men  and  women,  dine  at  a  tavern  ;  the 
share  of  the  reckoning  for  one  man  is  8  shillings,  for  one 
woman  7  shillings,  and  the  whole  reckoning  amounts  to 
7/.  5s,  Required  the  number  of  men  and  women  sepa- 
rately ? 

In  order  to  resolve  this  question,  let  us  suppose  that  the 
number  of  men  is  =  jr  ;  and,  considering  this  number  as 
known,  we  shall  proceed  in  the  same  manner  as  if  we  wished 
to  try  whether  it  corresponded  with  the  conditions  of  the 
question.  Now,  the  number  of  men  being  =  x,  and  the 
men  and  women  making  together  twenty  persons,  it  is  easy 
to  determine  the  number  of  the  women,  having  only  to  sub- 
tract that  of  the  men  from  SO,  that  is  to  say,  Uie  number  of. 
women  must  be  20  —  x. 

But  each  man  spends  8  shillings  ;  therefore  x  men  must 
spend  8r  shilUngs.  And  since  each  woman  spends  7  shil* 
hn^,  20—07  women  must  spend  140 -< 7^  shillings.  So  that 
adding  together  &r  and  140  —  7«r,  we  see  that  me  whole  SO 
persons  must  spend  140-|-jr  shillings.  Now,  we  know 
already  how  much  they  have  spent  ;  namely,  7/.  Bs.  or  1 46s,  ; 
there  must  be  an  equality,  therefore,  between  140  -|-  x  and 
145  ;  that  is  to  say,  we  have  the  equation  140  -|-  x  =:  145, 
and  thence  we  easily  deduce  or  =  5,  and  consequently  SO  — 
a<  =  20  —  5  =  15  ;  so  that  the  company  conâsted  of  5  men, 
and  15  women. 

568.  Again,  Suppose  twenty  persons,  men  and  women, 
go  to  a  tavern  ;  the  men  spend  24  shillings,  and  the  women 
as  much  :  but  it  is  found  tliat  the  men  have  spent  1  shilling 
each  more  than  the  women.  Required  the  number  of  men 
and  women  separately  ? 

Let  the  number  of  men  be  represented  by  x. 


188  XLSMBVTS  aiCT.  IT« 

Then  the  woncn  will  be  80  —  jr. 

Now,  the  X  meo  hmnng  spent  84  ahilfings,  the  ihare  of 

84 

each  man  is  — .    The  80  —  jr  women  hmvinir  alio  spent  9é 

X  ^  ■ 

ihiilingB,  theahareof  eadi  woman  b^.^   . 

But  we  know  that  the  diare  of  eadi  woman  u  one  shilling 
len  than  that  of  eadi  man  ;  if,  therefore,  we  subtract  1  fiom 
the  diare  of  a  man,  we  must  obtain  that  of  a  woman  ;  and 

eoonquentlj  —  —  1  =:  -^ .  This,  therefore,  is  the  equa- 
tion, from  which  we  are  to  deduce  the  value  of  x.  This 
▼alue  is  not  found  with  the  same  ease  as  in  the  preceding 
question  ;  bot  we  shall  afterwards  see  that  x  s  8,  whi» 
ndue  answers  to  the  equation  ;  for  y  —  1  =:  44  indudea 
the  equality  8  =  8. 

569-  It  u  evident  therefore  bow  essential  it  is,  in  all  pro- 
blems, to  consider  the  circumstances  of  the  question  at- 
tentivdy,  in  order  to  deduce  from  it  an  equation  that  shall 
express  by  letters  the  numbers  sought,  or  unknown.  After 
that,  the  whole  art  consists  in  resolving  those  equations,  or 
deriving  from  them  the  values  of  the  unknown  numbers  ; 
and  this  shall  be  the  subject  of  the  present  section. 

670.  We  must  remark,  in  the  nrst  place,  the  diversity 
which  subsists  among  the  questions  themselves.  In  some, 
we  seek  only  for  one  unknown  quantity  ;  in  others,  we  have 
to  find  two,  or  more  ;  and,  it  is  to  be  observed,  with  renrd 
to  this  last  case,  that,  in  order  to  determine  them  alÇ  we 
mtist  deduce  from  the  drcumstanocs,  or  the  conditions  of 
the  problem,  as  many  eqtiations  as  there  are  unknown 
quantities. 

671.  It  must  have  already  been  perodved,  that  an  equa- 
tion consists  of  two  parts  separated  by  the  sign  of  equality, 
^  to  shew  that  thcae  two  quantities  arc  ecjud  to  one  an- 
other ;  and  we  are  often  obliged  tu  perform  a  CTcat  number 
of  transformations  on  those  two  parts,  in  order  to  deduce 
from  them  the  vdue  of  the  unknown  quantity:  but  theae 
transfiirmatians  must  be  all  founded  on  tlie  following  prin- 
dples,  namdy,  That  two  cqiud  quantities  remain  equd, 
wnether  we  add  to  them,  or  subtract  (nnn  them,  equal 
quantities;  whether  we  multiply  them,  or  divide  them,  bv 
the  saiiic  number  ;  whether  we  raiM?  tliem  both  to  the  same 
power,  ur  extract  their  roots  of  the  same  degree;  or  iasAly, 


CHAP.  If.  OF  ALOEQRA.  189 

whether  we  take  the  logarithms  of  those  quantities,  as  wç 
have  already  done  in  the  preceding  section. 

572.  The  equations  which  are  most  easily  resolved,  are 
those  in  which  the  unknown  quantity  does  not  exceed  the 
first  power^  after  the  terms  of  the  equation  have  been  pro- 
perly arranged  ;  and  these  are  called  simple  e^[uaiions,  or 
equations  of  the  first  de^ee.  But  if,  after  havmg  reduced 
an  equation,  we  find  in  it  the  square,  or  die  second  power, 
of  the  unknown  quantity,  it  is  called  an  equation  of  the 
second  degree^  whicn  is  more  difficult  to  resolve.  Equaticns 
of  tJie  tfurd  degree  are  those  which  contain  the  cube  of  the 
unknown  quantity,  and  so  on.  We  shall  treat  of  all  these 
in  the  present  section. 


CHAP-  II. 


Of  the  Resolution  Q^Simple  Equations,  or  Equations  ^tfie 

fU  Degree. 

573.  When  the  number  sought,  or  the  unknown  quantity, 
is  represented  by  the  letter  ^,  and  the  equation  we  have  ob- 
tained is  such,  that  one  side  contmns  only  that  ^7,  and  the 
other  simply  a  known  number,  as,  for  example,  a:  =  25,  the 
value  of  X  is  already  known.  We  must  always  endeavour, 
therefore,  to  arrive  at  such  a  form,  however  complicated  the 
equation  may  be  when  first  obtained  :  and,  in  the  course  of 
this  section,  the  rules  shall  be  ^ven,  and  explained,  which 
serve  to  facilitate  these  reductions. 

574.  Let  us  be^n  with  the  simplest  cases,  and  suppose, 
first,  that  we  have  arrived'  at  the  equation  a^  -|-  9  =  16. 
Here  we  see  immediately  that  x  ss7:  and,  in  general,  if 
we  have  found  x  -f*  ^  =  ^y  where  a  and  b  express  any 
known  numbers,  we  have  only  to  subtract  a  from  both 
sides,  to  obtain  the  equation  x  =e  &  —  o^  which  indicates  the 
value  of  X. 

575  If  we  have  the  equation  x  —  a  =  é,  we  must  add 
a  to  both  sides,  and  shall  obtmn  the  value  of  x  =  6  -f  a. 
We  must  proceed  in  the  same  manner,  if  the  equation  have 
this  form,  x  —  a  =  a«  +  1  :  for  we  shall  find  immediately 
x=r  a«  +  a  +  l. 

In  the  equation  x  —  8a  =  20  —  6a,  we  find 

X  =  20  -.  6a  +  8a,  or  X  =  20  +  2a. 


190  sttintNTB  mar.  rr. 

And  in  this,  x  +  ^atsSO-f-Sa^we  hare 

x  =  20  +  8a  —  6a,orx  =  20-3a. 

676.  ir  the  original  equation  have  this  form,  x  —  a  + 
6  =:  c,  we  may  bcgia  by  adding  a  to  both  «des  which  wiO 
inve  X  -{-  b  zz  c  +  a;  and  then  subtracting  b  from  botli 
aidea,  we  shall  find  x  :^  e+  a  ^  b.  But  we  might  al» 
add  '{-û'^  b  at  once  to  both  sides  ;  and  thus  obtain  im- 
snediatelj  x  *a  c  +  a  —  b. 

So  likewise  in  the  following  examples  : 

If  X  -  Sa  +  36  X  0,  we  have  x  =  2a  —  86. 

Ifx  —  Sa  +  26  =  25-fa+26,  we  liave  x  =  25  +  4o. 

If  X  -9  +  6a  =  25  +  2a,  wc  have  r  =  84  -  4€r. 

577.  When  the  given  equation  has  the  form  ax  a  5,  wc 

only  divide  the  two  sides  by  a,  to  obtain  x  ==  ~.  But  if  the 

equation  has  die  form  ox  -f-  6  —  r  =:  df,  we  must  first  make 
tbe  terms  that  accompany  ax  vanish,  by  atldinp^  to  both 
ndes  —  6  +  ^  «  <^d  tnen  dividing  the  new  eciuation  ax  = 

d  —  6  +  c  by  a,  we  shall  have  x  =  ■  . 

•^  a 

The  same  value  of  x  would  have  Ixvn  found  by  suIk 
Iracting  -f  6  ->  c  from  the  given  equation  ;  that  is»  wc 
should  nave  had,  in  the  same  form, 

J-6+C 
ax  =  d  —  6  +  f ,  and  x  =  .     Hence, 

If  2x  +  5  =  17,  we  have  2x  =  12,  and  x  =  C. 
If  8x  —  8  =  7.  we  have  8x  =  15,  and  x  =  5. 
If  4x  -  5  -  8a  =  15  +  9a,  we  have  4x  =  20  -f  I2a, 
and  consequently  x  =  5  -f*  ^« 

X 

578.  When  the  first  equation  has  the  form  —  =  6,  wc 
BQltiply  both  sides  by  a,  in  oitkr  to  have  x  =  ab. 

X  X 

But  if  it  is  —  +  5  -  c  =  J,  wc  must  first  make  —  =  li 
a  a 

—  5  4-  c  ;  after  irhich  we  find  "** 

X  ==  ( J  —  6  +  r)  a  =  oJ  —  a6  -r  ac. 

Let  ^jr  —  8  =  4,  then  ;x  =  7.  and  jt  =  14. 
Let  4x-l-h2a  =  8-»-a,  then  fr  =  4  -  a,  and  j-  = 
It -Sa. 

X  X 

Let  — -  -  I  =  a, then ;  =  «i  +  l,and '  =  a*  —  I. 

a— 1  a— I 

679.  When  wc  have  arrived  at  such  an  equation  as 


CHAP.  IT*  OF  ALGSBEA.  191 


tue 

—-  =  c,  we  first  multiply  by  fi,  in  order  to  liave  ojr  :=z  bCf 

and  then  dividing  by  a,  we  find  a^  =  — . 
ax 


1£  -7 c  =^  d,  we  begin  by  giving  the  equation  this 

CUP 

form  ~i—  =  i  +  c;  after  which  we  obtain  the  value  of 
o 

bd+bc 

o^  =  &2  -f  be.  and  then  that  of  jf  = . 

a 

Let  yjr  —  4  =  1,  then  yx  =  6,  and  Ar  =  lö  ;  whence 

If  T^  +  T  =  ß>  wß  have  Jof  =  Ö  —  -J-  =  |.  ;  whence  8j?  = 
18,  and  jr  =  6. 

580.  Let  us  now  consider  a  case,  which  may  frcquenüy 
occur  ;  that  is,  when  two  or  more  terms  contain  the  letter  x, 
either  on  one  side  of  the  equation,  or  on  both. 

If  those  terms  are  all  on  the  same  side,  as  in  the  equation 
X  +  ^  +  ^  =  11>  ^6  ^^^^  X  +  ^x  =  6  ;  or  3x  =  1»  ;  and 
lastly,  X  =  4. 

Let  X  -f  -^  +  »r  =  44,  be  an  equation,  in  which  the 
value  of  X  is  required«  If  we  first  multiply  by  3,  we  have 
4x  -f  5x  =  182  ;  then  multiplying  by  2,  we  have  llx  = 
264 ;  wherefore  x  =  24.  We  might  have  proceeded  in  a 
more  concise  manner,  by  beginning  with^  the  reduction  of 
the  three  terms  which  contain  r  to  me  single  term  y  x  ;  and 
then  dividing  the  equation  y  *  =  44  by  11.  This  would 
have  given  -^  =  4,  and  x  =  24,  as  before. 

Let  |j:  —  |x  +  ^x  =  1.  We  shall  have,  by  reduction, 
T?jx  =  1,  and  X  =  2y. 

And,  generally,  let  or  —  &»  4-  €«:•  =  d;  which  is  the 
same  as  (a  —  6  +  c)x  =  d,  and,  by  diviaon,  we  derive  x  = 

d 

a  —  b-k-c 

581.  When  there  are  terms  containing  x  on  both  sides  of 
the  equation,  we  begin  by  making  such  terms  vanish  from 
that  side  from  which  it  is  most  easily  expunged  ;  that  is  to 
say,  in  which  there  are  the  fewest  terras  so  involved. 

If  we  have,  for  example,  the  equation  3a^  4-  2  =  x  -^  10, 
we  must  first  subtract  x  from  both  sides,  which  gives  2x  + 
2  =  10  ;  wherefore  2x  =  8,  and  x  =  4. 

Let  X  -f  4  =  20  —  x;  here  it  is  evident  that  2x  +  4  = 
20  ;  and  consequently  %»  =  16,  and  x  =  8. 


191  SLXMKKT»  SBC«»  fT, 

Leix  +  8sS2-ar,  thb  gives  lis  4»  -h  8  =  8S;  or 
4r  s  Séy  whence  «  =  6. 

Let  15  —  X  s  90  -  £r,  here  we  shall  hare 

15  +  4r  s  SO»  and  #  s  5. 

Let  1  -f  X  =  5  —  |x;  thisbeoomes  1  +  .{x  =  5»  orjxs 
4;  thereforeässS;  and  lastly,  x  s  |  :£  S^ 

If^  —  ^xs:^  —  IXyWe  must  add  fj^  which  gives  4  = 
j.  -f  Vr*«  subtracting  j-,  and  transposing  the  terms»  there 
remains  tV  t=  |.;  then  mnltiplving  bj  IS,  we  obtain  x=f. 

If  It  •-  fr  =  :J  +  |x,  we  add  fr»  which  gives  1{  =  t  + 
{x;  then  subtracting  {^  and  tranqxisingy  we  have  ^x  =  1|« 
whence  we  deduce  x  =  1^!^  s  ;|  by  multiplying  by  6  and 
dividing  by  7. 

582.  If  we  have  an  equation  in  which  the  unknown  num- 
ber jr  b  a  denominator»  we  must  make  the  fraction  vanish  by 
multiplying  the  whole  equation  by  that 


iruriJiHir 


100 
Suppose  that  we  have  found 8  =  12,  then,  adding 

100 
89  we  have  ==  90;  and  multiplying  by  x,  it  beconies 

100  ^  90x;  lastly,  dividing  by  2O9  we  find  x  =  5. 

Let  now =p  Ä  7  ;    here  multiplying  by  x  —  1,  wc 

have  6x  +  S  =  7x  —  7  ;  and  subtracting  5x,  there  remains 
8  s  2x  —  7;  then  adding  7,  we  have  2x  =  10;  whence 
X  «  5. 

588.  Sometimes,  also,  radical  signs  are  found  in  equations 
of  the  first  degree.  For  example  :  A  number  x,  below  100» 
b  reuuired,  such,  that  the  square  root  of  100  ^  x  may  be 
equal  to  8;  or  ^^(100  —  x)  =  &  The  square  of  both  sides 
will  give  100  -»  X  =  64»  and  adding  x,  we  have  100  =:  6^ 
-|-  x;  whence  we  obtain  x  s  100  —  64  =  36. 

Or,  since  100  —  x  =  64,  we  might  have  subtracted  100 
fipom  both  sides';  which  would  have  given  ^  x  =  —  86  ;  or, 
multiplying  by  —  I,  x  =  86. 

584.  1  juoly,  the  unknown  number  x  b  sometimes  found 
as  an  exponent,  of  which  we  luive  aln*tidy  seen  some  ex- 
amples; and,  in  this  case,  we  must  have  recourse  to  lo- 
ganihms. 

Thus  when  we  have  9^  =  519,  wc  take  the  logarithms  of 
both  sides  ;  whence  we  obtain  x  hg.  9  =z  log.  519  ;  and 


lo^  519 
by&]|p.2»  wefindxs -^-^.    The  Tables  then 


CHAf.  II.  OF  ALOBB&A.  103 

2-7092700      ^,^,^, 
«*^^^'=r5^3ÔïcS05^  ^^'^^  =  ^• 
Let  5  X  S^  ---  100  ==  S05;  we  add  100,  which  giv^  6  x 
3^  =  405  ;  divkÜDff  by  5,  we  have  3^  =  81  ;  aad  taking 
the  logarithms,  ftxlog.  3  =  log.  81,  and  (Uviding  by^d  leg. 

8,  wehavex  =  ^^,  or  X  =  ^^;  whence 

V9084860'_  .,,  _ 

""  0-9648426  ""  ^Tr^iVrr  -  »• 

QUESTIONS  FOB  PBACTICE. 

1.  If  A«  -  4  +  6  =  8,  then  will  x  =  6. 

2.  If  4r  -.  8  =  »r  +  «0,  then  will  x  =  28. 

3.  If  ax  =  ab  -^  a,  then  will  x  =  6  —  1. 

4.  If2r  +  4=16,  thenwillx=:6. 

3c* 

5.  If  or  +  2Aa  =  8c%  then  will  or  = 26. 

a 

6.  If  -|-  =  5  +  3,  then  will  X  =  16. 

22" 

7.  If  ^  ^  2  =  6  +  4,  then  will  ar  -  6  =  18. 

b  h 

8.  If  a =  c,  then  will  r  = 


9.  If  Ar  -  10=  ftr  +  6,  then  wiU  x  =  7. 

10.  If  40  -  fir  --  16  =  120  —  14r,  then  will  x  =  12. 

11.  If -|-- y+ -J- =  10,  then  will  x  =  24. 

12.  ^+  -I-  =  20  -  ^^,  then  wiU  X  =  3Si. 

13.  If  ^/fr  +  5  =  7,  then  will  J?  =  6. 

So* 

1*.  If«  +  v'(a*  +  *»)  =  ^,g>^-^>:  then  »»H  «  =  «•f 

15.  I£Sax  +  -^— 3  =  &p-a,  then  will  x  =  gr^jst- 

16.  If  v/(12  -l-x)  =  2  +  •x,  then  will  ar  =  4. 

2a* 

17.  If  y  +  ^a^  +  y*)  =  (^q^,  then  wiUy  =  4^  ^3. 

18.  If3^^y4^  =  16^«±?,thenwilly=18. 


194  E&SMBm't  tscT«  rr# 

90.  If  ^(M  +  xx>  s  t^i*  4.  T«),  ttien  «Ut  jr  s 

«a«       • 
SI.  If  y  »  Via*  +  •(&»+#*))-  «,  tbcn  wiU  «a 

tt.  Ifjp-^=j;|^-^thenwUIx  =  12. 

4ttx       S&r 
S8.  If-=^=-^tbaiinUxs8. 
x—x     x—9) 

45  SI 

*♦•  ^fä—n—  r— Jf  »*>"  will  *  =  6. 

86.  ifl_ir=flj^,thcnwiU»  =  & 
26.  If  615*  -  7x^  =  ♦&:,  then  will  x  =:  9. 


CHAP.  IIL 


Of  the  Solutkm  cfi^acaùùOâ  reloHng  to  the  preuding 

Chapter. 

585.  Q^etiionl.  To  divide  7  mto  two  tudi  puis  tluit  the 
gretter  may  exceed  the  Im  by  8. 

Lei  the  grcAler  pvt  be  x,  theo  the  lets  will  be  7  —  Jr  ;  ao 
thm  X  s  7^—  x-|-S^orjr=:10—  «*.  Adding  jr,  we  have 
ftr  z  10  ;  and  drndtnff  by  f,  jr  =  5. 

The  two  parts  thermiw  are  6  and  2. 

Questiom  2.  It  »  required  to  diride  a  into  two  parts,  to 
that  the  greater  may  exceed  the  km  by  6. 

Lei  the  greater  pari  be  jr,  ihen  the  other  will  be  a  —  x  ; 
«o  that  X  s  a  -:-  X  4*  &•     Adding  x,  we  have  2r  :=  a  -f  6  ; 

and  dtTtding  by  2,  jt  =  -j- . 

Another  method  ofeohition.  Let  the  greater  part  =  x; 
which  at  it  eacecda  the  le«  by  A«  it  is  erid^t  that  this  is  lens 
than  the  other  by  6,  and  thenfiire  must  be  =  x  -  A.  Now« 


CHAP.  III.  OF  ALGSBBA.  195 

these  two  parts,  takeil  together,  ought  to  make  a  ;  so  that 
2j:  —  6  =  a  ;  adding  J,  we  have  Ex  zz  a  +'bj  wherefore 

X  =  — Ö-,  which  is  the  value  of  the  greater  part;  and  that 

or  the  less  will  be  —5 6,  or  —5—  —  -^i  ot  — a"* 

586.  Question  3.  A  father  leaves  1600  pounds  to  be 
divided  among  his  three  sons  in  the  following  manner  ;  viz. 
the  eldest  is  to  have  200  pounds  more  than  the  second,  and 
the  second  100  pounds  more  than  the  youngest.  Required 
the  share  of  eacli. 

a 

Let  the  share  of  the  third  son  be  x 

Then  the  secondes  will  be    -    -    a:  +  100;  and 

The  first  sotfs  share      -     -    -    j?  +  300. 

Now,  these  three  sums  make  up  together  1600Ü.  ;  wc  have, 
therefore, 

âr  +  400  =  1600 

Sx  =  ISOO 

and  07=    400 

The  share  of  the  youngest  is  400/. 
That  of  the  second  is  -  -  500^ 
That  of  the  eldest  is      -    -  700/. 

587.  QuesHan  4.  A  father  leaves  to  his  four  sons  8600/* 
and,  according  to  the  will,  the  share  of  the  eldest  is  to  be 
<louble  that  of  the  second,  minus  100/.  ;  the  second  is  to 
receive  three  times  as  much  as  the  third,  minus  20Ö/.  ;  and 
the  third  is  to  receive  four  times  as  much  as  the  fourth,  minus 
300/.    What  are  the  respecÜTe  portions  of  these  four  sons? 

Call  the  youngest  son's  fAare  x 
Then  the  thiid  son's  is    -    4r  —   900 
The  second  son's  is     -    -  12x  —  1100 
And  the  eldest's     -    -    -  24vr  -  SSOO 

Now,  the  sum  of  these  four  shares  must  make  8600/.    We 
have,  therefore,  41j?  —  3700  =  860Ö,  or 
41j:  =  112300,  and  X  =    800. 

Therefore  the  youngesf  s  share  is    300/. 

The  third  son's 900/. 

The  second's «500/. 

The  eldeet's  .    -    ^    .    .    .    -  4900/. 

588.  Question  6,    A  man  leaves   11000  crowns  to  be  ^ 
divided  between  his  widow,  two  scms,  and  three  daugbtera. 
lie  intends  that  the  mother  should  receive  twice  the  «httre 
of  a  son,  and  that  each  son  should  recme  twice  as  much 

of 


196  SLVM BUT»  «riCT.  IT. 

at  A  daughter.    Required  bow  much  each  of  them  it  to 

Suppose  the  share  of  each  daughter  to  be  x 
Then  each  aoo^t  is  oontequentiy  -'  -  -2r 
And  the  widow's 4r 


The  whole  inheritanoe«  tberefarei  it  Sr  4-  4jr  4-  4r;  or  llx 
s  11000,  and«  cootequently,  x  =  1000. 

Eadi  daughter,  therefore,  is  to  receive  1000  crownt; 

So  that  the  three  receive  in  all     8000 

Eadi  too  reoeivct  SOOO  ; 

So  that  the  two  soot  receive   »    4000 

And  the  mother  recetvet    -    -    4000 


Sum    11000  crowns 

589.  Question  6.  A  father  intendt  by  hit  will,  that  hit 
three  sont  thould  thare  hb  property  in  the  following  man- 
ner: the  eldest  it  to  receive  1000  crownt  lett  than  half  the 
whole  fortune;  the  teoood  it  to  recttve  800  crownt  lett 
than  the  third  of  the  whole;  and  the  tliird  it  to  have 
000  crowns  less  than  the  fourth  of  the  whole.  Required 
the  sum  of  the  whole  fortune,  and  the  portion  of  each 


Let  the  fortune  be  expretted  by  x  : 
Tlie  thare  of  the  fint  ton  b  {x  -  1000 
That  of  the  teoond    .    .    .  4x  -    800 
That  of  the  thiiti      .    -    -  .;x  -    600 

So  that  the  three  tont  receive  in  all  4x  -f-  ^x  +  Jx  » 
5M00,  and  this  sum  mutt  be  equal  to  x.  We  have,  there- 
fore» the  c<|uatioQ  4ix  —  Si400  =  x;  and  tubtracting  x, 
there  remains  /^x  — DIOOsO;  then  addins  2400,  wc 
have  ,',x  s  £400;  and,  lastly,  multiplying  by  IS,  we  obtain 
x  =  SH800. 

llie  fortune,  therefore,  cootittt  of  28800  crowns  ;  and 

The  eldest  too  rcoeivet     13400  crowns 

The  second  ....      8800 

The  youngest   -    -    -      6600 

S8800  crownt. 
590.  Quesiion  7.  A  father  leaves  four  sons,  who  share 
his  |iroperty  in  the  following  nuuuier  :  the  first  takes  tlu* 
half  c»f  the  fortune,  minus  8000/.;  the  second  ukes  the* 
third,  minus  lOOOJL  ;  the  tliird  take«  exactly  the  fou^  of 
the  property  ;  and  the  fourth  takes  600/.  and  the  fifth  part 
et  tne  property.  What  was  the  whole  fortune,  and  Ik)w 
much  did  each  ton  rseebe  f 


CHAP.  m.  Off  ALOBlftA.  197 

Let  the  whole  fortune  be  represented  by  x  : 
Then  the  eldest  son  will  have  \x  ^  3000 

The  second |x  -  1000 

The  third  -----.    ^ 

The  youngest  -----    |x  +  600. 

And  the  four  will  have  received  in  all  |x  +  -Jjp  +  |x  + 
{X  —  3400,  which  must  be  equal  to  x. 

Whence  results  the  equation  -^x  —  3400  =  x\  then  sub- 
tracting T,  we  have  ^x  —  3400  =  0  ;  adding  3400,  we  ob- 
tain \^x  =  3400;  then  dividing  by  17,  we  have  -^^gX  = 
200  ;  and  multiplying  by  60,  gives  x  =  12000. 

The  fortune  therefore  consisted  of  12000/. 

The  first  son  received  3000 
The  second  •  -  -  3000 
The  third  .  -  -  -  8000 
The  fourth      -    -    -  3000 

591.  Qfii^tion  8.  To  find  a  number  such,  that  if  we 
add  to  it  its  half,  the  sum  exceeds  60  by  as  much  as  the 
number  itself  is  less  than  65. 

Let  the  number  be  represented  by  x  : 

Then  x  +  fr  —  60  =  &5  -  x,  or  |j:  ^  60  =  66  -  x. 
Now,  by  adding  x,  we  have  |x  —  60  =  65  ;  addmg  60,  we  ' 
have  {x  =  125  ;  dividing  by  5,  gives  ^j?  =  25  ;  and  mul- 
tiplying by  2,  we  have  x  =  50. 

Consequently,  the  number  sought  is  50. 

592.  UueHion  9*  To  divide  32  into  two  such  parts,  that 
if  the  less  be  divided  by  6,  and  the  greater  by  5,  the^  two 
quotients  taken  tc^zether  may  make  6. 

Let  the  less  of  the  two  parts  souirht  be  x  ;  then  the 
greater  wUl  be  8â  -  x.    IVir8^  ^vided  by  6,  gires 

-w-  ;  and  the  second,  divided  by  5,  gives — -= — .  Now  -jr-  + 

— - —  =  6  :  so  that  multiplying  by  5,  we  have  -Jx  +  38  — 

x  =  30,  or  -  {X  -f  32  =  30;  adding  jrX.  we  have  32  =s 
30  +  'x,;  subtracting  SO,  there  remains  2  ==  ^x;  and  lastly, 
multiplying  by  6,  we  have  x  =:  12. 

So  that  the  less  part  is  12,  and  the  greater  part  is  20. 

593.  Question  10.  To  find  such  a  number,  that  if  mul- 
tiplied by  5,  the  product  shall  be  as  much  less  than  40  as 
the  numoer  itself  is  less  than  12. 

Let  the  number  be  x;  which  is  less  than  12  by  12  —  x; 
then  taking  the  number  x  five  times,  we  have  5x,  which  is 


198  lUUisiiTi  aiGf«  IV. 

« 

le»  than  40  by  40  —  5jr,  and  th»  quanüty  mmt  be  equal  to 
12  —  X. 

We  bave,  thcrcrore,  40  —  5jr  =  IS  —  or.  Adding  &r, 
we  bave  40  =  12  -f  ir;  and  tubtractbg  IS,  we  ätaia 
S8  =  4r  ;  laitly,  dividmg  by  4,  we  bave  Jr  sb  7«  tbe  number 
aoi^t 

W4u  Qiieffiofi  11.  To  divide  SS  into  two  audi  parla, 
that  the  greater  may  be  eqtial  to  40  times  the  laM, 

Let  tM  leas  part  be  x,  than  tbe  greater  will  be  S5  —  x; 
and  the  latter  divided  by  the  fiMrmer  oualit  to  give  the 

by  X,  we  have  S5  —  x  s  4ftr;  adding  £,  we  have  S5  xs 
fOx;  and  dividing  by  50,  ffivet  x  ^  |.    ^  . 

The  le»  of  the  two  numoers  b  •^,  aliid  the  greater  is  84{  ; 
dividing  therefoce  the  latter  by  |,  or  multijuying  by  S,  we 

obtain  49. 

095.  Quettion  18.  To  divide  48  into  nine  parts,  so  that 
every  part  may  be  always  i  greater  than  the  part  which 
precedes  iL 

Let  the  first,  or  least  part  be  x,  then  the  seoond  wiB  be 
X  -f  ;,  tbe  third  x  -f  I,  ficc 

Now,  these  parts  form  an  arithmetica]  progresnoo,  whose 
first  term  is  x;  therefore  the  ninth  ana  last  term  win  be 
X  4-  4.  Adding  those  two  terms  togctlier,  we  have  Sx  +  4; 
multiplying  this  Quantity  by  the  number  of  terms,  or  by  9» 
we  have  IRr  +  96;  and  dividing  tliis  product  by  S,  we 
i^itain  the  sum  of  all  the  nine  parts  =  9x  -f  18;  wluch 
ought  to  be  equal  to  48.  We  have,  tlivreforc,  9x  +  18  = 
48  ;  subtracting  18,  thena  remains  Ux  =r  Ö0  ;  and  dividing 
fay  9^  we  have  x  ss  â|. 

The  first  |)art«  therefore,  is  S} ,  and  tlie  nine  parts  will 
succeed  in  the  following  order  : 

I  L»  1  4  5  Ö  7  K  9 

8V  -^  Si.  +  4;  +  4J  4^  5}  -h  6J  +  Gf  +  6J  +  7;. 
Which  together  make  48. 

506L  QurHion  18.  To  find  an  arithmetiuil  pn'*grrssi<in, 
whose  first  term  is  5,  the  last  term  ID,  and  tl^  entire 
sum  60. 

Mere  we  know  neither  the  difference  nor  the  number  of 
terms  ;  but  we  knknr  that  the  first  and  the  laut  term  would 
enable  us  to  express  the  sum  of  the  |m>gmision,  provided 
cmly  the  numlier  of  terms  were  given.  We  iJiall  therefiirc 
suppose  this  number  to  be  x,  and  eai|ires5  the  sum  of  tlie 


CHAP,  m«  CHT  ALAW.fMU  lift 

l&T 

progressian  by  -^r-.    We  know  alßG^  that  this  sum  is  60; 

l&r 
so  that -3-  =  ^«  or-ior  =  4^  and  jt  =  8. 

Now,  since  the  number  of  terms  is  8,  if  we  suppose  the 
diffsreoce  to  be  ;?,  ive  have  only  to  seek  for  the  eighth  tena 
upon  this  supposition,  and  to  make  i(  equal  to  10..  X)ie 
second  term  is  5  4-  x»  the  third  is  5  +  S«»  fmd  the  eifj^tfi  is 
B  +  Iz;  so  that 

Ö  +  7«  =  10 
7*=    5 

and     z  =r    ^ 

The  difference  of  the  progression,  therefore,  is  |,  and  the 
number  of  terms  is  8  ;  consequently,  the  progression  is 

12         3  4  5  6  7  8 

ß  +  5f  +  6f  +  7f  +  7|  +  8J:  +  9}.  +  10, 

the  sum  of  which  is  60. 

597*  Question  14.  To  find  such  a  number,  that  if  1  be 
subtracted  from  its  double,  and  the  remainder  be  doubled, 
from  which  if  2  be  subtracted,  and  the  remainder  divided  by 
4,  the  number  resulting  from  these  operations  shall  be  1  less 
than  the  number  sought. 

Suppose  this  number  to  be  jr;  the  double  is  2^;  sub- 
tracting 1,  there  remains  2r  —  1  ;  doubling  thb,  we  have 
4x  —  2  ;  subtracting  2,  there  remains  4jr  —  4  ;  dividing  by 
4,  wc  have  x  —  1  ;  and  this  must  be  1  less  than  x;  so 
that 

j;  —  1  =  j:  —  1. 

But  this  is  what  is  called  an-  identical  equation  ;  and 
shews  that  x  is  indeterminate  ;  or  that  any  nuinber  whatever 
may  be  substituted  for  it. 

598.  Question  15.  I  bought  some  ells  of  cloth  at  the 
rate  of  7  crowns  for  5  ells,  which  I  sold  again  at  the  rate  of 
1 1  crowns  for  7  ells,  and  I  gained  100  crowns  by  the  trans- 
action.    How  much  cloth  was  there? 

Supposing  the  number  of  ells  to  be  ;r,  we  must  first  see 
how  much  üie  doth  cost  ;  which  is  found  by  thé.following 
proportion  : 

Ix 
As  5  :  Jf  :  :  7  :  -^  the  price  of  the  ells. 

This  being  the  expenditure  ;  let  us  now  see  the  receipt  : 
in  order  to  which,  we  must  make  the  following  proportions 


•  suomrrs  MC«,  r^ 

Is»«    L«*       £• 

As  7  :  11  :  :  X  :  yx  crowns; 

aixl  this  receipt  ought  to  exceed  the  expenditure  hj  100 
crowns.    We  nare,  therefbrei  thb  équation  : 

Sablnicliog  fr,  there  renaint  JUt  k  100  ;  therefore  Ar  « 
9800»  and  «  rs  0»f. 

There  wfte,  therefore,  66Sf  ells  bouf^t  tor  816^  crowna» 
and  sold  again  for  916}.  crowns;  by  which  means  the  profit 
was  100  crowns. 

509.  Question  16.  A  person  buys  12  pieces  of  dolh  fat 
140/.  ;  of  whidi  two  are  white,  three  are  olack,  and  seven 
are  blue  :  also,  a  piece  of  the  black  cloth  costs  two  pounds 
more  than  a  piece  of  the  white,  and  a  piece  of  the  blue  cloth 
costs  three  Dounds  more  than  a  piece  of  the  black.  Required 
the  price  or  each  kind. 

Let  the  price  of  a  white  piece  be  x  pounds  ;  then  the  two 
pieces  of  tnis  kind  wiU  cost  2x;  also,  a  black  piece  costing 
jr  -f  f,  the  three  pieces  of  this  color  will  cost  &r  -f  6;  and 
lastly,  as  a  blue  piece  costs  x  -f-  6,  the  seren  blue  pieces  wiD 
cost  7x  -|>8S:  so  that  the  twdve  pieces  amount  in  all  to 
Wx  +  41. 

Now,  the  known  price  of  these  twelve  pieces  is  140 

Kinds;  we  have,  therefore^  12x  -{-  41  =  140,  and  Ua  s 
;  wherefore  x  »  8^.     So  that 

A  piece  of  white  cloth  costs  S^L 
A  piece  of  black  doth  cosu  10|/. 
A  piece  of  blue  cloth  costs  1S{/. 

600.  Qiusiiom  17.  A  man  having  bought  some  nutmegs, 
says  that  tliree  of  them  cost  as  much  more  than  one  pcnn^,  as 
(bur  cost  him  more  than  two  pence  halfpenny.  Required 
the  price  of  the  nutmegs? 

Let  X  be  the  excess  of  the  price  of  three  nuts  above  one 
penny,  or  four  farthiogt.  Now,  if  three  nutmcss  cost  x  -t-  4 
farthings,  four  will  cost,  by  the  condition  of  the  cjuestion, 
X  4- 10  fiurthings  ;  but  the  price  of  three  nutoiep  gives  that 
of  four  in  anciiier  way,  namely,  by  the  Rule  of  Three« 
Thus, 

S  :  X  +  4  :  :  4  :  ^^^J^. 

Sothat^^^^^=  X  +  10;  or,  4x  +  16  =  Ox  +  aO; 
ihcrvfurv  x  4.  16  s  SO,  and  x  s  14. 


CHAP.  Ill«  OF  ALGKBEA.  SOI 

Three  nutmegs,  therefore,  cost  4^,  and  four  cost  6d.  : 
wherefore  each  costs  l{d. 

601.  Question  18.  A  certain  person  has  two  silver  cups, 
and  only  one  cover  for  both*  The  first  cup  weighs  IS 
ounces  ;  and  if  the  cover  be  put  on  it,  it  weighs  twice  as 
much  as  the  other  cap  :  but  when  the  other  cup  has  the 
cover,  it  weiffhs  three  times  as  much  as  the  first.  Requbed 
the  weight  of  the  second  cup,  and  that  of  the  cover. 

Suppose  the  weight  of  the  cover  to  be  x  ounces  ;  then  the 
first  cup  being  covered  it  will  weigh  x  -f- 12  ;  and  this  weight 
be'mg  double  that  of  the  second,  the  second  cup  must  weigh 
ix  +  6;  and,  with  the  cover,  it  mU  weiffh  *  +  -i*  +  6, 
for  +  6;  which  weight  ousht  to  be  the  triple  of  IS  ;  tliat  is, 
Üiree  times  the  wd^t  of  the  first  cup.  We  shall  therefore 
have  the  equation  4x  -{-  6  =  86,  or  4^  =  80  ;  so  that  ix  = 
10  and  x  =  20. 

The  cover,  therefore^  weighs  ^  ounces,  and  the  second 
cup  weighs  16  ounces. 

•  6QS.  Question  19*  A  banker  has  two  kinds  of  change: 
there  must  be  a  jneces  of  the  first  to  make  a  crown  ;  ana  b 
pieces  of  the  second  to  make  the  same.  Now,  a  person 
wishes  to  have  c  pieces  for  a  crown.  How  many  pieces  of 
each  kind  must  the  banker  give  him? 

Suppose  the  banker  gives  x  pieces  of  the  first  kind  ;  it  is 
evident  that  he  will  give  c  ^  x  pieces  of  the  other  kind  ; 

but  the  X  pieces  of  the  first  are  worth  —  crown,  by  the  pro- 

X 

portion  a  :  x  ::  I  :  —  ;  and  the  c  —  or  pieces  of  the  second 

C~""X 

kind  are  worth  — r-  crown,  because  we  hiive  6  :  c  —  x  :  :  1  : 

e— X      ^     _         X       c— X 

-7-.     So  that,  —  +  —7-  =  1  ; 
o  ^  a  It 

bx 
or  —  4-c  —  x  =  ft;  or  6x  +  ac  —  ax  ^  ab  y 
a 

or,  rather  Ax  —  ax  =  ai  —  ac\ 

.  .  ab^ac  û(6— c) 

whence  we  have  x  =  —7 ,  or  jt  =:  — j ; 

6— a  b—a 

conso()uent]y,  c  —  .r,  the  pieces  of  the  second  kind,  must  be 

be  "üb      b{c  —  a) 

""    6— a  ^    6— a  " 


KUUUSMT»  UCT«  IV. 

The  bftokcr  must  thoiefore  give  --V ^  pieces  of  the  fint 

kind,  and    i         pieea  of  the  second  kind. 


Rewmfk.  These  two  nmnbm  are  easily  fomid  bj  the 
Rule  of  Thice,  when  it  is  required  to  ifiplj  the  lesnlts 
which  we  have  obtained.    Thus,  to  find  the  fint  we  snjt 

A  —  a  :  a  :  :  &  —  e  :  -7-- —  ;  and  the  second  number  is 

found  thus;  b  -^  abw  c  --  a\  -r . 

It  ought  to  be  obscnrcd  also,  that  a  is  less  than  A,  and  that 
€  is  less  than  &;  but  at  the  same  time  greater  than  a,  as  the 
nature  of  the  thing  requires. 

OOS.  Qiêution  xO.  A  banker  has  two  kinds  of  chance  ; 
10  pièces  of  one  make  a  crown,  and  5M>  pieces  of  the  otncr 
nmae  a  crown  ;  and  a  person  wishes  to  change  a  crown  mto 
17  pieoes  of  money  :  how  many  of  each  sort  must  behave? 

We  have  here  a  «  10,  6  s:  20,  and  c  =  17,  which  finw 
nishes  the  foUowing  proportions  : 

Firrt,  10  :  10  :  :  S  :  8,  so  that  the  number  of  pieces  of  the 
fint  kind  is  S. 

Secondly,  10  :  90  :  :  7  :  14,  and  the  number  of  the  second 
ul4. 

604.  Quetfton  SI.  A  father  leaves  at  his  death  several 
children,  who  share  his  property  in  the  folk>winç  manner  : 
namely,  the  first  receives  a  hundred  pound»,  and  the  tenth 
part  of  the  remainder  ;  the  scccmd  receives  two  hundred 
pounds,  and  the  tenth  part  of  the  rcnudndor;  the  third 
takes  three  hundred  pounds,  and  the  tenth  part  of  what 
remains  ;  and  the  fourth  takes  four  hundred  pounds,  and 
the  tenth  part  of  what  then  remains  ;  and  so  on.  And  it  is 
fiiund  that  the  property  has  thus  been  divided  equally 
among  all  the  children.  Reuuired  how  much  it  was,  how 
numy  children  there  were,  ana  how  much  each  received  ? 

Tnis  question  is  rather  of  a  singular  nature,  and  therefore 
deserves  particular  attention.  In  order  to  resolve  it  more 
easily,  we  »hall  sujjinite  the  whole  fortune  to  be  r  [XHinclu  ; 
and  since  all  the  children  receive  the  same  sum,  let  the  share  of 
each  be  x,  by  which  means  tlie  number  of  children  will  be  cx- 

fircssed  by  — .   Now,  thU  being  laid  down,  wc  may  [irucecd 

to  the  solution  of  the  c|uestion,  as  follows  : 


CHAP.  III. 


OF  ALGEBIIA. 


203 


Sum,  or 
be  oividra. 


Z—    X 


a— 2x 


z— Sjt 


X — 4fX 


«— 5r 


Order  of 

children. 


Fortioii  of  each« 


Difiereoccs. 


1st       X  s 


z-100 
100+  - 


2à      jr  s  200  + 
3d       X  SS  300  + 


4th      X  =  400  + 


10 
z— jp-SOO 

10 
r—gjT— 3001 


10 
aj-^Sx— 400 


5th      X  =  500  -h 
6th      X  =  600  + 


10 
s— 4x— 5001 


10 
z— 5x-600i 


10 


./^    X— 100    ^ 
100 j5-,0 

,^^    J>-100    ^ 
100— __=0 

,^    x-100    „ 
100— j~=0 

x-100    ^ 
and  so  on. 


We  have  inserted,  in  the  last  column,  the  differences 
which  we  obtain  by  subtracdng  each  portion  from  that  which 
follows  ;  but  all  die  portions  being  equal,  each  of  the  dif« 
ferences  must  be  =  0.  As  it  happens  ako,  that  all  these 
differences  are  expressed  exacdy  auke,  it  will  be  sufficient  to 
make  one  of  them  equal  to  nothing,  and  we  shall  have  the 

.      ,^      x-100      ^    „  ,.  ,  .      ^    ,^ 

equation  100 rjj—  =  0.    Here,  multiplying  by  10,  we 

have  1000  -  j*  -  100  =  0,  or  900  —  a;  =  0;  and,  conse- 
quently,  x  =  900. 

Wc  know  now,  therefore,  that  the  share  of  each  child  was 
900  ;  so  that  taking  any  one  of  the  equadons  of  the  third 
column,  the  first,  for  example,  it  becomes,  by  substitudng 

;5~100 


the  value  of  x,  900  =  100  + 


10 


,  whence  we  inunedi-' 


ately  obtain  the  value  of  z  ;  for  we  have 

9000  =  1000  +  ;?-.  100,  or  9000  =  900  +  «; 

z 
therefore  z  =  8100  ;  and  consequently  —  =  9. 

So  that  the  number  of  children  was  9  ;  the  fortune  lefl 
l)y  the  father  was  8100  pounds  ;  and  the  share  of  each  child 
was  900  pounds, 


QUESTIONS   FOR   PRACTICE. 


1.  To  find  a  number,  to  which  if  there  be  added  a  half,  a 
third,  and  a  fourth  of  itself,  the  sum  will  be  SO.      AfU^  S4. 


SM  £u:ui£NT8  tier«  tv. 

fL  A  person  being  asked  what  his  age  wm,  repfied  that 
I  of  his  age  multiplied  by  i'^  of  hb  age  gives  a  product 
equal  to  his  age.     What  was  his  age  ?  Am.  18. 

5.  'llie  sum  of  6601.  was  raised  for  a  particular  pivposc 
by  four  penMMiSt  A,  B,  C,  and  D  ;  B  advanced  twice  as 
much  as  A  ;  C  as  much  as  A  and  B  together  ;  and  D  as 
much  as  B  and  C«     What  did  each  contribute  ? 

Am.  60/.,  \äOL,  180/.,  and  SCO/. 

4.  To  find  that  number  whose  -f  (»rt  exceeds  its  ^  part 

by  13.  Jns.  144. 

5»  What  sum  of  money  b  that  whose  4  part,  j  part,  and 

{•  part,  added  together,  shall  amount  to  94  pounds  r 

^la.  1£0^ 

6.  In  a  mixture  of  copper,  tin,  and  lead,  one  half  of  the 
whole  —16/6.  was  copper;  one-third  of  the  whole  — IStt* 
tin;  and  one-fourth  of  the  whole  ~|-4/&.  lead  :  what  qiuintity 
of  each  was  there  in  the  coniixMition  ? 

Jnê.  MM.  of  co[)per,  84/&  of  tin,  and  78/A.  àtlmà. 

7.  A  bill  of  ISO/,  was  paid  in  guineas  and  moidores,  and 
the  ntimber  of  pieces  of  Doth  sorts  were  just  100;  to  find 
bow  many  there  were  of  each.  An$.  BO. 

&  To  'find  two  numbers  in  the  proportion  of  S  to  1,  so 
that  if  4  be  added  to  each,  the  two  sums  shall  be  in  the  pio- 
portion  of  ä  to  2.  ^iw.4anda 

9.  A  trader  allows  100/.  per  annum  for  the  expenses  of 
hb  fiunilj,  and  vearly  augments  that  part  of  his  s^tock  which 
is  not  so  expenjied,  by  a  wird  part  of  it  ;  at  the  end  of  three 
years,  hb  original  stock  was  doubled  :  what  had  he  at  first  ? 

Jns.  14S0L 

10.  A  fish  was  cau^t  whose  tail  weighed  91b.  His  bead 
weighed  as  mtich  as  his  tail  and  [  his  Ixxly  ;  and  his  body 
weighed  as  much  as  hb  head  and  tail  :  wbit  did  the  whole 
fish  weigh  ?  Afii.  72/6. 

11.  One  has  a  lease  for  99  years;  and  being  asked  how 
much  of  it  was  already  expired,  answered,  that  two-thirds  of 
the  time  past  was  eqiuü  to  four- fifths  of  the  time  to  come  : 

uired  the  time  past  Jtu.  54  years. 

tf.  It  is  required  to  divide  the  number  48  into  two  such 
parts,  that  the  one  part  may  be  three  times  as  much  above 
10,  as  the  other  wanu  of  5M).  Ans.  S2  and  1& 

la.  One  rents  S5  acres  of  land  at  7  pounds  18  shillings 

K  annum  ;  thb  land  consisting  of  two  torts,  he  rents  the 
er  sort  at  8  shillings  per  acre,  and  the  worse  at  5  :  ns 
quired  the  number  of  acres  of  tlie  lM*tter  sort. 

Ans.  9  o(  tlie  iK-tter. 
14.  A  ocrtain  cbtem,  which  wouU  be  tilled  in  lit  minutes 


real 


CHAP.  III.  OF  ALGKBHA.  S05 

by  two  ppes  running  into  it,  would  be  611ed  in  20  minutes 
by  mie  alone.  Required  in  what  üme  it  would  be  filled  by 
the  other  alone.  Jns.  30  minutes. 

15.  Required  two  numbers,  whose  sum  may  be  Sj  and 

their  proportion  as  a  to  &  Jns,  --j-,,and  ""TTl* 

16.  A  privateer,  running  at  the  rate  of  10  miles  an  hour, 
discovers  a  ship  18  miles  off  making  way  at  the  rate  of  8 
mUes  an  hour:  it  is  demanded  how  many  miles  the  ship 
can  run  before  she  will  be  overtaken  ?  Ans.  72. 

IT.  A  gentleman  distributing  money  among  some  poor 
people,  found  that  he  wanted  10s.  to  he  able  to  give  5s.  to 
each  ;  therefore  he  gives  4a.  only,  and  finds  that  lie  has  5s. 
left  :  required  the  number  of  shillings  and  of  poor  people. 

Ans,  15  poor,  and  65  shillings. 

18.  There  are  two  numbers  whose  sum  is  the  6th  part  of 
their  product,  and  the  greater  is  to  the  less  as  S  to  2.  Re- 
quirea  those  numbers.  AfM.  15  and  10. 

N.  B.  This  question  may  be  solved  by  means  of  one  un- 
known letter. 

19.  To  find  three  numbers,  so  that  the  first,  with  half  the 
other  two,  the  second  with  one-third  of  the  other  two^  tnd 
the  third  with  one  fourth  of  the  other  two,,  may  be  equal  to 
34.  ^779.  SCC  2S,  and  la 

20.  To  find  a  numlier  oonâsting  of  three  places,  whose 
dimts  are  in  arithmetical  progression  :  if  this  number  be  di* 
vided  by  the  sum  of  its  digits,  the  quotients  will  be  48  ;  and 
if  from  the  number  198  be  subtracted,  the  digits  will  be  in- 
verted. Am.  432. 

21.  To  find  three  numbers,  so  that  i  the  first,  •{.  of  the 
second,  and  ^  of  the  tliird,  shall  be  e^ual  to  62  :  j.  of  the 
first,  ^  of  the  second,  and  -f  of  the  third,  equal  to  47  ;  and 
'  of  the  first,  -f  of  the  second,  and  ^  of  thé  third,  equal  to 
S8.  Ans.  24,  60, 120. 

£2.  If  A  and  B,  together,  can  perform  a  pece  of  work  in 
8  days  ;  A  and  C  together  in  9  days  ;  and  B  and  O  in  10 
days  ;  how  many  days  will  it  take  each  person,  alone,  to  per- 
form the  same  work  ?  Ans.  14^,  1714)  2^^* 

23.  What  is  that  fraction  which  will  become  equal  to  ^  if 
an  unit  be  added  to  the  numerator  ;  but  on  the  contrary,  if 
an  unit  be  added  to  the  danominator,  it  will  be  equal  to  ^? 

Ans.  ^\. 

24.  The  dimensions  of  a  certain  rectangular  floor  are 
such,  that  if  it  liad  been  2  feet  broader,  and  3  feet  longer,  it 
would  have  been  64  square  feet  larger  ;  but  if  it  had  been  8 


SLIMSirrii  tier«  rr. 

fiMt  broader  and  S  feet  longer,  it  «ouU  then  haTe  been  6B 
iquare  feci  larger:  required  the  length  and  breadth  of  the 
floor.  Ana.  I..ength  14  tcet,  and  breadth  10  feet. 

S5.  A  hare  is  50  leaps  before  a  greyhound,  awl  takes 
4  leaps  to  the  gnwhound's  8  ;  but  two  of  the  greyhound^s 
leaps  arc  as  much  as  three  of  the  harems  :  how  many  leaps 
must  the  greyhound  take  to  catch  the  hare?  Ans.  SCO. 


CHAP.  IV. 


Of  the  Besolution  ^two  or  mare  Eqnatkms  of  the  First 

Degree. 

005.  It  frsQuently  happens  that  we  are  obliged  lo  intio* 
doe»  into  «I^Snue  <4lcul2^  two  or  mo»  ui2Cio«n  qi». 
lilie%  represented  by  the  letters  Jt^v^  »:  and  if  the  question 
is  determinate,  we  are  brought  to  the  same  number  of  cqii»> 
ikiDs  as  there  are  unknown  quantities  ;  from  whidi  it  is  tnen 
Mquirsd  to  deduce  those  quantities.  As  we  consider,  at 
latssnli  those  ec|uations  only,  which  contain  no  powers  cüf  an 
aaluMMrn  quantity  higher  than  the  first,  and  no  products  of 
two  or  more  unknown  quantities,  it  is  evident  that  all  those 
equations  hare  the  form 

OS  -h  6y  +  rx  =  d. 

006.  Beginning  therefore  with  two  equations,  we  dioll 
endeavour  to  find  from  them  the  value  of  x  and  ^  :  and,  in 
order  that  we  may  consider  this  case  in  a  general  manner,  let 
the  two  equations  be, 

in  which,  a,  i^  r,  andy^  ^,  A,  are  known  numliers.  It  is 
required,  therefore,  to  obtain,  from  these  two  equations.  Um* 
two  imknown  quantities  m  and  y. 

007.  llie  most  natural  methcxl  of  proceeding  will  roadilv 
prssent  itself  to  the  mind  ;  which  is  to  detennine,  from  both 
eqnatioos,  the  value  of  one  of  the  unknown  quantities  as  for 
exaasple  jr,  and  to  consider  the  equality  of  those  two  values; 
for  then  we  shall  have  an  equation,  in  which  the  unknown 
quantity  V  will  lie  found  by  itself,  and  nuiy  l)e  di^*miincd 
by  the  niics  already  given.  Then,  knowing y»  me  shall  ha%'e 
only  to  substitute  iu  value  in  one  of  the  qiuintities  that 


CHAP.  PK 


OF  ALGSBEA.  SOT 


608.  Aoooffding  to  tins  riile,  we  obtain  from  the  first 
equatioa,  x  =  — ^,  and  from  the  second,  x  =  — -p —  : 

then  putting  these  values  equal  to  each  other,  we  have  tlus 
new  equation  : 

ûh'—agy 
multiplying  by  a,  tlie  product  is  c  —  fey  =  ^^  ;  and 

then  byyj  the  product  is  fc-iftysi  ah -^agy  ;  adding  âgy,  we 
have^-  — yéy  +  «^y  =  ^A  ;  subtractingj^,  gives  — j/<6y+ 
agy  =  oA  — ^;  or (ag  -  bf)!f  =  ah  -yj;  hstly, divimng 

_^  ah—Jb 

In  order  now  to  substitute  this  value  of  y  in  one  of  the 
two  values  which  we  have  found  of  x,  as  in  the  first,  where 

T  = ^,  we  shall  first  have 

a 

abh—bcf      ,  ^  abh  —  btf 

•^  by  r=z  '^ 7^;  whence  c  —  to  =  c  —  — — -TÎTf 

acg--bcf—abh-\-bcf     acg-k-M^         ,  ,.  ...      , 
=  '^ TT —    =     *l     w.  ;  apd  dividing  by  «, 

C'-by     cg—bh 

""      a     ""««•— §^* 

609.  Question  1 .  To  illustrate  this  method  liy  exani|de8, 
let  it  be  proposed  to  find  two  numbers,  whose  sum  may  be 
15,  and  difference  7. 

Let  us  call  the  greater  number  or,  and  the  less^  :  then  we 
shall  have 

X  +  y  =  16,  and  ar  —  y  =i  7. 

The  first  equation  gives 

«  =  15  —  jy 
and  the  second,  «=57+^; 

whence  results  this  equation,  15  -*  y  =  7  +  y-  So  that 
15  =  7  +  %9  ^y  ^  ^  and  y  =  4;  by  which  means  we 
find  X  =  11. 

So  that  the  less  number  is  4,  and  the  greater  is  11. 

610.  Question  2.    We  may  also  generalise  the  preualiiy 


t06  XLEMXIITS  UCT.  Vf. 

qucstk»,  by  requiring  Iwo  mimbort»  wliote  flum  maj  be  tf , 
and  the  difference  6. 

Let  the  greater  of  the  two  numbeni  be  expreMed  bj  j^  nd 
the  lets  by  y  ;  we  shall  then  have  x  -|-y  ss  o,  and  x^y^b. 

Here  the  first  équation  gives  x  =  a  —  ^,  and  the  seeond 

«  »  *  +  y . 

Therefore, a  —  yss6+y;  ii=:6  +  l^;  2y  =  a— >6; 

htttljr,  tf  s  ^'ô"*  <um1,  consequently 9 

TThuih  we  find  the  greater  number,  or  j*,  is  --T-t  and 

the  less,  or  y,  is  -^  ;  or,  which  comes  to  the  same,  x  s 

ta  4  |i,  and  jf  =:  ^a  -*  ^i.  Hence  we  derive  the  following 
Uicoran  :  When  the  sum  of  any  two  numbers  b  a,  and  their 
dBSercnce  b  ft,  the  greater  of  the  two  numbers  wiU  be  equal 
to  half  the  sum  oAm  half  the  difference;  and  the  less  oT  the 
two  numbers  wiU  be  equal  to  half  the  sum  mimuê  half  the 
difference« 

611.  We  may  resolve  the  same  question  in  the  following 
manner: 

Since  the  two  equations  are, 

X  4-  jf  s=  a,  and 
X  —y  =  6; 

if  we  add  the  one  to  the  other,  we  have  Sx  =  a  -|-  &. 

Therefore  x  =  —ö"- 

I^jwtly,  subtracting  the  same  equations  from  each  other, 
we  have  äSy  =  a  —  6  ;  and  therefore 

»  =  ir- 

612.  QufUiam  3.  A  mule  and  an  a&s  were  carrying 
burdens  amounting  to  se%'eral  hundred  weiglit  The'  a»?« 
complained  of  his  and  said  to  the  mule,  I  need  only  one 
hundred  weight  of  ymir  load,  to  make  mine  twice  as  heavy 
as  yours;  to  which  the  mule  answered.  But  if  you  give 
me  a  hundred  weitfiit  of  vour»,  I  »hall  be  loaded  three  times 
as  much  you  will  oc.  How  oumy  hundred  weight  did  eai*li 
carry? 


CRAP.  It.  OF  ALCEBRÀk  309 

Suppose  the  mulets  load  to  be  or  hundred  weight,  and  that 
of  the  ass  to  be  ^  hundred  weight  If  the  mule  ^ves  one 
hundred  wdght  to  the  ass,  the  one  will  havey  +  1,  and  there 
will  remain  for  the  other  x  —  1  ;  and  since,  in  this  caise^ 
the  ass  is  loaded  twice  as  much  as  the  mule,  we  have  y  -|- 
1  =  Ar  -  2. 

Farther,  if  the  ass  gives  a  hundred  weight  to  the  mule, 
the  latter  has  x  -|-  1,  and  the  ass  retains  y  —  1  ;  but  the 
burden  of  the  former  being  now  three  times  that  of  the 
latter,  we  have  or  -|-  1  =  3y  —  8, 

Consequently  our  two  equations  will  be, 

y  +  1  =  ar  —  2,  and  ar  +  1  =  3y  -  8. 
From  the  first,  x  =  ^^-5—,  and  the  second  gives  jt  =:  8y — 

4;  whence  we  have  the  new  equation ^^-^  =s  %— 4,  whidi 

gives  y  =  ^,  :  this  also  determines  the  value  of  Xy  whidi 
becomes  9\, 

The  mule  therefore  carried  9\  hundred  wdght,  and  the 
ass  %\  hundred  weight. 

613.  When  there  are  three  unknown  number^,  and  as 
many  equations  ;  as,  for  example, 

i:  +  y  -  ar  =  8, 

•î^  +  ^— y  =  9, 

y  +  Ä— x  =  10; 

we  begin,  as  before,  by  deducing  a  value  of  x  from  each, 
and  have,  from  the 

1st  X  =  8  +  «  —  y; 

2d  j:  =  9+y  ~  ^' 
3d  ^  =s  y  4-  2  —  10. 

Comparing  the  first  of  these  values  with  the  second, 
and  after  that  with  the  third,  we  have  the  following 
equations  : 

8  +  «  -y  =  9+y  —  z, 

ö  +  ^"~y  =  y  +  *""  ^^• 

Now,  the  first  gives  Sz  —  2j/  =  1,  and,  by  the  second, 
2y  =  18,  or  y  =  9  ;  if  therefore  we  substitute  this  value  rf 
2)  in  ^z  —  2y  =  1,  we  have  2::  —  18  =  1,  or  %z  =  19,  so 
that  s  =  9i  ;  it  remains,  therefore,  only  to  determine  x, 
which  is  easily  found  =  %\> 

Here  it  happens,  that  the  letter  z  vanishes  in  the  last 
equation,  and  that  the  value  of  y  is  found  immediately; 
but  if  this  had  not  been  the  case,  we  should  have  had 

p 


no  iLsmiiTfl  tier«  t^. 

two  eqoitkiiit  beCWMn  s  and  y,  to  be  retohred  by  the  |M>- 
oediitf  rule. 

614.  Suppose  we  had  found  the  three  foUowing  eqiMH 

tioos: 

5x  -  2y  +  3*  =  46, 
%  4-&r  -    x  =  6a. 

If  we  deduce  from  each  the  value  of  j*,  we  shall  bare 
iWxn  the 

5         ' 

3d  X  =  3y  +  5s  -  62. 

Compartog  these  three  values  together,  and  first  the  third 
with  the  first, 

we  have  8y  +  &  -  62  =       ""  g -; 

multipl/uig  bv  3,  gives Sjy  +  l&r  -  186  =  25  -  6y  4>  4a; 
to  that  Qy  4-  las  =»  211  -  5y  +  4s, 
and  14y -hlljx  =  211. 

Gmiparing  also  the  third  with  the  second, 

we  have  3y  ^-  5^  —  62  =  — ^^-y^— , 

or  46  +  ^  -  3z  =  15y  +  253  -  310, 

which,  when  reduced,  becomes  356  =  13y  -f  ^^* 

We  shall  now  deduce,  from  these  two  new  e<|uationis  the 
value  of  y  : 

Ist  14y  +  llz  rs  211  ;  or  14y  =  211  -  Uz, 

211-lU 
andj/  = Yi — • 

2d  1.%  +  2Hs  =  fK6;  or  13j^  =  3:^6  -  28r, 

356 -28r 
•nd^y  =  -^.^. 

These  two  values  form  tlie  new  equation 

211-11;:      356-282      . 

— Y^ —  = 7^ —  »  whence, 

2743  -  143«  =  W84  -  3922,  or  2492  =  2241,  and  a  =  9. 
This  value  being  substituted  in  one  of  the  two  equations 
of  $jf  and  2,  we  nod  v  a  8;  and,  lastly«  a  similar  sub- 
üitutioQ  in  one  of  the  three  values  of  x,  will  give  jr  s  7. 


CHAP.  IV.  OF   ALORBftA.  Sil 

615.  If  there  were  more  than  three  unknowii  quantities  to 
determine,  and  as  many  equations  to  resolve,  we  should  mo- 
ceed  in  the  same  manner;  but  the  calculations  would  onen 
prove  very  tedious. 

It  is  proper,  therefore,  to  remark,  that,  in  each  particulate 
case,  means  may  always  be  disooveied  of  jgreatly  facilitating 
the  solution;  which  consist  in  introducing  into  the  c£ 
culaUon,  beside  the  principal  unknown  quantities,  a  new 
unknown  quantity  arbitrarily  assumed,  such  as,  for  example, 
the  sum  of  all  the  rest  ;  and  when  a  person  is  a  little  ac- 
customed to  such  calculations,  he  easuy  perceives  what  is 
most  proper  to  be  done*.  The  following  examples  may 
serve  to  facilitate  the  application  of  these  artifices. 

616.  Qfiestion  4.  Tnree  persons,  a,  b,  and  c,  play  to- 
gether ;  and,  in  the  first  game,  ▲  loses  to  each  of  the  other 
two,  as  much  money  as  each  of  them  has.  In  the  next 
game,  b  loses  to  each  of  the  other  two,  as  much  money  as 
they  then  had.  Lastly,  in  the  third  game,  a  and  b  gain 
each,  from  c,  as  much  money  as  they  had  before.  On 
leaving  off,  they  find  that  each  has  an  equal  sum,  namdy» 
24t  gumeas.  Kequired,  with  how  much  money  each  sat 
down  to  play  ? 

Suppose  that  the  stake  of  the  first  person  was  a,  that  of 
the  second  ^,  and  that  of  the  third  z  :  also,  let  us  make  the 
sum  of  all  the  stakes,  or  or  +  y  -f-  z,  =  s*  Now,  a  losing  in 
the  first  game  as  much  money  as  the  other  two  have,  he 
loses  ^  —  X  (for  he  himself  having  had  x,  the  two  others 
must  have  had  s  —  x);  therefore  there  will  remûn  to  him 
2^  —  ^  ;  also  b  will  have  2y,  and  c  will  have  22. 

So  that,  after  the  first  game,  each  will  have  as  follows  : 
A  =  2a:  —  Ä,  B  =  2y,  and  c  =  A». 

In  the  second  game,  b,  who  has  now  Sy,  loses  as  much 
money  as  the  other  two  have,  that  is  to  say,  «  —  2y  ;  so  that 
he  has  left  4y  —  *.  With  regard  to  the  other  two,  they 
will  each  have  double  what  they  had;  so  that  after  the 
second  game,  the  three  persons  have  as  follows  :  A  =  4r  — ^ 
2j,  B  =  ^  —  *,  and  c  =  4«. 

In  the  third  game,  c,  who  has  now  4sZf  is  the  loser  ;  he 
loses  to  A,  4jr  —  âlf,  and  to  b,  ^  —  ^  ;  consequently,  after 
this  game,  they  will  have  : 

*  M .  Cramer  has  given,  at  the  end  of  his  Introduction  to  the 
^Analysis  of  Curve  Lines,  a  very  excellent  rule  for  determining 
immediately,  and  without  the  necessity  of  passing  through  the 
ordinary  operations,  the  value  of  the  unknown  quantities  of  such 
equations,  to  any  number.    F.  T. 


SIS  SLBMXKTi  flKCT.  IT. 

Ass&r  —  4t,  B  =  8y^2#,  and  c  =  8s  —  #. 

Now,  each  having  at  the  end  of  this  game  S4  gaineaa,  we 
have  three  equations,  the  first  of  which  immediatelj  gives  j-, 
the  second  V,  and  the  third  z  ;  farther,  s  is  known  to  be  72, 
ânce  the  tnrce  penons  have  in  all  7S  guineas  at  the  end  of 
the  last  game  ;  but  it  is  not  necessary  to  attend  to  this  at 
first  ;  nnoc  we  have, 

1st  ar  -  4f  =  24,  or  Rr  =  24  +  4t,  or  X  =  S  +  {*; 
«d  8y  —  2#  =  24,  or  8y  =  24  +  2#,  or  j^  =  S  +  i#; 
8d  as  —    #  =  24i  or  8s  =  24  +    *,  or  2  =  8  +  ;#; 

and  adding  these  three  values,  we  have 

So  that,  nncex  +  jr  +  r  =  *,  we  have  *  =  9  +  fi ;  and, 
consequendy,  f#  =  9,  and  jt  =  72. 

If  we  now  substitute  this  value  of  s  in  the  expressions 
which  we  have  found  for  x,^,  and  r,  we  shall  nnd  that, 
before  they  began  to  play,  a  had  39  guineas,  a  21,  and 
c  12. 

Th'is  solution  shews,  that,  by  means  of  an  expression  for 
the  sum  of  tlie  three  unknown  quantities,  we  may  overcome 
the  difiicullies  which  occur  in  the  ordinary  method. 

617.  Although  the  preceding  question  appears  difficult  at 
first,  it  may  be  resolveil  even  without  algebra,  by  proceeding 
mversely.  For  since  the  players,  when  they  Ifft  ofi^,  hod 
each  24  guinca5,  and,  in  tlie  thini  game,  a  an<i  b  doublt*d 
their  money,  the}*  must  have  had  before  that  last  game,  as 
follows  : 

A  =  12,  B  =  12,  and  c  =  48. 

In  the  second  game,  a  and  r  doublcil  tlicir  money  ;  j%> 
that  lx.*tbre  that  game  they  had  ; 

A  =  6,  B  =:  42,  and  <-  =:  24. 

Lastly,  in  the  first  game,  a  and  r  gained  each  as  much 
■loney  as  they  began  with  ;  sci  that  at  first  the  tlirt*e  (xrrsons 
had: 

A  =  39,  B  =  21,  r  =  12. 

The  same  result  as  we  obtained  by  the  former  mltition. 

61 H.  Qursiion  5.  Two  persons  owe  amjointly  29  pis- 
tulcü  ;  tlu*v  have  l)i>th  money,  but  neither  of  them  enough 
to  enable  him,  singly,  to  disiluirge  thin  aimmon  debt  :  the 
first  debtor  says  tlieretbre  to  the  second,  If  you  give  me  f  of 
your  money,  I  can  immediately  my  tlu*  debt  ;  and  tlie 
seound  answem,  that  he  also  could  dinchorge  the  di4it,  if  the 
other  would  give  him  *  of  his  money.  Ke<|uirt*<i,  luiw  many 
pistoles  each  bed  ^ 


CHAP.  IV.  OV  ALOEBilA.  X\ß 

Suppose  that  thé  ârst  has  x  pbtoles,  and  that  the  second 
has  ^pistoles. 

Then  we  shall  first  have,  a:-\-^y  zi99; 

and  alsoi  y  -|-  |a:  =:  29. 
The  first  equation  gives  a?  =  29  —  ^^ 

116—^ 


and  the  second  r  = 


3 


so  that  29  —  xy  =  — T"^- 

From  which  equation,  we  obtain^  =  14|  ; 

Theirefore  x  =  19f 

Hence  the  first  person  had  I97  pistoles,  and  the  second 
had  14^^  jpistoles. 

619.  Qitestion  6.  Three  brothers  bought  a  vineyard  for 
a  hundred  guineas.  The  youngest  says,  that  he  could  pay 
for  it  alone,  if  the  second  gave  him  half  the  money  which  he 
had  ;  the  second  says,  that  if  the  eldest  would  ^ve  him  only 
the  third  of  his  money,  he  could  pay  for  the  vineyard  singly  ; 
lastly,  the  eldest  asks  only  a  fourth  part  of  the  money  of 
the  youngest,  to  pay  for  the  vineyard  himself.  How  much 
money  had  each  ? 

Suppose  the  first  had  x  guineas  ;  the  second,  y  j?uineas  ; 
the  third,  z  guineas;  we  shall  then  have  the  three  following 
equations: 

;r  +  4y  =  100; 

z  +  ix=:  100; 
two  of  which  only  give  the  value  of  x,  namely, 

1st  X  =  100  —  Ij^, 
3d  ^  =  400  —  4z. 

So  that  we  have  the  equation, 

100  —  4j^  =  400  —  4z,  or  éz  -  iy  =  300,  which  must 
be  combined  with  the  seèond,  in  order  to  determine  y  and 
z.  Now,  the  second  equation  was,  y  -{•  ^z  =1  100  :  we 
therefore  deduce  from  it  ^  =  100  —  yZ  ;  and  the  equation 
found  last  being  4^  —  -^y  ==  300,  we  have  y  z=  8z  —  600. 
The  final  equation,  therefore,  becomes 

100  —  42  =  8z  —  600;  so  that  8}«  =  700,  or  yz  = 
700,  and  z  =  84.     Consequentiy, 

J/  =  100  -  28  =  72,  and  X  =  64. 

The  youngest  therefore  had  64  ^ineas,  the  second  had  7S 
guineas,  and  the  eldest  had  84  guineas. 


fl4  mUÊmmwr*  ncr.  iv. 

M).  Ai,  in  thb  example  each  ecjoatioii  cnwliiiit  only  two 
imkliown  quanliüct,  wc  may  obtain  the  solution  required  in 
an  entier  way. 

The  fint  equation  jKtves  y  =  SOO  —  2r,  to  that  y  is  de- 
tarmined  by  x  ;  and  if  we  substitute  this  value  in  the  second 
equation,  we  have 

200-Sr  +  |i«  100;  therefore 44  =:  S;r  -  100, 

and  z  =:  6lr  -  SOO. 

So  that  X  is  also  determined  by  x;  and  if  we  introduce 
this  value  into  the  third  equation,  we  obuûn  6r  »  900  + 
jjr  :=  100,  in  which  x  stands  alone,  and  which,  when  reduced 
to  S&r  —  1600  =  0,  gives  jr  s  64.     Consequently, 

^a900-lS8r=7S,andx»884-SOO  =  8i. 

6S1.  We  may  fiJlow  the  same  method,  when  we  have  a 
greater  nnmber  of  equationi.  Suppose,  for  example,  that 
TC  have  in  general  ; 

a  o 

tm,  dcftmying  the  fractions,  these  equations  become, 

^  ey  +  z  :=^  cn^  ^  dz  +  u  zz  dn. 

Here,  the  first  ^ves  immediately  x  =:  aft  ^  at/,  and,  this 
value  being  substituted  in  the  second,  we  have  aim  -  abu 
-^y  zz  bn;  so  that  ^  =  frit  -  abn  -|-  abu  ;  and  the  hub- 
stitution  of  this  %'alue,  in  the  third  vcjuationy  gives  ben  — 
oben  -|-  abcu  -|-  z  =  m  ;  therefore 

X  =  m  —  ben  +  abcn  —  abcu, 

Substituting  this  in  the  fourth  equation,  we  liave 

cdfi  —  6rdii  -{-  abcdn  —  abcdu  +  11=:  dn. 

So  that  dn  —  edn  +  bcdn  -»  abcdn  =:  abcdu  —  u, 

or  (abed  —  \).u  ^  abedn  —  bedn  +  cdn  <-  dn  ;  whence  we 
have 

abedn  ^-bcdnA-edn  ^dn      n,  (abed  —  bed  +  rr/-  d) 
oAni— 1  flAc«/— 1 

And,  cunsoquently,  by  substituting  this  value  of  u  in  the 
^uation,  x  =  on  —  a«,  we  have 

^  aArrfu— orjlw+gc/fi  —  aa  ^  fi .  (nAcr/— ar«/-f-ai/— <i) 


CHAP*  XT.  OF  MiGEBBA.  S15 

•^  ""  abcd—1  ""  oicd— 1 


u  = 


aicd— 1  a&cd— 1 

oÄcdn  — ôcd»  +  cdn  — d»     n \  {abcd  —  bcd+cd—d) 


abcd—l  abcd—l 

622.  Question  7.  A  captain  has  three  companies^  one  oi 
Swiss,  another  of  Swabians,  and  a  third  of  Saxons.  He 
wishes  to  storm  with  part  of  these  troops,  and  he  promises  a 
reward  of  901  crowns,  on  the  following  condition;  namely, 
that  each  soldier  of  the  company,  which  assaults,  shall  re- 
ceive 1  crown,  and  that  the  rest  of  the  money  shall  be  equally 
distributed  among  the  two  other  companies.  Nov;-,  it  is 
found,  that  if  the  Swiss  make  the  assault,  each  soldier  of  the 
other  companies  will  rec^ve  half-a-crown  ;  that,  if  the  Swa- 
bians  assault,  each  of  the  others  will  receive  •{-  of  a  crown  ; 
and,  lastly,  if  the  Saxons  make  the  assault,  each  of  the  others 
will  receive  ^  of  a  crown.  Required  tlie  number  of  men  in 
each  company  ? 

Let  us  suppose  the  number  of  Swiss  to  be  x,  that  of 
Swabians  y,  and  that  of  Saxons  z.  And  let  us  also  make 
X  -{^y  -\-  z  =  s,  because  it  is  easy  to  see,  that,  by  this,  we 
abridge  the  calculation  con^derably.  If,  therefore,  the  Swiss 
make  the  assault,  their  number  lieing  x,  thtft  of  the  other 
will  be  5  —  ^  :  now,  the  former  receive  1  crown,  and  the 
latter  half-a-crown  ;  so  that  we  shall  have, 

a:  +  4^  -  ^JT  =  901. 

In  the  same  manner,  if  the  Swabians  make  the  assault, 
we  have 

And  lastly,  if  the  Saxons  make  the  assault,  we  have, 

z  +  1^  —  ^2  =  901. 

Each  of  these  three  equations  will  enable  us  to  determine 
one  of  the  unknown  quantities,  x,  y,  and  z  ; 

For  the  first  gives  x  =  1802  —  *, 
the  second  %  =  2708  —  *, 
the  third      Sz  =  8604  —  s. 

And  if  we  now  take  the  values  of  6r,  Gy,  and  6ar,  and 
write  those  values  one  above  the  other,  we  shall  have 

6^  =  10812  -  6s, 
Gy=    8109-8*, 
6z  =    7208  -  2s, 
and,  by  addition,  6»  =  26129  -  11*;  w  17*  =  26129; 


S16  MlMMMMn  MKCT.  IT 

to  thai  $  8s  1587;  wiiicb  it  the  whole  mimber  of  toldien» 
Bj  thit  meent  we  fiod, 

x=:180«-.  1637  =  865; 
2y  =  SrrOS  -  1537  =  1166,  or  j<  =  583; 
Sx  =  3604  -  1537  =  2061,  or  s  =  689. 

The  company  of  Swist  therefore  bat  265  men  ;  that  of 
583  ;  and  that  of  Saxons  680. 


CHAP.  V. 


Of  the  Retoiution  ^  Pure  Quadratic  Equationt. 

623.  An  equation  it  said  to  be  of  the  second  degree,  when 
it  contains  the  square,  or  the  second  power,  of  the  unknown 
quantity,  without  any  of  its  higher  powers  ;  and  an  equa- 
tion, containing  likewise  the  third  power  of  the  unknown 
quantity,  belongs  to  cubic  equations,  and  its  resolution  ns 
qutrct  particular  rules. 

.  6B4.  There  are,  therefore,  only  three  kinds  of  terms  in 
an  equation  of  the  second  degree  : 

1.  The  terms  in  which  the   unknown  quantity  is   not 
found  at  all,  or  which  is  composed  only  of  known  numbers. 

S.  The  terms  in  which  we  find  only  tlie  first  |x>wer  of  the 
unknown  quantity. 

3.  The  terms  which  contain  tlic  square,  or  llie  second 
power,  of  tlie  unknown  quantity. 

So  that  X  representing  an  unknown  quantity,  and  the 
letters  a.  b,  c,  d,  2icc.  the  known  i|uantitii*s  the  terms  oï 
the  first  kind  will  liave  the  Aimi  a,  the  terms  of  the  second 
kind  will  luive  the  fonn  bs,  and  the  terms  of  the  tliird  kind 
will  have  the  form  cjr, 

6525.  We  liave  already  seen,  how  two  or  more  terms  of 
the  same  kind  may  Ik*  united  together,  and  amsidcreil  as  a 
tingle*  term. 

For  example,  we  may  con^der  tht*  formula 
Äi*  —  bx*  4  rx*  as  a  Mngle  ten«,  representing  it  thus, 
(a  —  Ä  -f-  r)x*  ;  since,    in    fact,    (a  --  b  t  c)   is   a    know  n 
quantity. 

AikI  al«o,  wlien  Mich  terms  are  found  on  ImmIi  üidi*;«  of  the 
lign  i=- ,  wc  have  teen  how  they  may  be  brought  to  one  »ide« 


CHAP.  V*  OF  ALGEBRA.  917 

and  then  reduced  to  a  single  term.  Let  us  take,  for  ex« 
ample,  the  equation, 

2x«  -  ar  +  4  =  5-r«  -  &r  +  11  ; 

we  first  subtract  2x%  and  there  remains 

-  3j:  +  4  =  ar«  —  ar  4- 11; 

dien  adding  8x,  we  obtain, 

5:r  +  4  =  3jr*  +  11  ; 

lastly,  subtracting  11,  there  remains  Sjt*  =  6j7  -—  7- 

626.  We  may  also  bring  all  the  terms  to  one  Ade  of  thé 
sign  =,  so  as  to  leave  zero,  or  0,  on  the  other;  but  it  must 
be  remembered,  that  when  terms  are  transposed  from  one 
side  to  the  other,  their  signs  must  be  changed. 

Thus,  the  above  equation  will  assume  this  form,  Sx*  — 
ÄF  +  7  =  0  ;  and,  for  this  reason  also,  the  following  general 
formula  represents  all  equations  of  the  second  degree  ; 

ajT*  ±  bx  ±  c  =  0; 

in  which  the  sign  +,  is  read  plus  or  minus,  and  indicate^, 
that  such  terms  as  it  stands  before  may  be  sometimes 
positive,  and  sometimes  negative. 

627.  Whatever  therefore  be  the  original  form  of  a  qua- 
dratic equation,  it  may  always  be  reduced  to  this  formula  of 
three  terms.     If  we  have,  for  example,  the  equation 

ax-^b      €x\f 
cx-\-d^  gx-\-h 

we  may,  first,  destroy  the  fractions  ;  multiplying,,  for  this 
purpose,  by  ex  +  d,  which  gives 

CÛJV    "4"  CiX  -X-  ßUX  ^^  T^ 

ax  -\-  b  = — r-T ^5  then  by  gx  4-  Ä,  we  have  • 

ogA^  +  bgx  +  ahx  -[-  ÄÄ  =  ceaf^  +  tfx  +  edx  -|-^, 

which  is  an  equation  of  the  second  decree,  redudble  to 
the  three  following  terms,  which  we  shall  transpose  by  ar- 
ranging them  in  the  usual  manner  : 

-'!}'•+  |i|}' + { 1^ } = »• 

We  may  exhibit  this  equation  also  in  the  following  form, 
which  is  still  more  clear  : 

{ag  —  cé)x''  +  (bg  +  ah  —  cf-^  ed)x  +  bh  -^fd  =  0. 

6^.  Equations  of  the  second  degree,  in  which  all  the 
three  kinds  of  terms  are  found,  are  called  complete,  and  the 
resolution  of  them  is  attended  with  greater  oifficulties;  for 


I 


£18  BLEMBMTt  fllCT.  tV. 

which  retton  we  diail  fini  ooonder  thott»  m  whidi  one  «f 
the  terms  U  wanting. 

Now,  if  the  tenn  j^  were  not  found  in  the  equation,  it 
would  not  be  a  quadratic,  but  would  belong  to  thoae  of 
which  we  have  already  treated  ;  and  if  the  term,  which  con» 
tains  only  known  numbers,  were  wanting,  the  equation 
would  have  this  form,  at*  4:  &r  s  0,  which  bemg  divisUde 
by  jr,  may  be  reduced  to  ojt  ±  b  ^  0^  which  is  likewise  a 
«inde  equation,  and  bekmjn  not  to  the  present  class. 

esta.  Eut  when  the  micßle  term,  which  contains  the  first 
power  of  X,  is  wanting,  the  equation  assumes  this  form, 
Af*  ^c=sO,  orax*=  4^c;  as  the  sign  of  o  may  be  either 
pontive,  or  ncntive. 

We  shall  call  such  an  equation  a  pure  equation  of  the  second 
degree,  and  the  i^csolution  of  it  is  attended  with  no  diflBculty  ; 

e 
for  we  have  only  to  divid^  by  a,  which  gives  x*  =  —  ;  and 

tddng  the  square  root  of  both  sides,  \re  find  x  =  v^ —  ;  by 

which  means  the  equation  is  resolved. 

690.  But  there  arc  three  cases  to  be  considered  here.    In 

c 
the  first,  when  --  is  a  square  number  (of  which  we  can  there- 

fixe  really  assign  tlie  root)  we  obtain  for  the  value  of  x  a 
rational  number,  which  maybe  either  integral,  or  fractional. 
For  example,  the  ec|uation  x^  =:  144,  gives  x  =  12.     And 

c  , 
The  second  case  is,  when  —  is  not  a  square,  in  which  case 

we  must  therefore  be  contented  with  the  oign  ^ .  If,  for 
exami>lc,  x*  =  12,  we  have  x  :=:^12,  the  value  of  which 
may  be  determined  by  approximation,  as  we  ha%*e  already 
diewn. 

c 
The  thinl  case  is  that,  in  which  —   iK-comch  a   negative 

number  :  the  value  of  x  in  then  altogether  iniposftible  and 
imaginary  ;  and  tliin  result  nro^e?«  that  the  ((ue^tion,  which 
leans  to  such  an  eqtiaticni,  is  m  it.solf  im|)oftsihle. 

ftJl.  We  ühall  aluo  olwerve,  l)cfore  proceetling  farther, 
that  whenever  it  is  re(|utred  to  extract  the  M)uare  root  of  a 
number,  that  root,  as  we  luive  already  n*niarkcd,  has  alwa\?i 
two  values,  the  one  positive  and  the  other  negative.  Sui>- 
puv,  for  example,  we  have  tlnr  equation  x*  s  499  the  value 


CHAP.  V.  OF  ALGEBRA%  819 

of  X  w3l  be  not  only  -I^T»  but  alao  —  7»  which  is  expressed 
by  X  =  ±  7.  So  that  all  those  questions  admit  of  a  double 
answer  ;  but  it  wUl  be  e^y  perodived  that  in  several  cases, 
as  those  which  rdate  to  a  certûn  number  of  men,  the  ne^ 
gative  value  cannot  exist 

632.  In  such  equations,  also,  as  ox*  =  Ac,  where  the 
known  quantity  c  is  Wanting,  there  may  be  two  values  of  x^ 
though  we  find  only  one  if  we  divide  by  x.  In  the  equation 
^^  =  8x,  for  example,  in  which  it  is  required  to  assign  such 
a  value  of  x^  that  ^  may  become  ecjual  to  8x,  this  is  done  by 
«uppoâng  X  =s  3,  a  value  which  is. found  by  dividing  the 
eauation  by  x  ;  but,  beside  this  value,  there  is  also  anether, 
which  is  equally  satisfactory,  namely,  jf  =  0  ;  for  then 
ûP^  =  0,  and  3<r  =:  0.  Equations  therefore  of  the  second 
degree,  in  general,  admit  of  two  solutions,  whilst  sim^ 
equations  admit  only  of  one. 

We  shall  now  illustrate  what  we  have  said  with  regard  to 
pure  equations  of  the  second  degree  by  some  examples. 

633.  Question  1.  Required  a  number,  the  liait  of  which 
multiplied  by  the  third,  may  produce  24. 

Let  this  number  be  x;  then  by  the  question  -i^,  mul- 
tiplied by  -^y  must  give  24  ;  we  shall  therefore  have  the 
equation  ^'  =  24. 

Multiplying  by  6,  wc  have  x*  =  144  ;  and  the  extraction 
of  the  root  gives  x  .=  ±  12.  We  put  ±  ;  for  if  x  =  +  12, 
we  have  ^x  =  6,  and  ^  =  4s:  now,  the  product  of  these 
two  numbers  is  24  ;  and  if  x  =  — '  12,  we  have  ix  =  —  6, 
and  |x  =  —  4,  the  product  of  which  is  likewise  24. 

634.  Question  2.  Required  a  number  such,  that  being 
increased  by  5,  and  diminished  by  5,  the  product  of  the  sum 
by  the  difference  may  be  96. 

Let  this  number  be  x,  then  x-\-  5,  multiplied  by  x  —  5, 
must  give  96  ;  whence  results  the  equation, 

x«  -  25  =  96. 

Adding  25,  we  have  x^  =  121  ;  and  extracting  the  root, 
we  have  x  =  11.  Thus  x  -[-  5  =  16,  also  x  —  5  =  6;  and, 
lastly,  6  X  16  =  96. 

635.  Question  8.  Required  a  number  such,  that  by 
adding  it  to  10,  and  subtracting  it  from  10,  the  sum,  mul- 
tiplied by  the  difference,  will  give  51. 

Let  X  be  this  number;  then  10 +x,  multiplied  by  10— x, 
must  make  51,  so  that  100  —  x«  =  51.  Adding  x%  and 
subtracting  51,  we  have  x*  =  49,  the  square  root  of  which 
gives  a:  =  1, 

636.  Question  4.  Three  persons,  who  had  been  playing, 
leave  off;  the  first,  with  as  many  times  7  crowns,  as  the 
second  has  three  crowns;  and  tnc  second,  with  as  many 


XL  tu  ftjrr»  iscT.  nr. 

ûmn  17  aownty  at  the  thnnd  Im»  5  crownt.  Farther,  if  we 
multiply  the  moncv  of  the  first  by  the  money  of  the  leoood, 
«ad  tne  money  or  the  teoond  by  the  mcmey  of  the  thifd, 
•od,  lastly,  the  money  of  the  third  by  that  of  the  first,  the 
sum  of  these  three  products  will  be  SHSOf.  How  much 
money  has  cadi? 

Suppose  that  the  first  {Jayer  has  x  crowns;  and  since 
he  htt  as  manr  times  7  crowns,  as  the  second  has  S  crowns^ 
WW  know  that  his  money  is  to  that  of  the  second,  in  the  ratio 
or7:8. 

We  shall  therafiore  have  7  :  S  :  :  r  :  jjr,  the  money  of  the 
~  {Jayer. 

Also,  as  the  money  of  the  second  player  is  to  that  of  the 
third  in  the  ratio  of  17  :  5,  we  shall  have  17  :  5  :  :  j^  :  -i^V'» 
Urn  money  of  the  third  |Jayer. 

Multiplying  x,  or  the  money  of  the  first  player,  by  4^,  the 
anney  of  the  second,  we  have  the  product  4^  :  then,  |x,  the 
money  of  the  second,  multiplied  by  the  money  of  the  third, 
or  by  TTr***  t^^^  iVr^  ^  ^^»  lastly,  the  money  of  the  third, 
or  rW^9  multipliea  by  x,  or  the  money  of  the  first,  gives 
•riÇr«.  Now,  the  sum  of  these  three  producu  is  fH  -|- 
jLfjT*4»^!yi*;  and  reducing  these  fractions  to  the  same 
denominator,  we  find  their  sum  Vrr^*  which  must  be  cqiud 
to  the  number  3880^ 

We  have  thei^orc,  f^V  =  3880^ 

80  tliat  Vtt '*  =  11^02,  and  1521x*  being  equal  to 
857»Ö6,  dividing  by  1521,  we  have  x*  =  ^V^iV*;  «nd 
taking  its  root,  we  fincl  x  =  'y^^.  This  fraction  is  reducible 
to  lower  terms,  if  we  divide  by  18;  so  that  x  =  -j.*  s 
79f  ;  and  hence  we  conclude,  tliat  ]jr  =  84,  and  ^*/^=10. 

Tho  iir^i  player  therefore  Iulh  79 f  crowns,  the  second  iubs 
84  crowns,  and  the  third  10  crowns. 

Kirmark.  This  calculation  may  be  i^erfonned  in  an  easier 
manniT  ;  nainelv,  hy  taking  the  factors  of  the  nuiiitK*r>  nhich 
present  themselves,  and  atteiuUng  chiefly  to  the  squares»  of 
those  tai'tor». 

It  if»  evident,  that  J307  =  8  x  ItiU,  and  that  1G9  is  the 
square  of  18;  thi*n,  that  k;58  =:  7  x  119,  and  119  =  7  x 

8x  169 
17:  therefore  i^r—   '  x»  =  3880»    and  if  wc  mulliplv  bv  8, 

17x  40  '  I  .     -     » 

9x  169 
we  have '.^ — 7^**  r:  IHîhf.      I^et  us   resolve    this  nuni- 
17x-iO 

bcr  also  into  its  factors;  and  we  readily  perceive«  that 
the  first  is  4,  that  b  u>  say,  that  114ft;  =  4  x  '2878; 
farther,  2873  i»  divisible  bv  17,  so  that  se878  »  17  x  1G9. 


CHAP.  V.  OF  ALGEBRA.  9Xi 

Consequently,  our  equation  will  assume  the  following  form, 

9x169 

r= — j;rJ^  =  4  X  17  X  169,  which,  dirided  by  169,  is  re- 

17x49  "^ 

-    9 

duced  to  .r= — Tgjr«  =:  4  X  17  ;  multiplying  also  by  17  x  49, 

J.  f   X  TinJ 

and  dividing  by  9,  we  have  «^  =:  x ,  in  which  all 

the  factors  are  squares;  whence   we  have,  without  any 

2x  17  X  7 
further  calculation,  the  root  x  = =  *|.*  =  79f> 

as  before. 

637.  Çiuestion  5.  A  company  of  merchants  appoint  a 
factor  at  Archangel.  Each  of  them  contributes  for  the 
trade,  which  they  nave  in  view,  ten  times  as  many  crowns 
as  there  are  partners  ;  and  the  profit  of  the  factor  is  fixed  at 
twice  as  many  crowns,  per  centy  as  there  are  fVartners.  AlsO|  ' 
if  -p^  part  of  his  total  gain  be  multiplied  by  ^,  it  will  give 
the  number  of  partners.     That  number  is  required. 

Let  it  be  X  ;  and  since,  each  partner  has  contributed  lOx^ 
the  whole  capital  is  Iftr*.  Now,  for  every  hundred  crowns, 
the  factor  gams  ^,  so  that  with  the  capital  of  IOj^  his  prc^t 
will  be  \J^\  The  -y-J^  part  of  his  gain  is  t^ts^'^  multiplying 
by  2|,  or  by  */ ,  we  have  ^.fg^^,  or  ^i^J^^  and  this  must 
be  equal  to  the  number  of  partners,  or  x. 

We  have,  therefore,  the  equation  ^i^JP*  =  Jf,  or  a^  = 
225x;  which  appears,  at  first,  to  be  of  the  third  degree; 
but  as  we  may  divide  by  x,  it  is  reduced  to  the  quaaratic 
X'  n  225  ;  whence  x  =z  15. 

So  that  there  are  fifteen  partners,  and  each  contributed  ISO 
crowns. 


QUESTIONS   FOR   PRACTICE. 

1.  To  find  a  number,  to  which  20  being  added,  and 
from  which  10  being  subtracted,  the  square  of  the  sum, 
added  to  twice  the  square  of  the  remainder,  shall  be  17475. 

Ans.  75. 

2.  What  two  numbers  are  those,  which  are  to  one  an-* 
other  in  the  ratio  of  3  to  5,  and  whose  squares,  added  to- 
gether, make  1666?  Ans.  21  and  35. 

3.  The  sum  2a,  and  the  sum  of  the  squares  2b,  of  two 
numbers  being  given  ;  to  find  the  numbers. 

Ans.  a  —  V(b  —  a")  and  a  +  \^(b  —  a*). 


tlSMBNTt  SICT.  IT« 

4b  To  dmde  tke  miinber  100  into  two  such  pnts,  dwl 
the  sum  of  their  square  roots  may  be  14.     Ans.  o4  and  36. 

&  To  find  three  such  numbers,  that  the  sum  of  the  first 
and  second  multiplied  into  the  third,  may  be  equal  to  6S  ; 
«k1  the  sum  of  the  leound  and  tliird,  multiplied  into  the 
first,  may  be  equal  to  S8  ;  ako,  that  the  sum  of  the  first  and 
third,  multiplied  into  the  second,  may  be  equal  to  55. 

Am.  2,  5, 9* 

6.  What  two  numbers  are  those,  whose  sum  is  to  the 

.mater  as  11  to  7;  the  difference  of  thtnt  squares  being 

ISS?  ^M.  I4and& 


CHAP.  VI. 


Qf  <A^  Resolution  ^Mixt  Equations  of  the  Second  Degnt. 


638.  An  equation  of  the  second  degree  is  said  to  be  mixi^ 
or  complete,  when  three  terms  are  found  in  it,  namely,  that 
which  contains  the  square  of  the  unknown  quantity,  as  ax*  ; 
that,  in  which  the  unknown  quantity  is  found  only  in  the 
first  power,  as  &r  ;  and,  lastly,  the  term  which  is  composed 
of  only  known  quantities.  And  since  we  may  unite  two  or 
more  terms  of  the  same  kind  into  one,  and  brin^  all  the 
terms  to  one  side  of  the  sign  =:,  the  general  form  of  a  mixt 
equation  of  the  second  degree  will  be 

OJ*  ±  kx  ±  c  :zO. 

In  this  duipter,  we  shall  shew  how  the  value  of  x  mav  be 
derived  from  such  equations  :  and  it  will  be  seen,  that  there 
are  two  methods  of  otitaining  it 

639.  An  equation  of  the  kiml  that  we  are  now  considering 
nay  Ix?  reduced,  by  division,  to  such  a  form,  that  the  first 
term  mav  contain  only  tlie  s(|uare,  x%  of  the  unknown  quan* 
tity  X.  \Ve  sluill  leave  the  second  term  on  the  same  side 
with  X,  and  transpose  the  known  term  to  the  other  side  of 
the  sign  =•  By  tliese  means  our  equation  will  assume  the 
Ibrm  of  x*  -f  pr  :=  ^  Ç,  in  which  p  and  q  represent  any 
known  numbers,  positive  or  negative  ;  and  the  whole  is  at 
present  redticed  to  determining  Uie  true  value  of  x.  We  shall 
Dcgin  by  remarking,  that  if  r'  -^  px  were  a  real  sqiuire,  the 
rcaoluticm  wouM  be  attended  with  no  difficulty,  bccauM? 
it  woukl  only  be  rcqtiired  to  take  the  squa/e  root  of  both 


\ 


CHAF.  Vf.  OP    AL01SBRA.  9SX 

640.  But  it  i&  evident  that  x*  -|- px  cannot  be  a  square; 
since  we  have  already  seen,  (Art.  SOT.)  that  if  a  root  con- 
sists of  two  terms,  for  example,  x  ^-  n,  its  square  always 
contains  three  terms,  namely,  twice  the  product  of  the  two 
parts,  beside  the  square  of  each  part  ;  that  is  to  say,  tiie 
square  of  x  -|-  «  is  **  +  Aux  -|-  n*.  Now,  we  have  already 
on  one  side  x^  +  /m?  ;  we  may,  therefore,  consider  x^  as  the 
square  of  the  first  port  of  the  root,  and  in  this  case  px  must 
represent  twice  the  product  of  x,  the  first  part  of  the  root, 
by  the  second  part  :  consequently,  this  second  part  must  be 
ip,  and  in  fact  the  square  of  x  -f.  ^p,  is  found  to  be 

x'^px  +  J^K 

641.  Now,  X*  +  j^x  +  ^p*  being  a  real  square,  ,which  has 
for  its  root  x  +  tjP»  if  we  resume  our  equation  x*  +  jpx  r:  g, 
we  have  only  to  add  ip*  to  both  sides,  which  gives  us 
or*  +  j^x  -j-  ^p*  =  y  +  ip%  the  first  side  being  actually 
a  square,  and  the  other  containing  only  known  quantities. 
If,  therefore,  we  take  the  square  root  of  both  sides,  we 
find  X  -^  \p  :=.  s/(\p^  +  q)  ;  subtracting  \pj  we  obtain 
X  =  —  ip  4" ^(iiP*  +  ?)  »  ^"^>  ^s  every  square  root  may  be 
taken  either  affirmatively  or  Jiegatively,  we  shall  have  fcnr 
X  two  values  expressed  thus  ; 

642.  This  formula  contins  the  rule  by  which  all  qua- 
dratic equations  may  be  resolved  ;  and  it  will  be  proper  to 
commit  it  to  memory,  that  it  may  not  be  necessary,  every 
time,  to  repeat  the  whole  operation  which  we  have  gone 
through.  We  may^ always  arrange  the  equation  in  such  a 
manner,  that  the  pure  square  x^  may  be  found  on  one  side, 
and  the  above  equation  have  the  form  x^  :=^px^q^  where 
we  §pe  immediately  that  a?  =  —  4p  ±  V(^p*  +  y). 

643.  The  general  rule,  therefore,  whicn  we  deduce  fWmi 
that,  in  order  to  resolve  the  equation  x**  =s  —  px  4-  y^  is 
founded  on  this  consideration  ; 

That  the  unknown  quantity  x  is  equal  to  half  the  oo- 
efficient,  or  multiplier  of  a:  on  the  other  side  of  the  equation, 
plus  or  minus  the  square  root  of  the  square  of  this  number, 
and  the  known  quantity  which  fonns  the  third  term  of  the 
equation. 

Thus,  if  we  had  the  equation  x^  =  6x  +  7,  we  should 
immediately  say,  that  x'  =  3±v/(9  +  7)  =  S±4,  whence 
we  have  these  two  values  of  jr,  namely,  x*  =  7,  and  x  ns 
—  1.  In  the  same  manner,  the  equation  x*  =  lOop  —  9, 
would  give  x  =  5±v/(25~9)=5±4,  that  is  to  say, 
the  two  values  of  ^  are  9  and  1. 

644.  This  rule  will  be  still  better  understood,  by  distin- 


toi  Mjuuurrt  nurr.  iv. 

fluiihiiiff  the  following  caaet  :  lu.  When  »  U  an  even  num- 
Ser  ;  Sa,  When  p  is  an  odd  number  ;  ana  Sd,  When  p  is  a 
fractional  number. 

1st,  Let  p  be  an  even  number,  and  the  equation  such, 
that  X*  =  2px  +  q;  we  shall,  in  this  case,  have 

2d,  Let  p  be  an  odd  number,  and  the  equation  j'  s 
jw  +  y  ;  ^c  «hal'  ''«>*  l**^c  jr  =r  Jp  ±^(|p*  +  y);  and 

«noe  {f^  +  y  =s      ^^,  we  may  extract  the  square  root  of 

the  denominator,  and  write 

'  -  tP  ± 5- = 8 . 

8d,  Lastly,  if  p  lie  a  fraction,  the  equation  may  be  ns 
aolvcd  in  the  following  manner.    Let  the  e(|uation  be  «jt^s 

bx       c 
Ajt  +  r,  or  jr*s  —  +  — ,  and  we  shall  have,  by  the  rule, 

a        a 

nominator  of  which  is  a  square  ;  so  that 

b±snb^^\ac) 

645.  The  other  method  of  reserving  mixt  cjuadratic  couo- 
lions  ia,  to  transform  them  into  pure  eouations  ;  whicn  is 
done  I^  substitution  :  for  example,  in  tne  equation  x*  s 
pjT  -f-  9,  instead  of  the  unknown  quantity  -r,  wc  may  write 
anothcT  unknown  quantity,  v«  i^uch,  that  x  ^y  ^  {p;  by 
which  means,  when  we  have  determined  y^  we  may  mune- 
diately  find  the  %'alue  of  x. 

If  we  make  this  substitution  of  y  +  \p  instead  of  x,  wc 
have  x*=  ^  +  W  +  I/^,  and  px  =  )y  +  Xp"  ;  conscquentJy, 
our  equation  will  become 

jr' +Ä^ +!/>•=  Wf +;/'•  + y  ; 

which  is  first  retluccd,  by  subtracting  py«  tu 

and  then,  by  subtracting  «'o*,  to  y'  =  \p^  +  q.  This  is 
a  pure  quadratic  equation,  which  immediately  givi-» 

Now,  since  x  ai  y  -f  ip,  wc  luivc 


CHAP.  VI.  OF   ALOBBEA.  S25 

as  we  found  it  before.     It  only  remains,  therefore,  to  iL 
lustrate  this  rule  by  some  examples. 

646.  Que4tiion  1.  There  are  two  numbers;  the  one  exceeds 
the  other  by  6,  and  their  product  is  91  :  what  are  those 
numbers  ? 

If  the  less  be  x,  the.  other  will  be  x  +  6,  and  their  pro- 
duct X*  +  6*  =  91.  Subtracting  &r,  there  remmns  jp*  = 
91  —  6r,  and  the  rule  gives 

X  =  —  3  +  ^(9  -h  91)  =  —  3  ±  10;  so  that  x  =  7,  or 
*  =  -  13. 

The  question  therefore  admits  of  two  solutions  ; 

By  the  one,  the  less  number  x  =  7%  and  the  greater  x  + 
6  =  13. 

By  the  other,  the  less  number  jr  =  —  13,  and  the  greater 
^  +  6  =-7. 

647.  Qtiesiicn  2.  To  firtd  a  number  such,  that  if  9  be 
taken  from  its  square,  tlie  remainder  may  l)e  a  number, 
as  much  greater  than  100,  as  the  number  itself  is  less 
than  23. 

Let  the  number  sought  be  x.  We  know  that  x'*  —  9  ex- 
ceeds 100  by  X*  —  109  :  and  since  x  is  less  than  23  by 
23  —  jr,  we  have  this  equation 

or*  —  109  =  23  -  X. 

Therefore  x^  =  —  x  +  l^^j  a»d,  by  the  rule, 

^='i±  v/(i+ 132)  =~  i  ±y(^|:')  =-i±  V.  So 

that  jr  =  11,  or  J  =—  12. 

Hence,  when  only  a  positive  number  is  required,  that 
number  will  be  11,  the  square  of  which  minus  9  is  112,  and 
consequently  greater  than  100  by  12,  in  the  same  manner 
as  1 1  IS  less  than  28  by  12. 

648.  Question  3.  To  find  a  number  such,  that  if  we 
multiply  its  half  by  its  third,  and  to  the  product  add  half 
the  number  required,  the  result  will  be  30. 

Supposing  the  number  to  be  x,  its  half,  multiplied  by  its 
third,  will  give  ^x"';  so  that  ^^  -f  {jr  =:  30;  and  multiply- 
ing  by  6,  we  have  x«  +  3ar  =  180,  or  x^  =  -  3ar  -f  180, 
which  gives  x  =  -  4,  ±  >/(-»  + 180)  =  -  i  ±  V- 

Consequently,  either  or  =  12,  or  «  =  —  15. 

649.  Question  4.  To  find  two  numbers,  the  one  being 
double  the  other,  and  such,  that  if  we  add  their  sum  to  their 
product,  we  may  obtain  90. 

Let  one  of  the  numbers  be  *,  then  the  other  will  be  2x  ; 
their  product  also  will  be  2j?*,  and  if  we  add  to  this  3*, 
or  their  sum,  the  new  sum  ought  to  make  90.  So  that 
2j:^  +  3x  =  90;  or  Ar*  ;=  90  -  3x ;  whence  «•  =  -  ^  + 
é5,  and  thus  we  obtain 


BUUHMTl  tBCT.  IT. 

'  =-  i  ± v/(t\^4ö)  =-  J  ±  V- 
Conseauently  x  =:  6,  or  x  =:  —  74-. 

650.  Quesiian  5.  A  borse-doüer  bought  a  horse  Air  a 
eertain  number  of  crownt«  and  aold  it  again  for  119  crowns, 
bjr  which  means  his  profit  was  as  much  per  cent  as  the  horse 
coat  him  ;  what  was  his  first  purchase  ? 

Suppose  the  horse  cost  x  crowns;  then»  as  tlic  dealer  gaina 
X  per  cent,  we  hare  this  proportion  : 

J* 
As  100  :  X  :  :  X  :  j^  ; 

since  therelbre  he  has  gained  j^,  and  the  horse  originally 

cost  him  X  crowns,  he  must  have  sold  it  for  x  4-  ^ka  ; 

J« 
therefore  X  +  Tqq  ^   119;   and  subtracting  x,  we  have 

r^=:— X  4*  119;  then  multiplying  by  100,  wc  obtain 

«^=1  -  10ar+  11900.  Whence,  by  the  rule,  we  find 
X  =r  -  50  ±  x^(2500  +  11900)  =  —  50  ±  v/l*400  =  - 
50  ±  15»  =»  70. 

The  horse  therefore  cost  70  crowns,  and  since  the  horse- 
dealer  gained  70  per  cent  when  he  sold  it  again,  the  profit 
must  have  been  49  crowns.  So  that  the  horse  nmst  have 
been  sold  again  for  70  -f-  49,  that  is  to  say,  for  1 19  crowns. 

651.  QuesHfm  6.  A  person  buys  a  certain  number  of 
pieces  of  cloth  :  he  pays  for  the  first  ft  crowns,  for  the 
second  4  crowns,  for  the  third  6  crowns,  and  in  tlie  same 
manner  always  2  crowns  more  for  each  following  piece. 
Now,  all  the  pieces  tngetlier  cost  him  110  :  liow  many  pieces 
had  he? 

Let  the  number  mught  be  x  ;  then,  by  the  question,  the 
purchaser  paid  for  the  dilTerrnt  pieces  of  cloth  in  the  fol- 
lowing manner: 

for  the     1,  8,  3,  4,    5  .  .  .  .    x  pieces 
he  pays  2,  4^  6,  8,  10  ....  2x  crowns. 

It  is  therefore  required  to  find  the  sum  of  the  arithmetical 

progression  2  +  4  +  6  |8  + 2f,  which  coti&thts  of 

X  terms,  that  we  may  deduce  from  it  the  price  of  all  the 
pieces  of  cloth  taken  together.  The  rule  which  we  Imve 
already  given  for  thir»  oiM*ration  reciuut*»  us  to  add  the  la»t 
term  to  the  first;  and  the  sum  is  är  +  2;  which  must  be 
multiplied  by  the  number  of  terms  x,  and  the  product  «lill 


GRAF.  ▼!.  orALOBMA.  S97 

he2x^  +  ix;  lastly,  if  we  divide  by  the  différence  S,  the 
quotient  will  be  x*  +  J?,  which  is  the  sum  of  the  progression  ; 
so  that  we  have  a*  +  x  =  110  ;  therefore  jc*  =  — ;p  +  HO» 

andj?=-4.+v^(i  +  110)=— 4  + V  =  10. 
And  hence  the  number  of  pieces  of  cloth  is  10. 

652.  Question  7.  A  person  bought  several  pieces  of 
cloth  for  180  crowns;  and  if  he  had  received  for  the  same 
sum  8  pieces  more,  he  would  have  paid  S  crowns  less  for 
each  piece.     How  many  pieces  did  he  buy  P 

Let  us  iiepresent  the  number  sought  by  x;  then  each 

180 
piece  will  have  cost  him  —  crowns.   Now,  if  the  purchaser 

had  had  or  -{-  3  pieces  for  180  crowns,  each  piece  would  have 
cost  — -^  crowns  ;  and,  since  this  price  is  less  than  the  reid 

price  by  three  crowns,  we  have  this  equation, 

180       180 

x  +  3^    X 

Multiplying  by  *,  we  obtain  — -^  =  180—  Sx;  dividing 
by  3,  we  have  —7-5  =  60  —  x\  and  again,  multiplying  by 

X  ~f~  9 

JT  -f-  3,  ffives  60j:  =  180  -f  67j:  —  x-;  therefore  adding  x\ 
we  shallhave  x^  +  60x  =  180  -f  57ar  ;  and  subtracting  60jr, 
we  shall  have  x*  =  -  âr  -f  180. 
The  rule  consequently  gives, 

j:  =-  4  -f  -•(»  +  180),  or  J?  =  -  4  -f  V  =  12. 

He  therefore  bought  for  180  crowns  13  pieces  of  doth 
at  15  crowns  the  piece  ;  and  if  he  had  got  3  pieces  more^ 
namely,  15  pieces  for  180  crowns,  each  jnece  woiäd  bave 
cost  only  12  crowns,  that  is  to  say,  3  crowns  less. 

653.  Question  8.  ,  Two  merchants  enter  into  partnership 
with  a  stock  of  100  pounds;  one  leaves  his  money  in  the 
partnership  for  three  months,  the  other  leaves  his  for  two 
months,  and  each  takes  out  99  pounds  of  capital  and  profit. 
What  proportion  of  the  stock  did  they  separately  furnish  ? 

Suppose  the  first  partner  contributed  x  pounds,  the  other 
will  have  contributed  100  —  x.  Now,  the  former  receiving 
99/.,  his  profit  is  99  —  X,  which  he  has  gained  in  three 
months  with  the  principal  x;  and  since  the  second  receives 
also  99/.;  his  pront  is  jr  —  1,  which  he  has  gained  in  two 
months  with  the  principal  100  ~x;  it  is  evident  also, 
that  the   profit  of  this  second  partner  would  have  been 

q2 


SUniKNTl  tBCT«  !▼• 

'— — ,  if  he  had  remained  three  months  in  the  partocrsliip: 

and  as  the  profits  gained  in  the  same  time  ore  in  proportion 
to  tlie  principals,  we  have  tl)c  following  proportion, 

ar-3 
X  :  99  —  X  :  :  100  -  X  :  —3 — . 

And  the  equality  of  the  product  of  the  extremes  to  that  ef 
the  means,  gives  the  equation, 

Sx»-.&r 

— —    =9900-199Lr  +  x-; 

then  multiplying  this  by  2,  we  have 

fts^  -  &r  =  I9S0O  -  â9&r  4-  äi^;  and  subtracting  2r\  we 
obtain  j*  -  Or  =  19800  -  39Är.  Adding  Ss,  gives  x  = 
19800  —  995x  ;  then  by  the  rule, 

=  45.     *  ^         * 

The  first  partner  therefore  contributed  451.  and  the  other 
55/.  The  hrst  having  gained  5-W.  in  three  months  would 
bave  gained  in  one  month  18/.  ;  and  the  second  having 
gained  44/.  in  two  months,  would  have  gained  t^,  in  one 
month:  now  these  profits  agree;  for  if,  with  45/.,  IS/,  are 
gnncd  in  one  month,  2S/.  will  be  gained  in  the  same  time 
with  55/. 

654.  QucMtion  9.  Two  girls  carry  100  eggs  \o  ninrkct  ; 
the  one  had  more  than  the  other,  and  yet  the  8um  which  thoy 
both  received  {or  them  was  the  same.  The  fir.-t  snys  to  the 
Moond,  If  I  had  hod  your  egrr»,  I  should  Iwvc  ntvivwl  15 
pence.  The  other  answers  If  I  liad  had  yours,  I  should 
liaTP  receivcfl  6*  j)ence.  How  many  eggs  did  each  carry  to 
market  P 

Suppose  the  fi r«»t  hail  x  eggs  ;  then  the  second  mu>t  have 
had  100 -.X. 

Since,  therefore,  the  former  would  have  sold  100  —  x  eggs 
Rir  15  p»nci»,  wo  have  tht«  tollduing  pro|)ortion  : 

(100  — X):  15:  :x:  ttttt— . 

100 — X 

Also,  iânce  the  secimd  would  have  sold  x  eggn  for  G  J 
penct*,  we  readily  find  Imw  much  she  got  for  100  -  x  eggs, 
thus: 

ÎWOO— 20x 
Now,  both  the  girls  received  the  same  money  ;  we  lui\e 


C«AF.  Vf.  OF  ALGEBRA.  1239 

consequently  the  equation^  r^r^r —  = 5 ,  winch  be- 
comes 25j?*  =  200000  -  4000^  ;  and,  lastly, 

*«=-  leOjr  +  8000; 
whence  we  obtain 

a:  =  -  80  +  t/(6400  +  8000)  =  -  80  +  120  =  40. 

So  that  the  first  girl  had  40  eggs,  the  isecond  had  60,  and 
each  received  10  pence. 

655.  Question  10.  Two  merchants  sell  each  a  certain 
quantity  of  silk  ;  the  second  sells  3  ells  more  than  the  fii-st, 
and  they  received  together  35  crowns.  Now,  the  first  says 
to  the  second,  I  should  have  got  24  crowns  for  your  silk  ; 
the  other  answers,  And  I  should  have  got  for  yours  IS 
crowns  and  a  half.     How  many  ells  had  each  ? 

Suppose  the  first  had  a:  ells  ;  then  the  second  must  have 
had  X  -\-S  ells  ;  also,  since  the  first  would  have  sold  x-^-S 

24t 
ells  for  24  crowns,  he  must  have  received  — r-^  crowns  for 

his  X  ells.     And,  with  regard  to  the  second,  since  he  would 
have  sold  x  ells  for  12i  crowns,  he  must  have  sold  his 

25x-\-7o 
X  -\-  S  ells  for  — 5 ;  so  that  the  whole  sum  they  re- 
ceived was 

24^    ,  25a:  4-75       ^^ 

-j 5 =  35  crowns. 


x-\-S  •        2x 

This  equation  becomes  x*  =  20j;  —  75  ;  whence  we  have 
x  =  10  ±  v(100  —  75)  =  10  ±  5. 

So  that  thç  question  admits  of  two  solutions  :  according 
to  the  first,  the  first  merchant  had  15  ells,  and  the  secona 
had  18;  and  since  the  former  would  have  sold  18  ells  for 
24  crowns,  he  must  have  sold  his  15  ells  for  20  crowns. 
The  second,  who  would  have  sold  15  ells  for  12  crowns  and 
a  half,  must  have  sold  his  18  ells  for  15  crowps  ;  so  that  they 
actually  received  35  crowns  for  their  commodity. 

7\ccording  to  the  second  solution,  the  first  merchant  had 
5  ells,  and  the  other  8  ells  ;  and  since  the  first  would  have 
sold  8  ells  for  24  crowns,  he  must  have  received  15  crowns 
for  his  5  ells  ;  also,  since  the  second  would  have  sold  5  ells 
for  12  crowns  and  a  half,  his  8  ells  must  have  produced 
him  20  crowns  ;  the  sum  being,  as  before,  35  crowns. 


KLBMKXTt  4BCT.  IT. 


CHAP.   VIL 

Of  ike  Extnclk»  rfOu  RooU  qfPiAygcm  Numben. 

656.  We  have  thewn,  in  a  nrecedinff  duipter*,  how 
pdjgcKial  numbers  are  to  be  fouoa;  and  what  we  then  called 
an£j  isaibocaUedii  rooL  If»  therefore,  we  represent  the 
root  by  X,  we  shall  find  the  following  expressions  for  all 
polygMial  numbers  : 

the  iiigon,  or  triangle,  is  — —  , 

the  ivgoo,  or  square,  -    x^, 

8x*-r 
the  vgon       ....    — — , 

the  vigoo     ....    2x*— X, 
thcviigon    ....    — ^ — , 

the  viiigon       ...    8jr*— Ar, 

7jr*-5x 
the  ixgon      ....     —  , 

the  xgon 4t*  — Sx, 

tnc  figon       ....  — ^ 

657.  We  have  already  shewn,  that  it  b  easy,  by  means  of 
formula*,  to  find,  for  any  giren  root,  any  polygon 

Bttmber  required:  but  when  it  is  required  reciprocalfv  to 
find  the  side,  or  the  root  of  a  polygon,  the  number  of  whose 
sides  is  known,  the  operation  is  more  difficult,  and  always 
requires  the  solution  of  a  quadratic  equation  ;  on  which  ac- 
count  the  subject  deserres,  in  this  place,  to  be  separately 
coosidered.  in  doing  this  we  shaU  proceed  regularly,  be- 
ginning with  the  triangular  numbers,  and  passing  from  them 
to  ihoiie  of  a  mater  number  uf  aufwies« 

65H.  I^  Uierefore  91  be  the  given  triangular  number, 
the  ftide  or  root  of  which  is  required. 

If  wc  uwke  this  root  =i,  we  must  ha%'e 

«  Chap.  5,  Sect.  HI. 


CHAP.  VIU  OF  ALGEBRA.  281 

^^—^  =  91  ;  or  JT«  +  X  =  182,  and  x^  =  ^  x  +  182; 
consequently^ 

from  which  we  conclude,  that  the  triangular  root  required  is 
13  ;  for  the  triangle  of  13  is  91* 

659.  But,  in  general,  let'  a  be  the  given  triangular  num- 
ber, and  let  its  root  be  required. 

Here  if  we  make  it  =  x.  we  have  — ;r—  =  a,  or  x*  4- 
X  =  ^;  therefore,  x*  =  —  or  +  2a,  and  by  the  rule  jt  =  — 
i  +v{i  +  ^h  or  x  =  g . 

This  result  pves  the  following  rule  :  To  find  a  trian- 

fular  root,  we  must  multiply  the  given  triangular  number 
y  8,  add  1  to  the  product,  extract  the  root  of  the  sum, 
subtract  1  from  that  root,  and  lastly,  divide  the  remainder 
by  2. 

660.  So  that  all  triangular  numbers  have  this  property  ; 
that  if  we  multiply  them  by  8,  and  add  unity  to  the  produet, 
the  sum  is  always  a  square  ;  of  which  the  following  small 
Table  furnishes  some  examples  : 

Triangles  1,    3,   6,    10,  15,    21,    28,    36,    45,    55,  &c. 

8  times  +  1=9;  25,  49,  81,  121,  169,  225,  289,  361,  441,  &c. 

If  the  given  number  a  does  not  answer  this  condition,  we 
conclude,  that  it  is  not  a  real  triangular  number,  or  that  no 
rational  root  of  it  can  be  assigned. 

661 .  According  to  this  rufc,  let  the  triangular  root  of  210 
be  required  ;  we  shall  have  a  ==  210,  and  8a  +  1  =  1681^ 
the   square  root  of  which  is  41  ;    whence   we  see,  that* 
the  number  210  is  really  triangular,  and  that  its  root  is 

41-1 

— - —  =:  20.     But  if  4  were  pven  as  the  triangular  num- 

bcr,   and   its  root  were  required,   we  should  find  it  :? 
— ^  —  4,  and  consequently  irrational.     However,  the  tri- 

angle  of  this  root,  - — ^  —  i,  may  be  found  in  the  following 

manner  : 

V33-1        ,          „     17-M/33        ,     „. 
Smce  X  = -T ,  we  have  x*= ,  and  adding 


EL  RM  £N  TS  8BGT.  !▼• 

v/9S-l        .       ,  .*        «      ^ 

X  =:  — 5 to  It,  the  sum  w  ji«  -^  x  =  ^  =:  8.     Coot^ 

quently,  the  triangle,  or  the  triangular  number,  --^~  s  4. 

€ßSL  Tlic  quadrangular  numbers  being  the  same  as 
tquarea,  they  occasion  no  difficulty.  For,  supposing  the 
given  quadrangular  number  to  be  a,  and  its  required 
root  X,  wc  shall  have  x^  zz  a,  and  consequently,  x  s^^n; 
so  that  the  square  root  and  die  quadrangular  root  are  the 
same  thing. 

663.  Let  us  now  proceed  to  pentagonal  numbers. 

Let  £8  be  a  number  of  this  kind,  and  x  its  root  ;  then,  by 

3-f*— X 
the  third  formula,  we  shall  have  — -^ —  zz  23,  or  8x*  —  * 

B  44,  or  x^  =5  ^JT  4*  V  *  ^^^^^  which  we  obtain, 

and  consequently  4  is  the  pentagonal  root  of  the  number  fOL 

664.  Let  the  ibllowing  question  be  now  proposed:  the 
pentagon  a  being  given,  to  nnd  iu  root 

Let  tliis  root  be  x,  and  we  have  the  equation 

Sx*— X  Sa 

— - —  =  ff,  or  Sx»  -  X  z:  2a,  or  X«  =  ^.r  +  -    ;  by  means 

2a 
of  wliich  we  find  *  =  «  +V(A  +  "ä)»  ^^^^  ***> 

l+^/(24a+l)     ^.       -  .  .  , 

X  r: -A .    Therefore,  when  a  is  a  real  pentagon, 

5Ma  -|-  1  must  be  a  square. 

Let  330,  for  example,  be  the  given  pentagon,  the  rooC 

.„.            1+^/(7921)      1  +  89       ,, 
will  be  X  n   ^ =  — ^ —  =:  15. 

665.  Again,  let  a  be  a  given  hexagonal  number,  the  root 
of  which  is  required. 

If  we  suppose  it  =  x,  we  shall  have  21*  —  x  =  a,  oc 
t^  =z  (x  +  ^a  ;  and  this  gives 

l  +  v'CSii+l) 
X  =  i  +v^(/,  +  la)  =  ^^  -\—^' 

So  that,  in  order  that  a  may  be  really  a  hexagon,  8a  +  1 
nuflt  bcoume  a  square;  wlicnce  we  see,  that  afl  hexsgiHial 
numbers  are  contained  in  triangular  numbers;  but  it  is  pot 
ibt  same  with  the  roots. 


CHAP.  VU.  OF  AL6EB&A.  288 

For  example,  let  the  hexagonal  number  be  1225,  its  root 

....            l±Vmi      1+99      „ 
will  be  j:  = 5 =  —=5 —  =  26. 

666.  Suppose  a  an  heptagonal  number,  of  which  the  root  is 
required. 

Let  this  root  be  x,  then  we  shall  have 5 —  =  a,  or 

ar*  =  -Jo?  -j-  3Ö,  which  gives 

•ï^  =  A  +\/(t-S-o  +  rfl)  = îô ^  ' 

therefore  the  heptagonal  numbers  have  this  property,  that  if 
they  be  multiplied  by  40,  and  9  be  added  to  the  product, 
the  sum  will  always  be  a  square. 

Let  the  heptagon,  for  example,  be  2059  ;  its  root  will  be 

.       .  3+ •(82369)     8+287      ^ 

found  =  j:  =  j^ =  — Ja"   =  ^* 

667.  Let  us  suppose  a  an  octagonal  number,  of  which 
the  root  x  is  required. 

We   shall   here  have  3^  —  ^  =  a,  or  x*  =  |x  +  ^, 

whence  results  jr  =  ^  +  •  (^  +  |ö)  =    +v^(^+^) 

o 

ConscQuently,  all  octagonal  numbers  are  such,  that  if 
multiplied  by  3,  and  unity  be  added  to  the  product,  the  sum 
is  constantly  a  square. 

For  example,  let  3816  be  an  octagon;  its  root  will  be 

1+v^  11449      1  +  107      _ 
a= ^ =  __  =  86. 

668.  Lastly,  let  a  be  a  {^ven  n-gonal  number,  the  root  of 
which  it  is  required  to  assign  ;  we  shall  then,  by  the  last 
formula,  have  this  equation  : 

^—^- =  a,  or  (n  -  2)x2  -  (n  -  4)x  =  2ai 

„     (n— 4)x       2a         , 

consequently,  «ir= 5-  H ^;  whence, 

*        "^  n  —  x        n^^iC 


-    "-■*    ■    ,,(n-4)«      8(/i-a)a 
"^  ~  2(n— 2)'*'^^4(f»-2)«"*"4(n-2)«''°*" 
_  n  -  4+ v^  (8(n  -  2)a+(w— é)«) 


184  suuuurri  .  tKcr«  iv« 


Tb»  formula  cootaint  a  ^^eral  rule  for  fiiidbg  all  the 
possible  polygonal  roots  of  giTen  Dumbert. 

For  example,  let  there  be  mTon  the  xxnr-gonal  number, 
S009:  nnoe  a  i»  here  ssSOOQ  and  n  =  24,  we  hare 
n  —  2  s  S2  and  n  —  4  =:  80;  wherefore  the  root,  or 

80+^(588584+400)      30+728  _  ^^ 

''  ■=  44  -       44      ""  ^^* 


CHAP.  VIII. 

Of  the  Extraction  qfiht  Square  Roots  {^Binomials. 

069*  By  a  binomial*  we  mean  a  quantity  oompoaed  of 
two  parts,  which  are  either  both  affected  by  tfie  &i^  cjf  the 
square  root,  or  of  which  one,  at  least,  contains  that  sict. 

For  this  reason  3  -|-  %/5  is  a  binomial,  and  likewise 
V  8  +  %/S;  and  it  is  indifferent  whether  the  two  terms  be 
joined  by  the  sign  +  or  by  the  sign  —  •  So  that  S  —  v5 
and  3  +  x^5  are  both  binomials. 

670.  The  reason  that  these  binomials  deserve  particular 
attention  is,  that  in  the  resolution  of  quadratic  equations  we 
are  always  brought  to  quantities  of  this  form,  when  the  re» 
solution  cannot  dc  performed.  For  example,  the  equation 
X»  =  Gr  —  4  gives  x  =  3  +    x'5. 

It  is  evident,  therefore,  that  such  quantities  must  often 
occur  in  algebraic*  calculations  ;  for  which  reason,  we  have 
already  carefully  shewn  how  they  are  to  be  treated  in  the 
«dinary  operations  of  addition,  subtraction,  multiplication, 
and  division .  but  we  have  not  been  able  till  now  to  shew 
how  their  square  roots  arc  to  be  extracted  ;  that  is,  a»  fmr  as 
that  extraction  is  passible  ;  for  when  it  is  not,  we  mua  be 
satisfied  with  affixing  to  the  (}uantity  another  radical  »tgn. 

Thus,  the  square  root   of  3  +    ^/8  is  written    ^/^  •+■   ^^8  ; 
or  ^'(S  -f    yii). 

671.  It  muU  here  be  observed,  in  the  uni  place,  that  tlie 

*  In  algebra  we  generally  give  the  name  binomial  to  any 
quantity  composed  of  two  tenns  ;  but  Euler  has  thought  proper 
to  confine  this  appellation  to  those  expressions,  which  the  French 
analytlA  call  ^iMiJi/tlief  partiy  cmmrnensmrahkf  amd  partly  incom- 
irmèU.     r .  T. 


CHAP.  YIII.  OB  AL6XBBA.  2S5 

squares  of  such  binomials  are  qlso  binomials  of  the  same 
kind  ;  in  which  also  one  of  the  terms  is  always  rational. 

For,  if  we  take  the  square  of  a  +  ^/by  we  shall  obtain 
(a*  +  6)  +  ^'s/b»  If  therefore  it  were  required  recipnx^y 
to  take  the  root  of  the  quantity  (a*  +  &)  +  Sa  ^/b,  we  should 
find  it  to  be  a  -{-  ^/by  and  it  is  undoubtedly  much  easier  to 
form  an  idea  of  it  in  this  manner,  than  if  we  had  only  put 
tlie  siffn  v"  before  that  quantity«  In  the  same  manner,'if 
we  take  Ùie  square  of  ^/a  +  VÄ>  we  find  it  (a  -f  ô)  + 
2  v/û6  ;  therefore,  reciprocally,  the  square  root  of  (a  +  é)  + 
9,  y/ ab  will  be  ^a  +  a/6,  which  is  likewise  more  easily  un- 
derstood, than  if  we  had  been  satisfied  with  putting  the  àgn 
V  before  the  quantity« 

67S.  It  is  chiefly  required,  therefore,  to  assign  a  character, 
which  may,  in  all  cases,  point  out  whether  such  a  square 
root  exists  or  not  ;  for  which  purpose  we  shall  be^in  with  an 
easy  quantity,  requiring  whether  we  can  assign,  m  the  sense 
tliat  we  have  explûnâ,  the  square  root  of  the  binomial 
6  +  2^/6. 

Suppose,  therefore,  that  this  root  is  Vx-f-  ^y\  the 
square  of  it  is  (j;  +^)  -f  2  V^»  which  must  be  equal  to 
the  quantity  5  -f  2^/6.  Ck»nsequently,  the  rational  part 
X  '\-  y  roust  be  equal  to  5,  and  tne  irrational  part  2  ^xy 
must  be  equal  to  2  ^6  ;  which  last  equality  gives  ^xjf  sx 
V6.  Now,  since  a?  H-  y  =  6,  we  have  y  =  6  —  x,  and 
this  value  substituted  in  the  equation  ^  =  6,  produces 
5j?  —  or*  =  6,  or  4P*  =  &r  —  6;  therefore,  j?  =  |.  -f  \/(  V  — 
V)  =  T  +  4^  =  3»  So  that  X  =  8  andy  =  2;  whence  we 
conclude,  that  the  square  root  of  6  H-  2  a/6  is  VS  +  Vä, 

673.  As  we  have  here  found  the  two  equations,  j?  -f-  y  =  5, 
and  xy  =  6^  we  shall  give  a  particular  method  for  obtaining 
the  values  oîx  and  y. 

Since  x  +y  =  5,  by  squaring,^*  +  8*^  +  y*  =  26  ;  and 
as  we  know  that  «r*  —  %jcy  -|-  y*  is  the  square  of  x  —  y^  let 
us  subtract  from  jp*  +  äry +y*  =  26,  the  equation  jry  =:  6, 
taken  four  times,  or  4zy  =  24,  in  order  to  have  a:*  —  ^V  + 
y«  =  1  ;  whence  by  extractioü  we  have  x  —  y  =  1  ;  and  as 
X  -{-y  =  5,  we  shall  easily  find  j?  =  3,  and  y  =  2;  where- 
fore, the  square  root  of  6  +  2  ^6  is  V3  +  ^/2. 

674.  Let  us  now  consider  the  general  binomial  a  -f  Vö, 
and  supposing  its  square  root  to  be  ^/x-\-  ^/y,  we  shall 
have  the  equation  (^  +y)  +  2  ^/xy  =  a  -f  ^b\  so  that 
X  +  2/  =  Ö,  and  2  ^ay  =  a/a,  or  4xy  =  b  ;  subtracting 
this  square  from  the  square  of  the  equation  j?  -{-y  =  a,  that 
is,  from  x'  +  2xy  +  y^  =  a*,  there  remmns  x*  —  ftry  + 
y*  =  a'  —  é,  the  square  root  of  which  isx  —  y  a  -v/(a*  —  Ä). 


f06  KLSMXJITS  ttCT«  IV. 

quired  of  o  +  v/6  is  %^  \ +  a/^ ^ ^  • 

675«  We  admit  dial  this  expresnon  is  more  complicated 
tiian  if  we  had  nmply  put  the  radical  sign    v^  before  the 

S*Ycn  binomial  a  4-  \^6>  and  written  it  ^^(a  +  x^b):  but 
le  abore  expresnon  may  be  greatly  amplified  when  the 
munbers  a  and  b  are  such,  that  a*  —  6  is  a  square  ;  since 
then  the  sign  ^^^  which  is  under  the  radical,  disappears. 
We  see  also,  at  the  same  time,  that  the  square  root  of  the 
binomial  a  +  ^^b  cannot  be  conveniently  extracted,  except 
when  a*  —  6  =  c*  ;  for  in  this  case  the  square  root  required 

m    %/( — 5"  )+  s^( — 5— )2  but  if  a*  —  6  is  not  a  perfect 

square,  we  cannot   express   the   square  root  of  a  +   x^b 
more  simdy,  than  by  putting  the  raoical  sign  x^  before  it. 

676.  The  condition,  therefore,  which  is  requisite,  in  order 
that  we  may  express  the  square  root  of  a  binomial  a  +  x^b 
in  a  more  convenient  form,  is,  that  a*  —  bXiea  square  ;  and 
if  we  represent  that  square  by  c*,  we  shall  have  for  the 

.a  '\'  c  a  '^  c 

square  root  m  question  %^(  )  +  s^{ — tï — )•     We  must 

farther  remark,  that  the  square  root  of  a  —   x^b  will  be 
\^(^^)  -  -^^("2"^  '  *^»  ^y  squaring  this  quantity,  we  get 

•  —  2  v^(  — -r —  )  ;  now,  since  c«  =  a*  —  6,and  consequently 

1^  —  c^  =  &,  the  same  square  is  found 

^       b  2x'b 

677.  When  it  is  required,  therefore,  to  extract  tlie  square 
root  of  a  binomial,  as  <i  -f  x^b^  the  nilc  is  to  Mibtnict  (nnn 
the  ic|uare  a*  of  the  rational  |)art  the  Hiuan*  b  of  the  ir- 
rational part,  to  take  the  square  root  of  tnc  remaindiT,  and 
ealHng  that  root  r,  to  write  for  the  root  miuired 

o  -f  r  II  —  r 

678.  If  the  square  root  of  8  -^  VU  were  nquired«  we 


CHAP.  VIII.  '  OF  ALGKBKA.  237 

should  have  a  =  2  and   ^b  =  v/8;  wherefore  a^  —  b  ^ 
e^  =  1  ;  so  that,  by  the  formula  just  given,  the  root  sought 

Let  it  be  required  to  find  the  square  root  of  the  binomial 
11-1-6  ^/2.  Here  we  shall  have  a  =  11,  and  vi  =  6  a/2; 
consequently,  ô  =  36  x  2  =  72,  and  a*  —  6  =  49,  which 
gives  c  =  7  ;  and  hence  we  conclude,  that  the  square  root 
of  11  +  6  v2  is  >v/9  +   a/2,  or  3  -f  V2. 

Required  the  square  root  of  11  -f-  2  a/ 30.  Here  a  =i  11, 
and  a/a  =  2  a/ 30;  consequently,  ô  =  4  x  30  =  120, 
Ö*  —  Ô  —  1,  and  c  =  1  ;  therefore  the  root  required  is 
^6  -f  a/5. 

679.  This  tuIq  also  applies,  even  when  the  binomial  con- 
tmns  imaginary,  or  impossible  quantities. 

Let  there  be  proposed,  Cor  example,  the  binomial  1  -}- 
4  a/—  3.  First,  we  shall  have  a  =  1  and  ^/b  =  4  a/—  8, 
that   is  to  say,   ô  =  —  48,   and   a*  —  i  =  49  ;    therefore 

0  =  7,  and  consequently  the  square  root  required  is   a^4  + 
^-  3  =  2+  a/-  3. 

Again,  let  there  be  given  —  4.  -h  4  a^—  3.  First,  we 
have  a  =  —  I-  ;  a^ô  =  i  n^  —  ^>  ^^^  é  =  ix— 3=—  J; 
whence  a*  —  Ä  =  ^  -h  J  =  1,  and  c  =  1  ;  and  the  result 

a/  — 3 
requu-ed  is   ^/^.  -I-   a/  -  |  =  i  H ^ ,  or  4^  +  -[-  a/—  8. 

Another  remarkable  example  is  that  in  which  it  is  required 
to  find  the  square  root  of  2  a/  —  1.  As  there  is  here  no 
rational  part,  we  shall  have  a  =  0.  Now,  v/  i  ^  2  a/—  1, 
and  Ä  =  —  4  ;  wherefore  0*  —  ô  =  4  and  c  =  2  ;  conse- 
quently, the  square  root  reauired  is  a/1  -|"  v^~-  ^  =  1  + 
V'—  1>   and   tne   square  ot  this  quantity  is  found  to  be 

1  +2  a/-  1  -1  =1  2  a/-  1. 

680.  Suppose  now  we  have  such  an  eauation  as  i:^  = 
a  ±  a/*,  and  that  0*  —  6  =:  c^*  ;  we  conclude  from  this,  that 

Û+C  a—c 

the  value  of  a:  =:  y/{-'Q-) ±  -v/l— 3-),  which  may  be  useful 

in  many  cases. 

For  example,  if  x«  =  17  +  ^^  V2,  we  shall  have 
X  =  3  +  a/8  =  3 -f  2  a/2. 

681.  This  case  occurs  most  frequently  in  the  resolution  of 
equations  of  the  fourth  degree,  such  as  jr*  n  2tfx*  +  cL  For, 
if  we  suppose  x^  =.  y,  we  have  jr*  n  y%  which  reduces  the 
given  equation  to  1/^  zz  %ay  -f-  {/,  and  from  this  we  find 
y  zi  a  ±  A/(a'  +  d),  thererore,  x*  =:  a  +  v'(a*  +  d),  and 
consequently  we  have  another  evolution  to  perform.     Now, 


t88  BLBMBMT8  «BCT.  %W. 

«nee  s^b  s  y/{a*  +  d),  wc  have  i  ss  a*  4-  <2»  and  a«  ^ 
b  zz  ^  d\  iff  therefore,  —  <2  is  a  square,  as  r%  that  is  to 
say,  <2  =  —  c*,  we  may  asûgn  the  root  required. 

Suppose,  in  reaUty,  that  a  sz  —  c^  ;  or  that  the  propoeed 
équation  of  the  fourth  dqpree  is  je^:=:2ax*  —  c%  we  shall  then 

find  that  X  a  -•l-g-) ±  -^(-2")- 

682.  We  shall  illustrate  what  we  have  just  said  by  some 

coumples. 

1.  llequired  two  numbers,  whose  product  may  be  106, 
and  whose  squares  may  together  make  274. 

Let  us  represent  those  two  numbers  by  s  and^j  we  dudi 
then  have  the  two  equations, 

^ssl05 
X«  +  y*  =  274. 

Thefirstgives^  =  — ,  and  this  value  of  y  bdng  sub» 

sätuted  in  the  second  equation,  we  have 

Wherefore  X*  +  105»  ==  274x^  orx*  =  274i^  -  105*. 

If  we  now  compare  this  equation  with  that  in  the  pre- 
ceding article,  we  have  2a  =  1^4,  and  -  r-  =  —  la*)'; 
consequently,  c  =  105,  and  a  zz  137.     We  therefore  fiiul 

137+105^           137—105        ,,       , 
'  =  ^^ 2 —  )  ±  ^( «—  )  =  11  ±  4w 

Whence  x  cs  15,  or  x  =  7.  In  the  first  case,  i/  =  7,  and  in 
the  second  case,  ^  =:  15  ;  whence  the  two  nunilrers  sought  arc 
15  and  7. 

683.  It  is  proper,  however,  to  observe,  that  thi«  calcula- 
tion may  be  performed  much  more  easily  in  another  w:i\. 
For,  since  x-  +  ^-«y  +.V"  *"*'  -**  ""  ^//  *"  V'  ^ri*  Mpiari»», 
and  sinoc  the  values  of  jr^'  -f  y'^  and  of  Jiß  are  ;rivin,  we  ha\e 
only  to  take  the  dtnible  of  thin  la^t  quantity,  niul  tlu*n  to  ;!(UI 
ana  subtract  it  from  the  first,  as  follow»:  x-  -i-y*  =:  iTTk 
to  which  if  we  add  %iy  =  210,  we  have 

«•  4-  24y  +  y  =s  484,  which  givw  x  +  y  =  lÄ. 

But  subtracting  îiry,  there  remains  x-  —  *triß  -f  i/  ~  CK 
whence  we  find  x  —  y  —  8. 

So  that   2Lr  =  ;)0,  and  2y  =:  14  ;  conMX]uentlv,  r  =r  1.3 

mA  w  =  7. 

Tne  following  general  question  is  reffulveti  bv  the  j^uie 
netbod. 


CHAP.  YIII.  OF  ALGCiEA.  SS9' 

S.  Required  two  numbers»  whose  product  may  be  m,  and 
the  sum  of  the  squares  t/. 

If  those  numbers  are  represented  by  x  and  y  y  we  have  the 
two  following  equations  : 

xy  =  m 
j:*  +  y^  ==  n. 
Now,  ary  =  9m  being    added   to  jr«  +  y«  —  w,   we  have 
x^  +  ^y  4"^*  —  ^  +  2^^  aïid  consequently, 

X  +  y  zi  -v/(n  +  2*»). 

But  subtracting  2xy,  there  remains  x*  —  &iy  -f  ^*  =  n 
—  2in,   whence   we  get  x  ^  y  zz  \/{n  —  2m);    we  have» 
therefore,  x  =  ^  ^/(n  +  2m)  +  ^  ^(n  —  2fii)  ;  and 
y  =  iy{n  +  2w)  —  ^  VC»  -  2m). 

684.  3.  Required  two  numbers,  such,  that  their  product 
may  be  35,  and  the  difference  of  their  squUres  24. 

Let  the  ^ater  of  the  two  numbers  be  x,  and  the  less  y  : 
then  we  sha£  have  the  two  equations 

XJ/=:36, 

j:*  —  y*  =  24  ; 

and  as  we  have  not  the  same  advantages  here,  we  shall  pro- 
ceed in  the  usual  manner.     Here,  the  first  equation  gives 

35 

J/  =  — ,  and,  substituting  this  value  of^  in  the  second,  we 

Mr 

1225 
have  X* ^  =  24.     Multiplying  by  j*%  we  have 

X*  —  1225  =  24j:'  ;  or  x^  =  24a*  +  1225.  Now,  the  se- 
cond member  of  this  equaüon  bein^  affected  by  the  sign  + , 
we  cannot  make  use  of  the  formula  already  given,  because 
having  c^  =  —  1225,  c  would  become  imaginary. 

Let  us  therefore  make  x^  =  *  ;  we  shall  then  have 
2*  =  24«  +  1225,  whence  we  obtain 

2  =  12  ±  >/(144  +  1225)  or  «  =  12  i  87; 

consequently,  i?*  =  12  +  37  ;  that  is  to  say,  either  =  49,  or 
=  -25. 

If  we  adopt  the  first  value,  we  have  x  =  7  and  y  =  5. 

The  second  value  gives  x  =  V—  26  ;  and,  since  xy  =  85, 

35  1225 

we  have  j/  =  ^_gg  =  ^ZI^-  ^""  ^• 

685.  We  shall  conclude  this  chapter  with  the  following 
question. 

4.  Required  two  numbers,  such,  that  their  sum,  their 
product,  and  the  difference  of  their  squares,  may  be  all 
equal. 


t40  BtÈM XHTi  imoT«  fir. 

Let  X  be  the  greetar  of  the  two  numbers,  and  y  the  le»; 
then  the  three  following  expressions  must  be  equal  to  one 
another:  namelT»  the  sum,  x-f^y;  (be  product,  ry;  and 
the  difference  of  the  squares,  or*  —  ^.  It  we  compare  the 
fint  with  the  second,  we  have  x  -^y  =  xy  ;  which  will  give 

y 

A  value  ofor:  fiirysjry— x  =  (^  —  1),  and  x  «  ""^î» 

Consequenüy,*  +  ^^ ^^'^^^'^V  *"^  ^  =^-1» 

that  is  to  say,  the  sum  is  equal  to  the  product  ;  and  to  this 
also  the  difference  of  the  squares  ought  to  be  equal.     Now» 

wel»Te^-y.=^;j-^j-y=^-fJ;  so  tluit 

makiiig  this  equal  to  the  quantity  found  -3««  ^c  have 

•^^-r  =    ,  ^    — «  ;  dividing  byy,  we  have  =  = 

^Z%s^\  '  •"^  multiplying  by  y«  -  %  -f  I,  or  (j^  -  1)% 
we  have  y  —  1=  —  y*  +  2y;  conse(]ucntly,  y  =  ^  +  1  ; 
which  gives j^  =r  J  ±  n^(;  +  1)  =  {  ±  %'I;ory  =  — \t-'» 

and  since  x  = =•,  we   sliall   have,   by   sulMilution,   and 

usmg  the  sign -1- ,  X  = -;^^j . 

In  order  to  remove  the  surd  quantity  from  the  denomi- 
nator, multiply  lioth  terms  by     x  5-{-  1,  and    hc  obtain 

'•        4        ""      2     ' 

Therefore   the  greater  of  the  numlMTK  smiirlit,   <>r    i\ 

8 — g—  ;  and  the  less,  jf,  =  — ^ — . 

Hence  their  sum  «r-f^  s  S-4-\^;  their  prtnluct  xy  n 

8+  v'5;    and  since  jT*  = 5—  ,  andy-  —  — - — ,   %ii 

have  also  the  difference  of  the  tquan*«  x*  —  jy«  =:  î!  -j-  ^  '•'». 
beinff  all  the  same  quantity. 

OWS.  As  this  solution  is  very  long,  it  \%  pra|KT  to  remark 


CHAP.  Vin.  OF  ALeEBRA.  241 

that  it  may  be  abridged.  In  order  to  which,  let  us  b^n 
\nth  making  the  sum  x  -^y  equal  to  the  difference  of  me 
squares  x*  —  i/^;  we  shall  dien  have  j?  -{-  y  =  jr*  —  y*  ;  and 
dividinj^  by  or  +  y,  because  or*  —  y*  =:  (jr  -4-  y )  x  (ir  —  y), 
we  fina  1  =  x  —  y  and  x  zzy  +  \.  Consequently^  *  +  y 
=  %  +  1>  and  J?  —  y*  =  %  +  1  ;  farther,  as  the  product 
^!/9  ^^  i^  +9»  must  be  equal  to  the  same  quantity,  we  have 
y*+y  =  %  +  l5  ory*  =  y  +  l,  which  gives,  as  before, 

687.  The  preceding  question  leads  also  to  the  solution  of 
the  following« 

5.  To  find  two  numbers,  such,  that  thâr  sum,  their  pro-' 
duct,  and  the  sum  of  their  squares,  may  be  all  equal. 

Let  the  numbers  sought  be  represented  by  x  and  y; 
then  there  must  be  an  equaTity  between  x  +  jf,  xjfy  and 

Comparing  the  first  and  second  quantities,  we    have 

y 

j:  -|-  y  =  :ry,  whence  x  =  -^-  ;     consequently,    xy,    and' 

j:  +y  =  -^.  Now,  the  same  quantity  is  equal  to  j:*  +y*; 
so  that  we  have 

Multiplying  by  y*  —  ^  -|-  1,  the  product  is 

y  -2^  +  2/  =y  -f,  ory*  =  3y»  -  %•; 
and  dividing  by  y*,  we  have  y*  =  3y  —  8  ;  which  ^ves 

y  =  I  ±  v/(J  -  3)  =  g ;  consequently, 

y  —  1  = ^ ,   whence   results  x  =  r-r — ; — 5  ;  and 

multiplying  both  terms  by  1  —  >/  —  8,  the  result  is 

6-2v/-3        3- >v/-3 
•^  -  —4-       ,  or         2       • 

Therefore  the  numbers  sought  are  x  = 5 ,     and 

y  = 0 >   ^^^^   sum    of  which    is  x  -J-  y  =  3,  their 

3-3^/— 3 
product  xy  =  3  ;   and  lastly,   since  x"  n 5 ,  and 

R 


UM  XLSMEKTtf  tSCT.  lt. 

y*  SS  ^ ,  the  sum  of  the  squares  **  4-  y  =  3,  «B 

the  same  Quantity  as  required. 

688.  We  may  fpeatly  abridge  this  calculation  by  a  par- 
tieular  artifice,  which  is  applicable  likewise  to  other  cases  ; 
and  which  connsts  in  expressing  the  numbers  sought  by  the 
sum  and  the  difference  of  two  letters,  instead  of  representing 
tbem  by  distinct  letters. 

In  our  last  question,  let  us  suppose  one  of  the  numbers 
sought  to  he  p  +  Çy  and  the  other  p  ^  q^  then  their  sum 
irill  be  9py  their  product  will  he  p^  ^g\  and  the  sum  of 
their  squares  will  be  tp*  +  S^,  wmch  three  quantities  must 
be  equal  to  eadi  other;  therefore  making  the  first  equal  to 
the  second,  we  have  %i  =so*  —  a*,  which  gives  o*  a  p*  —  1^, 

Substituting  this  value  or  9*  in  tne  tnird  quantity 
ftp*  +  Sg^U  ^^à  comparing  the  result  4p*  —  4p  with  the 
first,  we  have  52p  =  4p^  —  4p,  whence  p  ss  |, 

Consequently,  9*  =  p*  -  2p  ==  —  ^^  and  q  =:  — 3 — ; 

80  that  the  numbers  sought  are  p  +  9  = 5 ,  and 

/>  —  f  = 3 ,  as  before. 


QUESTIONS    FOR    PRACTICE. 

1.  What  two  numbers  are  those,  whose  difference  is  15, 
and  lialf  of  their  product  €i\ual  to  the  cube  of  the  less  ? 

Ans.aaxHl  \S. 

iL  To  find  two  numbers  whose  sum  is  100,  and  product 
2059.  Ans.  71  and  i». 

3.  There  arc  three  numbers  in  geometrical  progression  : 
the  sum  ol*  the  first  and  second  is  10,  and  tlie  difference  of 
the  second  and  third  in  S4.     What  are  they  ? 

ÄM.fty  8  and  82. 

4.  A  merchant  having  laid  out  a  certain  .su in  of  money  in 
goods  »icll^  thcni  a^ain  for  ^4/.  gaining  ajt  much  |kt  emit  as 
the  gtKMis  ct>t*i  him  :  rtnjuin^I,  what  thoy  coM  him.  .-Irw.  20/. 

5.  The  sum  oC  tuo  uuiiiIkts  i»  j,  their  product  h.  Ri^ 
quiii-d  the  iiunilxT«. 

An^.      ^-  ±  x'(  -  *4-~i  )f  and 

"  ,    "' 


CHAP.  YIII.  OF  ALOBBEA.  MS 

6.  The  sum  of  two  numbers  is  a,  and  the  sum  of  their 
squares  b.     Required  the  numbers. 

a  26— a*  , 

Ans.     ^  ±  -/(— 4— )»  and 

7.  To  divide  36  into  three  such  parts,  that  the  second 
may  exceed  the  first  by  4,  and  that  the  sum  of  all  their 
squares  may  be  464.  Ans.  8, 12, 16w 

&  A  person  buying  190  pounds  of  pepper,  and  as  many 
of  ginger,  finds  that  for  a  crown  he  has  one  pound  more  of 
ginger  than  of  pepper.  Now,  the  whole  price  of  the  pepper 
exceeded  that  01  the  ginger  by  ox  crowns:  how  maiTf 
pounds  of  each  had  he  for  a  crown  ? 

Ans.  4  of  pepper,  and  5  of  jginger. 

9.  Required  three  numbers  in  continual  proportion,  60 
being  the  middle  term,  and  the  sum  of  the  extremes  beli^ 
equd  to  125.  Ans.  45,  60,  90. 

10.  A  person  bought  a  certain  number  of  oxen  for  80 
guineas  :  if  he  had  received  4  more  for  the  same  money,  he 
would  have  paid  one  guinea  less  for  each  head.  What  was 
the  number  of  oxen?  ^n^.  16. 

11.  To  divide  the  number  10  into  two  such  parts,  that 
their  product  being  added  to  the  sum  of  their  squares,  may 
make  76.  Ans.  4  and  o. 

12.  Two  travellers  A  and  B  set  out  from  two  places,  r  and 
A,  at  the  same  time;  A  from  F  with  a  design  to  pass 
through  Ay  and  ß  from  A  to  travel  the  same  way  :  after  A 
had  overtaken  B,  they  found  on  computing  their  travels, 
that  they  had  both  together  travelled  80  miles  ;  that  A  had 
passed  through  A  four  days  before,  and  that  B,  at  his  rate  of 
travelling,  was  a  journey  of  nine  days  distant  from  P.  Re- 
quired the  distance  between  the  places  T  and  A.  Am,  6  miles. 


r2 


•M  SLSMBiiTt  ttcr.  nr. 


CHAP.  IX. 

Ofïke  Nature  ^Equations  afihe  Second  Degree. 

689.  What  we  bave  already  said  sufBaently  shews,  that 
eauatioiis  of  the  second  degree  admit  of  two  solutîoDs;  and 
this  property  ought  to  be  examiiied  in  every  point  of  view, 
becMse  the  nature  of  equations  of  a  higher  degree  will  be 
▼cry  much  illustrated  by  such  an  examination.  We  shall 
d^crefore  retrace,  with  more  attention,  the  reasons  which 
render  an  ec}uation  of  the  second  degree  capable  of  a  double 
solution;  since  they  undoubtedly  will  exnibit  an  essential 
property  of  those  equations. 

090.  We  have  already  seen,  indeed,  that  this  double  solu- 
tion arises  from  the  circunistancc  that  the  square  root  of  any 
nomber  nui^  be  taken  cither  positively,  or  ne^tivcly  ;  but, 
as  thu  prindple  will  not  easily  apply  to  equations  of  hi{;hcr 
degrees,  it  nuiy  be  prmer  to  uiustratc  it  bv  a  distinct 
analysis.  Taking,  therefore,  for  an  example,  the  quadratic 
equation,  x^  s  1^^  —  S5,  we  shall  give  a  new  reason  for 
this  equation  being  resolvible  in  two  ways,  by  admitting  fur 
X  the  values  5  and  7,  both  of  which  will  satisfy  tlic  terms  %Â 
the  equation. 

691.  For  this  |Hirposc  it  is  most  convenient  to  l>ogin  with 
trani4)o>ing  the  tenns  of*  the  iniuation,  so  tiiut  one  of  tiR* 
sides  may  Iwcome  0  ;  the  above  etjuation  con6C<|Ucntly  takes 
the  form 

X'- 12x  +  35  =  0; 

and  it  ih  now  required  to  find  a  number  such,  tliat,  if  wc 
substitute  it  f(»r  x,  tlie  quantity  j:^  —  12j*  +  a5  may  lie  really 
equal  to  notliing  ;  after  which,  wc  shall  liave  to  shew  liow 
this  may  lie  done  in  two  clifierent  ways. 

691Î.  Now,  the  whole  of  thi»  connifttA  in  clearly  she^  iii«^, 
that  a  quantity  of  the  fonn  x-  —  1ÜJ*-|"«^'>  •"">'  In?  con- 
sidered OS  the  pfikluct  of  two  faiiorf.  Thus,  in  renhtv,  the 
(|uantity  of  which  we  »|H*ak  in  cc)ni|)f>MHl  of  the  two  factors 
(x  —  Ô)  X  (x  —  7):  and  since  the  nliove  quantity  nuwt 
become  0,  wo  must  also  have  the  prinluct  yx  —  .*>)  x  \x  —  7) 
=  Ü;  hut  a  |>ro(luct,  of  whatever  nuinlKT  of  factors  it  i« 
compOActl,  lKx*f>mt*s  e(|iial  to  0,  on!v  when  one  of  thos<*  ftu*- 
tors  is  retluced  to  ().  This  \s  a  rundanicntal  prindple,  to 
which  we  munt  |my  [mrticular  attention,  i*s{Hcially  fihen 
e«|iiatiunA  of  hii^her  dejjrees  are  taiititi  of. 

OiK).  It  is  tlH'refVtre  i*asily  uiklerstood,  tliat  '.lie  product 


CHAP.  IX.  OF  ALGKBBA.  946^ 

(:r  —  5)  X  (*  —  7)  may  become  0  in  two  ways:  ßssty  when 
the  first  factor  x  —  5  ==  0  ;  and  also,  when  the  second  factor 
1*  —  7  =  0.  In  the  first  case,  jt  =  5,  in  the  second  x  =  7. 
The  reason  is  therefore  very  evident,  whj  such  an  equation 
x^  —  ISj:  +  85  =  0,  admits  of  two  solutions  ;  that  is  to  say, 
why  we  can  assign  two  values  of  Xy  both  of  which  equally 
satisfy  the  terms  of  the  eouation  ;  for  it  depends  upon  (his 
fundamental  principle,  tliat  the  quantity  x^  —  Ixx  4-  85 
may  be  represented  oy  the  product  of  two  factors. 

694.  Tne  same  circumstances  are  found  in  all  equa^ 
tions  of  the  second  d^ree  :  for,  after  haviiLQ;  brousht  the 
terms  to  one  side,  we  find  an  equation  of  the  fdlowing 
form  jr^  —  ax  -{-  6  =  0,  and  this  formula  may  be  always 
considered  as  the  product  of  two  factors,  which  we  shall  re- 
present by  (x  ^  p)  X  (x  —  q)f  without  concerning  ourselves 
what  numbers  the  letters/»  and  q  represent,  or  whether  they 
be  negative  or  positive.  IJ^ow,  as  this  product  must  be  =  0, 
from  the  nature  of  our  equation,  it  is  evident  that  this  may 
happen  in  two  cases  ;  in  the  first  place,  when  x  ^ p;  and  in 
the  second  place^  when  x  :zi  q;  and  these  are  the  two  values 
of  X  which  satisfy  the  terms  of  the  equation. 

695.  Let  us  here  consider  the  nature  of  these  two  factors, 
in  order  that  the  multiplication  of  the  one  by  the  other  may 
exactly  produce  a:*  —  oj?  +  ^«  By  actually  multiplying 
them,  we  obtain  J^^  —  (/>  +  y)  ^  +  p?  ;  which  quantity  must 
be  the  same  as  x*  —  aw?  -|-  é,  therefore  we  have  evidently 
/?  +  9  =  ^>  ^^^  PC  =  ^-  Hence  is  deduced  this  very  re- 
markable property;  that  in  every  equation  of  the  forpti 
x'^  ^  ax  •{-  b  z=  0,  the  two  values  of  x  are  such,  that  their 
sum  is  equal  to  a,  and  their  product  equal  to  6  :  it  there- 
fore necessarily  follows,  that,  if  we  know  one  of  the  values, 
the  other  also  is  easily  found. 

696.  We  have  at  present  considered  the  case,  in  which  the 
two  values  of  .r  are  positive,  and  which  requires  the  second 
term  of  the  equation  to  have  the  sign  —,  and  the  third  terra 
to  have  the  sign  -{-J  Let  us  also  consider  the  cases,  in  which 
either  one  or  both  values  o£  x  become  negative.  The  first 
takes  place,  when  the  two  factors  of  the  equation  ^ve  a  pro- 
duct of  this  form,  {x  -^  p)  x  {x  -{-  q)  ;  for  then  the  two 
values  of  x  are  x  =  p,  and  x  =  —  ç  ;  and  the  equation 
itself  becomes 

^  +  (q  —  p)^'-pq  =  0; 
the  second  term  having  the  sign  -I- ,  when  q  is  greater  than  pj 
and  the  sign  —,  when  q  is  less  than  p  ;  liistly,  the  third  term 
is  always  negative. 


M6  E1.BMBIIT9  SBGT.  IT. 


The  teooiid  cate,  in  which  both  irahiefl  of  x  are  n^atitcv 
oodin,  when  the  two  factors  arc 

fbr  we  shall  then  have  x  =  ->  p^  and  x  :r  —  ç  ;  the  equa- 
tion itself  therefore  becomes 

**  +  (/^  +  g)x+«  =  0, 

io  which  both  the  second  and  third  terms  are  affected  by  the 
sign  -f  • 

607.  The  signs  of  the  second  and  the  third  terms  con- 
sequently Aew  us  the  nature  of  the  roots  of  any  equation  of 
tbeseoond  degree.  For  let  the  equation  be  jr*  •  • . .  ox  .  •  •  • 
A  s  Q.  If  the  second  and  third  terms  have  the  ngn  +9  the 
two  values  of  x  are  both  negative;  if  the  second  term  have 
the  ngn — ,  and  the  third  term  +,  both  values  are  positive  : 
laellyt  if  the  third  term  also  have  the  sign  —,  one  of  the 
values  in  question  is  .poeiüve.  But,  in  all  cases  whatever,  the 
second  term  contins  the  sum  of  the  two  values,  and  the 
third  term  contains  their  oroduci. 

698.  After  what  has  oeen  said,  it  will  be  easy  to  form 
equations  of  the  second  de^^rce  amtaining  any  two  f^ven 
values.  Let  there  be  requurcd,  for  example,  an  equation 
such,  that  one  of  the  values  of  x  may  be  7,  and  the  other 
—  8.  We  first  form  the  simple  eqiutions  x  =:  7,  and 
X  =:  —  8;  whence,  x  — 7  =:  0,  and  x4'8  =  0;  these  give 
us  the  factors  of  the  equation  required,  which  consequently 
becomes  1^  —  4r  —  21  =0.  Applying  here,  also,  the  above 
rule,  we  find  the  two  given  values  of  x  ;  for  if  x'^  z=  4x  -f  81, 
we  have  j  =  2  f  VS5  »2  +  5,  that  is  to  say,  jp  =  7,  or 
*=  -8. 

699-  The  values  of  x  may  also  liappen  to  be  equal.  Sup- 
pose, for  example,  that  an  equation  is  required,  in  which  bcih 
values  may  be  5  :  here  the  two  factors  will  be  (x  —  6)  X 

ix  —  5),  and  the  equation  sought  will  be  2^  -  lOx  +  25  =  0. 
tn  this  equation,  x  appears  to  have  only  one  value  ;  but  it  is 
becauM  x  is  twice  iîmnd  =  5,  as  the  common  method  of 
resolution  sliews  ;  for  we  have  x-  s  lOx  —  25  ;  wherefore 
jr  =  5  ±  v^O  =:  5  ±  0,  that  is  to  say,  x  is  in  two  ways  «=  6. 
TOO.  A  very  remarkable  case  sometimes  occurs,  in  which 
bodi  values  of  x  become  imo^nary,  or  imposiuble  ;  and  it  is 
then  wholly  impossible  to  assign  any  value  for  j,  that  would 
satisfy  the  terms  of  the  equation.  LfCt  it  be  pn)poscd,  for 
esample,  to  divide  the  number  10  into  two  jpaits,  buch  that 
their  nroduct  may  be  *M.  If  we  call  one  or  tlum.*  {lorts  x, 
the  other  will  U'lO  -  1,  and  their  product  will  be  lUr  - 


\ 


^ 


b 

^ 


CHAP.  IX.  OF  ALGEBRA. 


^4 


jT^  :=  SO  ;  wherefore  ««  =  lOx  -  80,  and  a:  =  5  ±  v'  -  5, 
which,  being  an  imaginary  number,  shews  that  the  question 
is  impossible. 

701.  It  is  veiT  important,  therefore,  to  discover  some 
sign,  by  means  or  which  we  may  immediately  know  whether 
an  equation  of  the  second  degree  be  possible  or  not. 

Let  us  resume  the  general  equation  **  —  ax  +  6  =  0.  We 
shall  have  x*  =  ax  —  i,  and  x  =  ^a  ±-v/(^*  —  6).  This 
shews,  that  if  6  be  greater  than  ^a%  or  4&  greater  than  a\ 
the  two  values  of  x  are  always  imaginary,  since  it  would  be 
required  to  extract  tlie  square  root  of  a  negative  quantity; 
on  the  contrary,  if  6  be  less  than  ^\  or  even  less  than  0, 
that  is  to  say,  if  it  be  a  negative  number,  both  values  will  be 
possible  or  real.  But,  whether  they  be  real  or  ima^nary,  it 
IS  no  less  true,  that  they  are  still  expressible,  and  always 
have  this  property,  that  their  sum  is  equal  to  a,  and  tbeir 
product  equal  to  i.  Thus,  in  the  equation  x«— 6^-j-10=0, 
the  sum  of  'the  two  values  of  x  must  be  6,  and  the  product 
of  these  two  values  must  also  be  JO;  now,  we  find,  1.  x  = 
8+  V  —  1,  and  2.  x  =  3 —  v^  —  1,  quantities  whose  sum  is 
6,  and  the  product  10. 

702.  The  expression  which  we  have  just  found  may  like- 
wise be  represented  in  a  manner  more  general,  and  so  as  to 
be  applied  to  equations  of  this  form,^*  ±  gr  +  7*  =  0  ; 
for  this  equation  gives 

^'  =  +  J  "  y,  and  Of  =  T  ^  *^^^*"'  /^'  ^^  *  ' 
X  =  — S-= — ^~ — ^—  ;  whence  we  conclude,  that  the  two 

values  are  imaginary,  and,  consequently,  the  equation  im- 
possible, when  ^h  is  greater  than  g^  ;  that  is  to  say,  when, 
m  the  equation^*  —  gx  -f  7i  =  0,  four  times  the  product 
of  the  first  and  the  last  term  exceeds  the  square  of  the  second 
term  :  for  the  product  of  the  first  and  the  last  term,  taken 
four  times,  is  |/îir%  and  the  sauare  of  the  middle  term  is 
^x*  ;  now,  if  4/Äx*  be  greater  tnan  ^^x«,  y%  is  also  greater 
than  £"%  and,  in  that  case,  the  equation  is  evidently  im- 
possible ;  but  in  all  other  cases,  the  equation  is  possible,  and 
two  real  values  of  x  may  be  assigned.  It  is  true,  they  are 
often  irrational;  but  we  have  a&eady  seen,  that,  in  such 
cases,  we  may  always  find  them  by  approximation  :  whereas 
no  approximations  can  take  place  with  regard  to  ima^nary 
expressions,  such  as  v/  —5  ;  for  100  is  as  far  from  being  the 
value  of  that  root,  as  1,  or  any  other  number. 

703.  We  have  farther  to  observe,  that  any  quantity  of 


/ 

SiB  ILBM1MT8  aiCT.  IT. 

the  second  degree,  ^  ±ox  ±hy  must  always  be  rcsohriUe 
into  two  iacUn,  such  as  («  ±  p)  x  (x  ±  9).  For,  if  we 
took  throe  factors,  such  as  these,  we  should  come  to  a 
Quantity  of  the  third  degree  ;  and  taking  only  one  such 
factor,  we  should  not  exceed  the  first  degree.  It  is  therefore 
cortain,  that  every  equation  of  the  second  degree  necessarily 
amtttns  two  values  of  x,  and  that  it  can  neither  have  more 
nor  less. 

704.  We  have  already  seen,  that  when  the  two  fiictors 
are  found,  the  two  values  of  «  are  also  known,  since  each 
fiKtor  i^ves  one  of  those  values,  by  making  it  caual  to  0. 
Tlie  converse  also  b  true,  xkx.  that  when  we  have  found  one 
value  of  X,  we  know  also  one  of  the  factors  of  the  equation  ; 
for  if  '  ss  p  represents  one  of  the  values  of  x,  in  any  equa- 
tion of  the  second  degree^  x  —  p  is  one  of  the  factors  of  that 
equation  ;  that  is  to  say,  all  the  terms  having  been  brought 
lo  one  nde,  the  equation  b  divisible  by  j*  «»  p  ;  and  farther, 
the  quotient  expresses  the  other  factor. 

705.  In  order  to  illustrate  what  we  have  now  said,  let 
there  be  given  the  ccjuation  x*  4-  4x  ~  81  =:  0»  in  which 
we  know  UMt  x  =  S  is  one  of  the  values  of  x,  because 
(8  X  8)  +  (4  X  3)  -  21  =  0;  this  shews,  that  x  -  S  is 
one  of  the  factors  of  the  equation,  or  that  x^  4.  4x  —  21  is 
divisible  by  x  —  3,  which  the  actual  division  proves,    llius* 

x-S)  x^  +  4.r-21  (x  +  7 
X-  —  ar 


7x-2I 
7x  -21 

0. 

So  tliat  the  other  factor  is  x  +  7,  and  our  c<|uatkHi  is  rc- 
prcsenUxl  by  ihv  product  (x  -  .'})  x  (x  +  7)  =  0;  whcticx* 
the  two  vaha\%  »f  x  itumcdiatcly  follow,  the  fir^t  factor  giving 
X  =  ÎÎ,  and  the  other  x  =  —  7. 


CHAP.  X. 
r^Pure  Equations  oftht  Third  Degrre. 


7OG.  An  ci|uation  of  the  third  dc^x*  i»  îaici  to  Ik*  iiun , 
when  tlu;  cube  of  the  unknown  quantity  ih  ct|ual  to  a  kiH»i»ii 


CHAP.  X.  OF  ALGEBEA.  249 

quantity,  and  when  neither  the  square  of  the  unknown 
quantity,  nor  the  unknown  quantity  itself,  b  found  in  the 
equation  ;  so  that 

x^  =  125,  or,  more  generally,  x'  =  a,  J*  =  -r-f  &c. 

are  equations  of  this  kind. 

707.  It  is  evident  how  we  are  to  deduce  the  value  of 
X  from  such  an  equation,  since  we  have  only  to  extract  the 
cube  root  of  both  sides.  Thus,  the  equation  s^  =  125 
gives  X  =1  5,  the  equation  x'  =  a  gives  *  =  i/oj  And  the 

equation  jr*  =  —  gives  x  =  y-r-j  or«  =  j^-     To  be  able, 

therefore,  to  resolve  such  equations,  it  is  sufficient  that  wc 
know  how  to  extract  the  cube  root  of  a  given  number. 

708.  But  in  this  manner,  we  obtun  only  one  value  for  x  : 
but  since  every  equation  of  the  second  degree  has  two 
values,  there  is  reason  to  suppose  that  an  equation  of  the 
third  degree  has  also  more  tnan  one  value.  It  will  be  de- 
serving our  attention  to  investigate  this  ;  and,  if  we  find  that 
in  such  equations  x  must  have  several  values,  it  will  be  neces- 
sary to  determine  those  values. 

709.  Let  us  consider,  for  example,  the  equation  x*  =  8, 
with  a  view  of  deducing  from  it  all  the  numbers,  whose  cubes 
arc,  respectively,  8.  As  x  =:  2  is  undoubtedly  such  a  num- 
ber, what  has  been  said  in  the  last  chapter  shews  that  the 
quantity  x'  —  8  =  0,  must  be  divisible  by  x  —  2  :  let  us 
therefore  perform  this  division. 


2x« 

-8 

^* 

—  4ix 

4r- 

■8 

éx- 

8 

0. 
Hence  it  follows,  that  our  equation,  ^  —  8  =  0,  may  be 
represented  by  these  factors  ; 

(^  -  2)  X  (**  +  2x  +  4)  =  0. 

710.  Now,  the  question  is,  to  know  what  number  we  are 
to  substitute  instead  of  x,  in  order  that  x'  =  8,  or  that 
v^  -*  8  =  0  ;  and  it  is  evident  that  this  condition  is  an- 
swered, by  supposing  the  product  which  we  have  just  now 
found  equal  to  0  :  but  this  happens,  not  only  when  the  first 


ttO  BLBMMNTS  »£CT.  HT. 

flMor  JT  —  S  s  0,  which  gyrtB  at  #  s  51,  but  alto  when  tbi 

ttpond  btiUtr 

jk'  4-  ftr  -f  4  a  Q.    Let  ut,  therefore,  nuke 

JK«  +  £r  -f  4  =  0;   then  we  shall  have  j*  =  —  tr  -  4, 

and  thence  x  =  ^  1  ±  ^/—  8. 

711*  So  that  betide  the  cate,  in  which  m  ssft,  which  cor* 
latjiondt  to  the  equation  ^  a  8,  we  have  two  other  Tahica 
of  #,  the  cubet  of  which  are  alto  8;  and  these  are, 

»=-.l+^/-8,and-r=:-l-/-8,  at  will  be 
evident,  by  actually  cubing  thete  exprettiont; 

-14-^— S  -1-^-8 

-l-H^-8  -1  — v^«8 

1—^—8  1+^^-8 

-.^-8-8  +^-8-3 


— «-«v^-8    square     — «-h2,/-8 
-1+    v/-8  -1-    -^-8 


-8^/— 8  +  6  -h2^/-8  +  6 


8  cube.  & 

It  it  true,  that  thete  values  are  imaginary,  or  impotsible  ; 
butyet  they  deserve  attention. 

71S.  What  we  have  said  applies  in  general  to  every  cubic 
equation,  such  at  j^  =  a  ;  namely,  Uiat  beside  the  value 
X  Si  i/Cj  we  thall  alway t  find  two  other  valuer«.  To  abridge 
the  odculation,  let  ut  suppojte  ^a  =  c,  so  that  /i  =  c^,  our 
couati<xi  will  then  assume  this  form,  x'  —  c^  ^  0^  which 
wul  be  divitible  by  x  —  c,  as  the  actual  division  shews  : 

X  —  c)  T*  —  r*  (x'*  f  ex  -f  c' 
X*  -  ex* 


a 


Contoquently,  the  equation  in  question  may  be  repre- 
tented  by  the  pruduct  (x  —  r)  x  (x-  +  r*  +  r')  =  0,  which 
is  in  fact  s  0,  not  only  when  x-.c=.0,  orx^c,  but  also 


CHAP.  X.  OF  ALGEBRA  251 

when  x*  +  ear  +  e*  =  0.    Now,  this  expression  contains  two 
other  values  of  x  ;  for  it  ^ves 

c  c^ 


**  =  —  cj?  —  c^,  and  #  = —  "ô"  i  '^^'l —  ^"^>  ^  ....*• 

j:  =  =-^ ;  that  is  to  say,   «  =  5 

-l±>/-8 
= g X  c. 

713.  Now,  as  c  was  substituted  for  ^a,  we  conclude,  that 
every  equation  of  the  third  degree,  of  the  form  x'  =  a,  fiiF- 
nishes  uree  values  of  x  eacpressed  in  the  fdlowing  manner: 

1.  07  =  ya, 

2.  a:  = g X  ^a, 

8.  JT  = 5 X  y^. 

This  slicws,  that  every  cube  root  has  three  different 
values  ;  but  that  one  only  is  real^  or  possible,  the  two  others 
being  impossible.  This  is  the  more  remarkable,  since  every 
square  root  has  two  values,  and  since  we  shall  afterwards 
see,  that  a  biquadratic  root  has  four  different  values,  that  a 
fifth  root  has  nve  values,  and  so  on. 

In  ordinary  calculations,  indeed,  we  employ  only  the  first 
of  those  values,  because  the  other  two  are  imaginary  ;  as  we 
shall  shew  by  some  examples. 

714.  Question  1.  To  find  a  number,  whosse  quare,  mul- 
tiplied by  its  fourth  part,  may  produce  482. 

Let  X  be  that  number;  the  product  of  «^  multiplied  by 
Xx  must  be  equal  to  the  number  432,  that  is  to  say,  ^  s 
432,  and  3^  =  1728  :  whence,  by  extracting  the  cube  root, 
we  have  x  =  12. 

The  number  sought  therefore  is  12;  for  its  square  144^ 
multiplied  by  its  fourth  part,  or  by  8,  gives  482. 

715.  Question  2.  Required  a  nuinber  such,  that  if  we 
divide  ite  fourth  power  by  its  half,  and  add  14j  to  the  pro- 
duct, the  sum  may  be  100. 

Calling  that  number  x,  its  fourth  power  will  be  x*; 
dividing  by  the  half,  or  4^:,  we  have  2^;  and  adding  to  that 
14^  ,  the  sum  must  be  100.  We  have  therefore  2i*  +  l*t 
zz  100;  subtracting  14^,  there  remains  2xî  a  ^4 1 .  jj. 
viding  by  2,  gives  x^  =  ^^',  and  extracting  the  cube  root, 
wc  find  X  =z  ^, 

716.  Question  3.     Some   officers  being  quartered  in  a 


XLBMSIITS  SBCT.  Vf. 

«WPtry»  e>dh  commandt  three  tîmet  as  many  honemeo,  and 
twenty  tiroes  as  many  foot^soldiers,  as  there  are  offioen. 
Also  a  horaeman^s  monthly  pay  amounts  to  as  many 
florins  as  there  are  ofBoerSy  and  each  foot-soldier  receiyes 
half  that  pay  ;  the  whole  monthly  expense  is  13000  florins. 
Bmuircd  the  number  of  officers. 

If  X  be  the  number  required,  each  officer  will  haTc  under 
bun  Sr  horsemen  and  SOx  foot-soldiers.  So  that  the  whole 
mmiber  of  horsemen  is  Sr%  and  that  of  foot-aoldiers  b 

Now,  eadh  horseman  reoâving  x  floiins  per  month»  and 
each  fiMUHSokfier  receiving  |x  florins,  the  pay  of  the  horse- 
aen,  each  month»  amounts  to  Sx*,  and  that  of  the  foot- 
soldiers  to  lOlr*;  omsequently,  they  all  together  receive 
ISx*  florins,  and  this  sum  must  be  equal  to  ISOOO  florins: 
we  have  therefore  ISr^  =  13000,  or  x^  =  1000,  and  x  =z  10, 
the  number  of  officers  required. 

717.  Question  4.  Several  merchants  enter  into  partner- 
diip,  and  each  contributes  a  hundred  times  as  many  se(|uin9 
as  there  are  partners;  they  send  a  factor  to  Venice,  to 
OMmage  their  captai,  who  gains,  for  every  hundred  sequins, 
twice  as  many  sequins  as  there  are  partners,  and  he  nv 
turns  with  9ßB2  sequins  profit.  Required  the  number  ol* 
partners. 

If  this  number  be  supposed  nx,  each  of  the  partners 
will  have  furnished  lOOx  sequins,  and  the  whole  capital 
must  have  been  lOOx'*^  ;  now,  the  profit  being  Sir  for  100« 
the  capital  must  have  produced  Sjc*  ;  so  that  2x^  =  SG62, 
or  x'  s=  1331  ;  this  gives  x  s  11,  which  is  the  number  of 
partners. 

718.  Question  5.  A  country  girl  excluuigcs  cIuh.*scs  for 
hens,  at  the  rale  of  two  cheeses  for  three  hens  ;  which  hens 
lay  each  {  as  many  eggs  as  there  are  cheeses.     Farther,  the 

E'rl  sells  at  market  nmc  eggs  for  as  many  sous  as  each  hen 
id  laid  eggs,  receiving  in  all  T2  sous  :  how  many  cheeses 
did  slie  exchange  ? 

Let  the  numlier  of  cheeses  =  x,  then  the  number  of 
hensy  which  the  girl  received  in  exchange,  will  Im?  \j^  and 
each  hen  laying  [x  eggs,  the  number  of  eggn  will  Ik*  =  ].r% 
Now,  as  nine  eggs  sell  for  \x  sous,  the  money  whidi  !x- 
eggs  produce  is  |'^,  and  ^'^^  =  7;^  Conse(|uenllv, 
j?==  24x78  =  8x3x8x9  =  8x8xte7,  whence 
jr  =:  12;  that  is  to  say,  the  girl  exchanged  twelve  cheeses 
fbr  eighteen  hens. 


ci^Ap.  xr.  OF  aloebha.  25S 


CHAP.  XI. 

Of  the  Resolution  ^Complete  Equations  of  (he  Third 

Degree« 

719.  An  equation  of  the  third  d^ree  is  called  complète^ 
when,  beside  the  cube  of  the  unknown  quantity,  it  contains 
that  unknown  quantity  itself,  and  its  square:  so  that  the 
general  formula  for  these  equations,  bringing  all  the  terms 
to  one  side,  is 

ax^  ±  6x'  ±  ej7  ±  d  =  0. 

And  the  purpose  of  this  chapter  is  to  shew  how  we  are  to 
derive  from  such  equations  the  values  of  Xy  which  arc  also 
called  the  roots  of  the  equation.  We  suppose,  in  the  first 
place,  that  every  such  an  equation  has  thrâe  n)Ots  ;  since  it 
has  been  seen,  in  the  last  chapter,  that  this  is  true  even  with* 
regard  to  pure  equations  of  tne  same  degree. 

720.  We  shall  first  consider  the  equation  a?  —  6x^. +> 
ILr  —  6  =  0;  and,  since  an  equation  of  the  second  degree 
may  be  considered  as  the  product  of  two  factors,  we  may^ 
also  represent  an  equation  of  the  third  degree  by  the  product*, 
of  three  factors,  which  are  in  the  present  instance, 

(x  -  1)  X  (0?  -  2)  X  (t  -  3)  =  0; 

since,  by  actually  multiplying  them,  we  obtain  the  given 
equation  ;  for  (x  —  1)  x  \x  —  2)  gives  jr*  —  3jr  -[-  2,  and 
multiplying  this  by  a:  —  3,  we  obtain  x^  —  6a:*  4-  llo;  — ;•  6, 
which  are  the  given  quantities,  and  which  must  bè  =Ö;* 
Now,  this  happens,  when  the  product  [x  —  1)  x  (»r  —  2)  x  * 
(r  —  3)  =  0 ;  and,  as  it  is  sufficient  for  this  purpose,  that' 
one  of  the  factors  become  =0,  three  different  cases  may  give*" 
this  result,  namely,  when  x  —  IzrO,  orj:  =  l;  secondly, 
when  X  —  2  =  0,  ora:  =  2;  and  thiidly,  when  .r  —  3  =  0, 
or  .r  =  3. 

We  see  immediately  also,  that  if  we  substituted  for  x, 
any  number  whatever  be^de  one  of  the  above  three, 
none  of  the  three  factors  would  become  equal  to  0;  mid,* 
consequently,  the  product  would  no  longer  be  0;  which 
proves  that  our  equation  can  have  no  other  root  than  these 
three. 

721.  If  it  were  possible,  in  every  other  case,  to  asngn 
the  three  factors  of  such  an  equation  in  the  same  manner. 


S54  XLEMBMTS  IICT.  l¥. 

we  should  iminediateljr  hftTe  its  three  roolà.  Let  us,  there- 
fore, consider,  in  a  more  general  numner,  these  three  factors, 
jr  -  p,  X  —  Y»  '  ~~  ^*  Now,  if  we  seek  their  [nnduct,  the 
first,  multiplied  by  the  second,  gives  x*  ^  (p  +  ç)'  +/'7> 
and  this  product,  multiplied  by  x  —  r,  makes 

^-(P  +  9  +  ^)^  +  iP9  +  P^  +  f  >*  —  W- 
Here,  if  this  formula  roust  become  =0»  it  may  happen  in 

three  cases  :  the  first  is  that«  in  which  x-*psO,  orx  =  ^; 

the  second  is,  when  x  —  9  =  0,  or  x  ^  q\  the  third  is, 

when  jr— r=:0,  orxsr. 
7£8.  Let  us  now  represent  the  quanti^  found«  bj  the 

equalkm  x*  —  ax^  4-Aur  —  csO.   It  is  evident,  in  order 

tut  its  three  roots  may  be  x  a  p,  x  =  9,  x  =s  r,  that  we 

must  have, 

1.  a  s  p  +  9  +  r, 

SL  6  =5  p9  "{-pr  +  Ç^j  *nd 

S.  e  ^  pgr* 

We  perceive,  from  this,  that  the  second  term  of  the  equa- 
tion contains  the  sum  of  the  three  roots  ;  that  the  third  term 
contains  the  sum  of  the  products  of  the  roots  taken  two  by 
two }  and  lastly,  that  the  toiirth  term  consists  of  the  product 
of  aU  the  three  roots  multiplied  together. 

From  this  last  property  we  may  deduce  an  important 
truth,  which  is^  that  an  equation  of  the  third  d^ree  can 
have  no  other  rational  roots  than  the  divisors  or  the  last 
term  ;  for,  since  that  term  is  the  product  of  the  three  roots, 
it  must  be  divisible  by  each  of  them  :  so  that  when  we  wisli 
to  find  a  root  by  trial,  we  immediately  see  what  numbers 
we  are  to  use  ^« 

For  example,  let  us  consider  the  equation,  x'  =:  x  -|~  6, 
or  x'  —  X  —  6  =  0.  Now,  as  this  equation  can  have  no 
other  rational  roots  tlian  numbers  which  are  factors  of  the 
last  term  6,  we  have  only  1,  2,  3,  6,  to  try  with,  and  the 
result  of  these  trials  will  be  as  follows  : 

If  X  =  1,  we  have      1    -  1  —  6  =  —  6. 
If  X  =  2,  we  have      8-2-6  =  0. 
If  X  =  8,  we  have    27  -  3  -  6  =  18 
If  X  :s  6,  we  have  816  -  6  -  6  =  S04. 

Hence  we  see,  that  x  =  2  is  one  of  the  roots  of  the  given 
equation  ;  and,  knowing  this,  it  is  easy  to  find  the  otlier  two; 

*  We  shall  find  in  the  sequel,  tliat  this  is  a  general  property 
of  equations  of  any  cliinenAion;  and  a»  thU  trial  requins  u*  to 
know  all  the  diviAor»  of  the  last  term  of  the  €^quation,  we  may  for 
this  purpose  have  recourse  to  the  Table,  Art.  (Üi. 


CHAP.  XI. 


OE   ALOKBllA.  85S 


for  X  =  S  being  one  of  the  roots,  ^  -*  2  is  a  factor  of  the 
equation,  and-  we  have  only  to  seek  the  other  fiictor  by 
means  of  division  as  follows  : 

X  ^  2)  a^  --  X  -^  6  (x'  +  ftx  +  S 


2«» 

—  JT  — 

6 

ar* 

-*s 

är 

-6 

Sx 

-6 

0. 

Since,  therefore,  the  formula  is  represented  by  the  product 
(jT  —  2)  X  (a:"  +  Ar  +  S),  it  will  become  =0,  not  only  when 
X  —  2  =0,  but  also  when  ^  +  2ar  +  3  =  0  :  and,  this  last 
factor  gives  x'^  +  2x  =  —  3  ;  consequently, 

X  =—1  ±>v/— 2; 
and  these  are  the  other  two  roots  of  our  equation,  which  are 
evidently  imposable,  or  imaginary. 

723.  The  method  which  we  have  explained,  is  applicid>Ie 
only  when  the  first  term  a?  is  multipliea  by  1,  and  the  other 
terms  of  tlie  equation  have  int^r  coeffidents;  there- 
fore, when  this  is  not  the  case,  we  must  begin  by  a  pre- 
paration, which  consists  in  transforming  the  equation  mto 
another  form  having  the  condition  required  ;  after  which,  we 
make  the  trial  that  has  been  already  mentioiied« 

Let  there  be  ^ven,  for  example,  the  equation 

x'  -  8x3+  V^  -  T  =  0; 

as  it  contains  fourth  parts,  let  us  make  x  =  ~,  whidi 
will  give 

8         4+8^~"' 
and,  multiplying  by  8,  we  shall  obtain  the  equation 

the  roots  of  which  are,  as  we  have  already  seen,  y =1^  ^=2^ 
y  =  3  ;  whence  it  foUows,  that  in  the  given  equation,  we 
have  x  =  4^r=l,x  =  f. 

724.  Let  there  be  an  equaüon,  where  the  coefficient  of 
the  first  term  is  a  whole  number  but  not  1,  and  whose  last 
term  is  1  ;  for  example, 

firs  -  llx*  +  &r  -  1  =  0. 


SB6  BLKMSKTS  81CT.  !¥• 

Here»  if  we  divide  bj  6|  wc  ihall  have  dr'—  V^  +'— i^O; 
which  équation  we  may  clear  of  fracUoos,  by  the  method 
just  explained. 

216"  «16  ^T      ^•■"' 

and  multipljring  by  216,  the  equation  will  become 
y  -  lly:  f-  S%  —  d6  =  0.     l^ut  as  it  would  be  tedious 
to  make  trial  of  all  the  divisors  of  the  number  86,  and 
aa  the  last  term  of  the  original  equation  is  1,  it  is  better 

to  nppoae,  in  this  equation,  x  =  —  ;  for  we  shall  then 

fi  11  fi 

have  — 5"  + 1=0,  which,  multiplied  by  *•, 

gives  6  —  lis  +  6^  —  z^  =  0,  and  transposing  all  the 
tOfVis,  a*  —  ftr«+  11«  —  6  =  0;  where  the  roots  are  a  =  1, 
zzzij  s  =  8  ;   whence  it  follows  that  in  our  equation 

7C5*  It  has  been  observed  in  the  preceding  articles,  that 
in  order  to  have  all  the  roots  in  positive  numoers,  the  signs 
plîiê  and  mimuê  must  succeed  each  other  alternately  Toy 
means  of  which  the  equation  takes  this  form, 
j-s  .  ax^  -f  &r  —  c  =  0,  the  «gns  changing  as  many  times 
as  there  arc  positive  roots.  If  all  the  three  roots  had  been 
negative,  ana  we  had  multiplied  together  the  three  factors 

X  -f  />,  X  f  ç,  J  +  **»  •"  ^^^  terms  would  have  had  the 
sign  pluSf  and  the  form  of  the  c(|uation  would  have  been 
jr  4-  <u^  -(-  Ax  -I-  c  =  0,  in  which  the  same  signs  follow 
each  other  three  times;  that  is  the  number  of  negative 
roots. 

We  may  conclude,  therefore,  that  as  often  as  the  higns 
change,  the  e(|uation  has  positive  roots  ;  and  that  as  often  as 
tlie  same  higns  follow  eocn  other,  the  e(|uation  has  negative 
roots.  This  renuurk  is  very  important,  because  it  teai*nes  us 
whether  tlie  divisors  of  the  last  term  are  to  be  taken  affirma- 
tively or  negatively,  when  we  wihh  to  make  the  trial  which 
has  Dcen  mentioned. 

786.  In  order  to  illustrate  what  has  Xkvix  said  by  an  ex- 
ample, let  us  considcT  the  ct|uation  x'-f  x'— 34x  +  56  =  0, 
in  which  tlie  «gns  are  changed  twict*,  and  in  which  the  same 
sign  retumii  but  once.  Here  we  conclude  tliat  the  e<|uation 
hat  two  positive  roots,  and  one  negative  root  ;  and  as  these 


CHAP.  XI.  OF  ALGEBRA.  S87 

roots  must  be  divisors  of  die  last  term  56,'  they  must  be  in- 
cluded in  the  numbers  ±1»  ^i  4,  7,  8»  14,  38, 56. 

Let  us,  therefore,  make  x  =  %  and  we  shall  have  8  + 
4  —  68  -f-  56  =  0  ;  whence  we  condude  that  or  =  2  is  a 
positive  root,  and  that  therefore  x  —  S  is  a  divisor  of  die 
equation,  by  means  of  which  we  easily  find  the  two  other 
roots  ;  for,  actually  dividing  by  4?  —  2,  we  have 

or  — 2)x3+     x«-84*  +  56(ar*  +  ac  — 28 
x3-2x» 


Sx«  -  84x 
3x«-    6x 


2ar 
28j: 


56 
56 


0. 

And  making  the  quotient  x«  -|-  3j:  —  28  =  0,  we  find  the 
two  other  roots  ;  which  will  be 

J7  -=  1  ±  v^(^  +  2S)=i  -  4  ±  V  ;  that  is,  j:  =  4;  or 
X  =  —  7  ;  and  taking  into  account  the  root  found  before^ 
namely,  x  =  2,  we  clearly  perceive  that  the  equation  has 
two  positive,  and  one  negative  root.  We  6hall  give  some 
examples  to  render  this  still  more  evident 

727.  Question  1.  There  are  two  numbers,  whose  dif- 
ference is  12,  and  whose  product  multiplied  bj  their  sum 
makes  14560.     What  are  those  numbers? 

Let  X  be  the  less  of  the  two  numbers,  then  the  greater 
will  be  J*  +  12,  and  dieir  product  will  be  x*  -f-  12x,  which 
multiplied  by  the  sum  2x  4-  12,  gives 

2x»  +  86r«  +  144x  =  14560; 

and  dividing  by  2,  we  have  \ 

a^  +  ISx"  +  7ar  =  7280. 

Now,  the  last  term  7280  is  too  ^reat  for  us  to  make  trial 
of  all  its  divisors  ;  but  as  it  is  divisible  by  8,  we  shall  make 
X  =  2^,  because  the  new  equation,  8^  -f  72^*  +  144^ 
=  7280,  after  the  subsütution,  being  divided  by  8,  will  be- 
come ^  -f-  9y*  +  18^  =  910  ;  to  solve  which,  we  need  only 
try  the  divisors  1,  2,  6,  7, 10, 13,  &c.  of  the  number  910: 
where  it  is  evident,  that  the  three  first,  1,  2,  5,  are  too 
small  ;  beginning  therefore  with  supposing  y  =  7,  we  im- 
mediately find  that  number  to  be  one  of  the  roots  ;  for  the 
substitution  gives  848+  44 1  -|r  126  =  910.  It  follows, 
therefore,  that  x*  =  14;  and  the  two  other  roots  will  be 
found  by  dividing  ^  +  fljy«  +  18y  -  910  by  y  —  7,  thus  : 


BI.KMJBKT8  SECT.  IT. 


1^  -  llÄy 


lâOy  -  910 
ISOy  -  910 

0. 

Supponng  now  thiB  quotient  y  +  16y  +  130  =  0,  we 
diall  have  y  +  I6y  =  —  130,  and  thencè 
M  =  —  8  ±  x/~  w;  a  proof  that  the  other  two  rooU  are 
impossible. 

The  two  numbers  sought  are  therefore  14,  and  (14  -f 
12)  =  S6  ;  the  product  of  which»  364»  multiplied  by  their 
sum,  40,  gives  14560. 

728.  Ç^esikm  2.  To  find  two  numbers  whose  difference 
is  18,  and'such»  that  their  sum  multiplied  by  the  difference 
of  their  cubes,  may  produce  275184. 

Let  X  be  the  less  of  the  two  numbers,  then  x  +  18  ^H  be 
the  greater  ;  the  cube  of  the  first  will  be  x',  and  the  cube  of 
the  second 

x'  +  54r«  +  972r  +  5832; 

the  difference  of  the  cubes 

54x«  -I-  97ür  -h  583:i  =  54  (x'  -I-  18x  -f  108), 
which  multiplied  by  the  sum  2x  -f-  1^»  or  2  (x  -f-  9)9  gi^cs 
the  product 

108  (x*  +  27x»  +  270x  +  972)  =  275184. 
And,  dividing  by  108,  we  have 

x=  +  27x«  4-  270Lr  +  972  =  2548,  or 
x»  +  27jr-  +  270x  =  1576. 

Now,  the  divisors  of*  1576  are  1,  2,  4,  8,  &c.  the  two  first  of 
which  are  too  small  ;  but  if  we  try  j*  =  4,  that  number  is 
fimml  to  satisfy  the  terms  of  the  »{uation. 

It  remains,  therefore,  to  divide  hy  x  »  4,  in  order  to  find 
the  two  other  roots;  which  divihion  givi^si  the  quotient 
a*  +  Six  +  5594;  nuiking  then*fore 

J"  +  liU  =  -  394,  we  shall  find 

'=  -  V  ^±CV  -  '  VM; 

that  is,  two  inwginary  roots. 

Hence  the  numbers  siHjght  are  4,  and  (4  4-  18)  =  22. 

729.  QucMtum  3.  Rec)uired  two  numbers  whose  dif- 
firreooe  is  720,  and  such,  that  if  the  less  be  multiplied  by  the 
square  root  of  the  greater»  the  product  may  be  90736. 


CHAP.  XI.  OF  ALGEBBA.  259 

If  the  less  be  represented  by  x,  the  greater  will  evidently 
be  X  +  720  ;  and,  by  the  question, 

X  V{x  +  720)  =  20736  =  8  .  8  .  4  .  81. 
Squaring  both  sides,  we  have 

X«  (x  +  720)  =  a^  +  720x2  =  8* .  8« .  4^ .  81«. 
Let  us  now  make  x  =  8y  ;  this  supposition  ^ves 
Sy  +  720  .  Sy  =  8* .  8* .  4* .  81»; 

and  dividing  by   8',    we  have  y^  +  90^"  =  8  .  4-  .  81'- 
Farther,  let  us  suppose  y  =  2«,  pnd  we  shall  have 
8^  +  4  .  90;^*  =  8  .  4'.  81*  ;  or,  dividing  by  8, 

z^  +  452«  =  4«  .  81«. 

Again,  make  z  =  9uy  in  order  to  have,  in  this  last  equa- 
tion, 9*u'  +  45  .  9^u^  =  4*  .  9*,  because  dividing  now  by  9*, 
the  equation  becomes  u^  +  5u^  n  4«  .  9,  or 
tt^(a  +  5)  =  16  .  9  =  144;  where  it  b  obvious,  that  t^  =4; 
for  in  this  case  w«  =  16,  and  w  +  5  =  9  :  since,  therefore, 
M  zz  4,  we  have  z  =  36,  y  =  72,  and  x  =  576,  which  is  the 
less  of  the  two  numbers  sought;  so  that  the  ^eater  is  1296, 
and  the  square  root  of  this  last,  or  36,  multiplied  by  the 
other  number  576,  gives  20736. 

730.  Remark.  This  question  admits  of  a  simpler  solu- 
tion ;  for  since  the  square  root  of  the  greater  numoer,  mul- 
tiplied by  the  less,  must  give  a  product  equal  to  a  given 
number,  the  greater  of  the  two  numbers  must  be  a  souare. 
If,  therefore,  from  this  consideration,  we  suppose  it  to  oe  j:^> 
the  other  number  will  be  x«  —  720,  which  bemg  multiplied  by 
the  square  root  of  the  greater,  or  by  x,  we  have 

x^  -  720x  =  20736  =  64  .  27  .  12. 
If  we  make  x  =  4y,  we  shall  have 

64y  -  720  .  4y  =  64 .  27  .  12,or 

y  -  45y  =  27  .  12. 

Supposing,  farther,  y  =  8z,  we  find 

27z3  -  135r  =  27  .  12;  or,  dividing  by  27,  z*  -  5z  =  12, 
or  2^  -  52  —  12  =  0.  The  divisors  of  12  are  1,  2,  3,  4,  6, 
12:  the  first  two  are  too  small;  but  the  supposition  of 
z  =  S  gives  exactly  27  —  15  —  12  =  0.  Consequently, 
3  =  3,  y  =  9,  and  x  =  36  ;  whence  we  conclude,  that  the 
greater  of  the  two  numbers  sought,  or  x^,  =  1296,  and  that 
the  less,  or  x*  —  720,  =  576,  as  before. 

731 .  Question  4.  There  are  two  numbers,  whose  dif- 
ference is  12;  the  product  of  this  diiference  by  the  sum  of 
their  cubes  is  102144  ;  what  are  the  numbers?  . 

Calling  the  less  of  the  two  niunbers  x^  the  greater  will  be 
X  +  12  :  also  the  cube  of  the  first  is  x',  and  of  the  second 

82 


900  BLSMKKTt  SECT.  I¥. 

4^  +  3&r'  +  432r-|-1728;  the  jproduct  also  of  the  tum  of 
these  culxrs  by  the  differenoe  12,  is 

12  (AT»  +  86j*  +  HaSlx  +  1788)  =  102144  ; 

and,  dividing  successively  by  12  and  by  2,  we  have 

j-'  +  l&r»  +  21&r  +  864  =  4266,  or 
x>  +  18j*  +  216r  =  9392  =:  8  .  8  .  53. 

ITnow  we  substitute  x  z=  2^,  and  divide  by  8,  we  shall 
have^  +  flly*  +  04y  =  8.53=  424, 

Now,  the  divisors  of  424  are  1,  2,  4,  8,  53,  8cc.  1  and  S 
are  evidently  loo  small  ;  but  if  we  make  v  =  ^9  ^®  ^nd 
64+144  +  216  =  424.  So  that  y  =  4,  and  x  =  8; 
whence  we  conclude  that  the  two  numbers  sought  arc  8  and 
(8  +  12)  =  20. 

782.  Question  5.  Several  persons  form  a  partnership, 
and  establish  a  certain  capital,  to  which  each  contributes  ten 
tiroes  as  many  pounds  as  there  arc  persons  in  company  : 
they  gain  6  pluM  the  number  of  partners  per  cent  ;  and  Uie 
whole  profft  is  392  pounds:  required  how  many  partners 
there  are? 

Let  X  he  tlie  numlx^r  required  ;  then  each  partner  will 
have  fumiidied  lOx  poundti,  and  coniointly  lÖür*  pounds; 
and  since  they  gain  x  +  6  {x?r  cent,  they  will  have  gained 


X' 


^+6x« 


with  the  whole  capital,  — rjr — ,  which  is  to  Ix*  made  equal 

to  39^^ 

We  have,  therefore,  x*  +  6j^  =  ^20,  consequently, 
making  x  =  2y,  and  dividing  by  8,  we  have 

y  +  3y  =  490. 

Now,  the  di\iM>rs  of  490  are  1,2,  5,  7,  10,  8:c.  the  first 
thnt»  of  which  are  tc»  small  ;  but  if  we  suppose*  ^  =  7,  we 
have  34:5  +  147  =  490;  so  tliat  y  =  7,  and  x  =  14. 

There  art*  thercfon*  fourteen  partners,  and  each  of  them 
put  140  |)ounds  into  the  common  stick. 

73J.  Qtitstion  6.  A  company  of  nK*rrhants  have  a  com* 
mon  stock  of  8240  {XMinds;  and  each  contributes  to  it  forty 
times  as  many  |)ounds  as  there  arc  {lartners  ;  with  which 
they  gain  as  much  per  cent  as  there  are  partners  :  now,  on 
divuhng  the  pnilit,  it  is  fourni,  after  each  has  received  ten 
times  as  numy  pounds  as  tlH*re  arc  iiersims  in  the  omnany, 
that  there  still  remains  5224A  Uequireil  the  number  oi  mer- 
chants ? 

If  X  lie  made  to  represent  the  number,  each  will  have  con- 
tributed 40r  to  the  stock  ;  con8c(|uently,  all  together  will 
have  coslributed  40H,  which  makca  the  stock 


CUAJP.  XI«     '  OF   ALGEBRA.  261 

=  40a;^  +  8240.    Now,  with  this  sum  they  gain  x  per  œnt  ; 
so  that  the  whole  gain  is 

40j^      8240a:       ^  ^^^    _^ 

100     "*"    100    ""  ^^^^*^^  ""  ^^^  ""  ^  "^  *T*^- 
From  which  sum  each  receives  lOx,  and  consequently  they 
all  together  receive  10j:%  leaving  a  remainder  of  224  ;  the 
profit  must  therefore  have  been  10^  -|-  224,  and  we  have 
the  equation 

2x^      412t 

^  +  î^=  10x^  +  22^. 

Multiplying  by  5  and  dividing  by  %  we  have  x^  +  SOfo  = 
26x»  +  560,  or  x^  -  25^«  +  206r  -  660  =  0  :  the  first, 
however,  will  be  more  convenient  for  trial.  Here  the  divisors 
of  the  last  term  are  I,  2,  4,  5,  7,  8, 10, 14, 16,  &c.  and  they 
must  be  taken  positively  ;  because  in  the  second  form  of  the 
equation  the  signs  vary  three  times,  which  shews  that  all  the 
three  roots  are  positive. 

Here,  if  we  first  try  j:  =  1,  and  x  zr  2,  it  is  evident  that 
the  first  side  will  become  less  than  the  second.  We  shall 
therefore  make  trial  of  other  divisors. 

When  X  =  4,  we  have  64  +  824  z=  400  +  560,  which 
does  not  satisfy  the  terras  of  the  equation. 

If  a:  =:  5,  we  have  12.5  +  1030  =  625  +  560,  which  like- 
wise  does  not  succeed. 

But  if  J«  =  7,  we  have  343  +  1442  =z  1225  +  560, 
which  answers  to  the  equation  ;  so  that  a:  =  7  is  a  root  of 
it.  Let  us  now  seek  for  the  other  two,  by  dividing  the 
second  form  of  our  equation  by  j:  —  7. 

.r  -  7  )  or'  —  25^-«  +  260x  -  560  (  x*  -  l&r  +  80 

x^  -    7x* 


-  18x*  +  206x 

-  18x»  +  12ftr 

80x  -  560 
80x-  560 

0. 

Now,  making  this  quotient  equal  to  nothing,  we  have 
jp2  _  I8ar  +80  =  0,  or  X«  -  ISx  =  -  80 ;  which  gives 
X  =  9  ±  1,  so  that  the  two  other  roots  are  x  =:  8  ;  or 
X  =  10. 

This  quesüon  therefore  admits  of  three  answers.  Accord- 
ing to  the  first,  the  number  of  merchants  b  7  ;  aocording  to 


5MS 


KLEMENTH 


■BCT«  !¥• 


the  second,  it  is  8  ;  and,  according  to  the  third,  it  is  10.  The 
following  sUtement  shews,  that  ail  these  will  answer  the 
conditions  of  the  question  : 

Number  of  merchants  .  -  .  . 
Each  contributes  40jr     .... 

In  all  they  contribute  AQje*  .  -  - 
The  original  stock  was    .    .    -    . 

The  whole  stock  is  IOj!« -f  8S40   • 

With  this  capital  they  gain  as 
much  per  cent  as  there  are 
partners  ....... 

Each  takes  from  it  ..... 
So  that  they  all  together  take  lOx^ 
Therefore  there  remains      •    •    - 


CHAP.  XII. 


(fft/w  Rule  fy* Cardan,  or  ^'Scipio  Kcrrtx). 

TM,  When  we  have  removed  fractions  fn)m  on  e<|uation 
of  the  third  (Icffree,  accortiinf^  tu  the  manner  which  hau  been 
explained,  ana  none  of  the  divisors  of  the  last  term  are 
found  to  he  a  root  of  the  equaticm»  it  is  a  certain  prfM>f,  not 
only  that  the  etjuation  \ias  no  root  in  integer  numbers,  but 
alM)  that  a  fractional  nM)t  cannot  exint;  which  may  be 
proved  as  follows. 

lA»t  then»  be  gi%'en  the  equation  x'  —  ax-  -|-  /n  —  r  =0, 
in  which,  <f,  A,  r,  expn^ss  intepT  nunibem.  If  we  sup|X]ce, 
f<ir  example,  x  n  J,  we  nholl  nave  *|'  —  Ja  •  Ja  —  r  =  0, 
Now,  the  fir^t  term  only  Iulh  8  for  the  denominator;  the 
othiTR  lieing  either  integer  numbers,  or  numbers  divided 
only  by  I  or  by  %  aiul  tlK*n*fore  cannot  make  0  with  the 
first  tcnn.  Tne  wimc  tiling  happi-nn  witli  every  otiu^r 
fraction. 


CHAP.  XII«  OF  ALGEBBA.  S6S 

7S5.  As  in  those  fractions  the  roots  of  the  equation  are 
neither  integer  numbers,  nor  fractions,  they  are  irrational, 
and,  as  it  often  happens,  imaginary.  The  manner,  there- 
fore, of  expressing  them,  and  of  determining  the  radical 
signs  which  aifect  them,  forms  a  very  important  point,  and 
deserves  to  be  carefully  explained.  This  method,  called  Car^ 
dan's  Rule,  is  ascribed  to  Cardan,  or  more  properly  to  Sdpio 
Ferreoy  both  of  whom  lived  some  centuries  since*« 

736.  In  order  to  understand  this  rule,  we  must  first  at- 
tentively consider  the  nature  of  a  cube,  whose  root  is  a 
binomial. 

Let  a  -f-  6  be  that  root  ;  then  the  cube  of  it  will  be 
a^  -j-  3û^ô  +  3aJ^  +  ô',  and  we  see  that  it  is  composed  of 
the  cubes  of  the  two  terms  of  the  binomial,  and  beside  that, 
of  the  two  middle  terms,  3a^ô  +  3aô«,  which  have  the  cx>m* 
mon  factor  3a6,  multiplying  the  other  factor,  a  +  6  ;  that  is 
to  say,  the  two  terms  contain  thrice  the  product  of  the  two 
terms  of  the  b'momial,  multiplied  by  the  sum  of  those  terms. 

737.  Let  us  now  suppose  j:  =  a  +  J  ;  taking  the  cube  of 
each  side,  we  have  jr*  =  a^  +  6'  +  3a6  (a  +  ô)  :  and,  since 
a  +  A  =  j:,  we  shall  have  the  equation,  or'  =  a^  -f  6^  -h  So&r, 
or  J^*  =  ^abx  +  a^  +  6^,  one  of  the  roots  of  which  we  know 
to  be  or  =  a  -h  Ô.  Whenever,  therefore,  such  an  equaüon 
occurs,  we  may  assign  one  of  its  roots. 

For  example,  let  a  =  2  and  0  =  3;  we  shall  then  have 
the  equation  ar^  =  18x  +  35,  which  we  know  with  certainty 
to  have  x  -=i  5  for  one  of  its  roots. 

738.  Farther,  let  us  now  suppose  a'  =  p,  and  6'  zr  g  ;  we 
shall  then  have  a  =  J//?  and  b  =  yg,  consequently,  ah  =  ^pq\ 
therefore,  whenever  we  meet  with  an  equaüon,  of  the  form 
x^  =  SxVpq  -\-  p  ■\-  qy  we  know  that  one  of  the  roots  ia 
Vp  ^  l/q. 

Now,  we  can  determine  p  and  j,  in  such  a  manner,  that 
both  S\/pq  and  p  ■\-  q  may  be  quantities  equal  to  deter- 
minate numbers  ;  so  that  we  can  always  resolve  an  equation 
of  the  third  degree,  of  the  kind  which  we  speak  of. 

739.  Let,  in  general,  the  equation  x^  zzfx  -i-  ^  be  pro- 
posed. Here,  it  will  be  necessary  to  compare^*  with  Sî/pq, 
and  g  with  />  •+•  J  ;  that  is,  we  must  determine  p  and  q  in 

*  This  rule  when  first  discovered  by  Scipio  Ferreo  was  only 
for  particular  forim  of  cubics,  but  it  was  afterwards  generalised 
by  Tartalea  and  Cardan.  See  Montucla  s  Hist.  Math.  ;  also  Dr. 
Hutton's  Dictionary,  article  Algebra;  and  Professor  Bonny- 
castle's  Introduction  to  liis  Treatise  on  Algebra,  Vol.  1.  p. 
xii— XV. 


264  KMJtUEMTê  tSGT«  IT. 

nich  a  mftiiner,  that  S^m  may  become  eaual  to  f,  and 
P'^^'zzgi  for  we  then  know  that  one  of  tne  roots  of  ovr 
equation  will  be  jr  :=  l/p  -f  Vf* 

740.  We  have  therefore  to  resolve  these  two  equations^ 

f  P 

The  first  gives  }Jpq  =  ^^  ;  or />ç  =  ^  =tV/*»  •»* 

kfKi  -=■  iV/*^  The  second  equation,  being  squared,  givca 
P*  +  2py  +  y^  =  ^  ;  if  we  subtract  from  it  ^pq  =s  /f/^t 
we  have  9-  —  Aoç  +  r/-  =  /r*  ~  iVy^^»  ä*^  taking  the 
square  root  of  both  sides,  we  have 

Now,  fdnce  p  +  7  ==  ^>  ^e  have,  by  adding  p  +  9  to  one 
side  of  the  ecjuatton,  and  its  caual,  ^,  to  the  other,  %p  s 
e  -^  ^''(5*  —  x*?/*)  Î  »n^»  '7  subtracting  p  —  7  from  />  +  J, 
we  have  iqz=.g  -^  s'K^  —  vTw/^)  *  consequently, 

741 .  In  a  cubic  equation,  therefore,  of  the  form  x*  = 
/^'^Rf  ^batever  be  the  numbers y*and  g^  wc  liave  always 

for  one  of  the  roots 

that  is,  an  irrational  quantity,  containing  not  only  the  sign 
of  the  square  root,  but  aim  the  sign  of  the  cube  root  ;  aiid 
this  is  the  formula  which  is  called  tlie  Itttir  o^*  Cardan, 

14tâ,  lict  us  apply  it  to  sona*  examples  m  order  that  its 
use  may  be  better  undenttcxxl. 

Let  JT^  =  ttr  +  9.     First,  we  shall  have/=  G,  and^  =  9  ; 
so  that  g«  =  81,/^  =  216,  ,V/'  =  î*-  ;  then 
^  -  ^\/'  =  40, and  ^/(i?-  -  .V/»)  =  7.   Therefore, one 
of  the  roots  of  the  given  equation  is 

X  =  v?-^)  +  î/(-5r>  =  ^'»*  +  '^î  =  Î/8  +yi  = . . 

2  +  1=3. 

74CÎ.  Let  there  be  pro|)oAed  the  equation  x^  =  dr  +  It 
Hens  we  iJudl  have  /*=  3  and  ^  =  ii  ami  consequently, 
^  =  4,/»  =  27,  and   ^^f'  =  4  ;  which  gives 
%^(ff^^  •%./')  =  ^^i    whence  it   followji,  that  one  of  the 

2+0  2-0 

roots  is  X  =  ;/(-!_) +^(-3-)  =  1  +  i  =  « 


CHAP.  XII.  OF  ALGKBAA.  965 

744.  It  often  happens,  however,  that,  though  such  an 
equation  has  a  rational  root,  that  root  cannot  be  found  by 
the  rule  which  we  are  now  considering. 

Let  there  be  given  the  equation  a:^  zz  6x  +  40,  in  which 
JT  =  4  is  one  of  the  roots.  We  have  herey  =:  6  and^  =:  40; 
fartiier,  g^  =:  1600,  and  ^-^p  =  32  ;  so  that 
g^  -  ^V/3  =1568,  and  V(g''  -  -êrf^)  =  ^/1«68  =  .  .  . . 
v^(4  •  4  .  49  .  2)  =  28  V^  ;  consequently  one  of  the  roots 
will  be 

,,,40+28^/2        ,^40-28;/2 

a:  =  ?/(20+14  V2)  +  ^(20-14 ^/2)  ; 

which  quantity  is  really  =  4,  although,  upon  inspection^  we 
should  not  suppose  it.  In  fact,  the  cube  of  2-)- V2  being 
20  +  14  ^/2,  we  have,  reciprocally,  the  cube  root  of  20  -f 
14  ^/2  equal  to  2  -f  v'2;  in  the  same  manner,  ^(20  — 
14  V2)  =  2  -  •2  ;  wherefore  our  root  jr  =  2  +  V2  + 
2-  ^/2  =  4*. 

745.  To  this  rule  it  mi^ht  be  objected,  that  it  does  not 
extend  to  all  equations  of  the  third  degree,  because  the 
square  of  x  does  not  occur  in  it  ;  that  is  to  say,  the  second 
term  of  the  equation  is  wanting.  But  we  may  remark,  that  ,. 
every  complete  equation  may  be  transformed  into  another, 
in  which  tne  second  term  is  wanting,  which  will  therefcure- 
enable  us  to  apply  the  rule. 

To  prove  this,  let  us  take  the  complete  equation  a^  *- 
6x^  +  llx  —6  =  0:  where,   if  we  take  the  third  of  the 
coefficient  6  of  the  second  term,  and  make  c  —  2  n  y,  we' 
shall  have 

xzny  +  %        ^*=y*  +  4y  +  4,  and 

ar»  =  ys  +  6y*  +  12y  +  8  ; 

Consequently,  ar^  =  ^  -f  6y*  + 1%  +    8 

-  6jr«  =     —  %«  -  24y  —  24 

11j7=  lly  +  22 

-6=  «   6 

or,  x^  —  6jc*  4-  llo?  —  6  =  y^  —  y. 

We  have,  therefore,  the  equation  y^  — ^  =:  0,  the  resolu- 

*  We  have  no  general  rules  for  extracting  the  cube  root  of 
these  binomials,  as  we  have  for  the  square  root  ;  those  that  have 
been  given  by  various  authors,  all  lead  to  a  mixt  equation  of  the 
third  degree  similar  to  the  one  proposed.  Howevec,  when  the 
extraction  of  the  cube  root  is  possible,  the  sum  of  the  two 
radicals  which  represent  the  root  of  the  equation,  always  be^ 
comes  rational;  so  that  we  may  find  it  immediately  by  the 
method  explained,  Art.  722.     F.  T. 


SUUKKTS  SECT.  IV* 

tioa  of  wfiidi  it  b  eTident,  since  we  immediately  peroeiTe 
that  it  is  the  product  of  the  factors 

If  we  DOW  make  each  of  these  factors  =  0,  we  have 

that  is  to  say,  the  three  roots  which  we  have  already  found« 

746.  Let  there  now  be  given  the  general  equation  of  the 
third  degree,  x^  +  ax^  -|-  6x  +  c  =  0,  of  which  it  is  re- 
quired to  destroy  the  second  term. 

For  this  purpose,  we  must  add  to  x  the  third  of  the  oo- 
cfiicient  of  the  second  term,  preserving  the  same  sign,  and 
then  write  for  this  sum  a  new  letter,  as  for  example  ^,  so 
that  we  shall  have  x  -|-  4^  =  ^,  and  x  ssy  ^  |a  ;  whoice 
lesults  the  following  calculation  : 

and  1^  =  y  —  ay  +  }a*y  —  ^^  ; 

Consequently, 

x^  =  y»  — irj^  f  |^-y-,!^l 

or«  =  «y  -  ia^y  i-   ^ 

Alt  =  ^  —    ja6 

c  =  r 

or,y  -  (4«  -  b)y  +  ^y-  iab  +  c=  0, 
an  equation  in  which  the  second  term  is  wanting. 

747.  We  are  enabled,  by  means  of  this  tranGiormation,  to 
find  the  roots  of  all  equations  of  the  third  degree,  as  the  fol- 
lowing example  will  shew. 

l^^t  it  be  proposed  to  resolve  the  equation 

iJ-ßr^'  +  lar—  12  =  0. 

Here  it  is  first  necessary  to  destroy  the  second  term  ;  for 
which  purpose,  let  us  make  x  —  2  =  ^,  and  then  we  shall 
have  x=y-rîî,x^=j^'  +  4y  +  4,and  r^=y  +  6y'  + 
12y-|-8;  therefore, 

jJ  =  y  4.  6y»  +  12v  +    8 

—  ftr»  =       -  6/-  2^v-24 

lax  =z  1.%  +  26 

-   12     =  -  12 

which  gives  y  +  jy  —  2  =sO  ;  or  y'  =  —  y  +  2. 

And  if  we  com|Mure  this  equation  with  the  formula,  (Art. 
741)  J^  =yx  +/r,  we  bavey*=:  —  1,  and  g  =z  U;  wliercv 
fcrr,    /j-  =  4,    and     »%/' =  -  ^;    also,    /r*  -  ,%f'^ 

consequently. 


CHAP.  XII.  OF  AL&EBBA.  267 


-    .   •         .-  or 

3'  =  ?/  (9  +  -^ )  +  ?/(9  -  -g— ) 
,^27+6y21,  ,  ,,  ,27-6  V21.  ^ 

J,  =  ^?/(27+  6  ./21)  (+  4- V(27  -  6  V21)  ; 

and  it  remains  to  substitute  this  value  in  x  =  y  +  2. 

748.  In  the  solution  of  this  example,  we  have  been 
brought  to  a  quantity  doubly  irrational  ;  but  we  must  not 
immediately  conclude  that  the  root  is  irrational  :  because  the 
binomials  27  ±  6  \/21  might  happen  to  be  real  cubes;  and 
this  is  the  case  here  ;  for  the  cuoe  of 

3+V/21,   .      216+48^/21       «^  ,  ^    ,«,   .   ^  „         , 
— !-^ —  bemg ^-^ =  27  +  6  V^21,  it  follows  that 

/^  o 

'  the  cube  root  of  27  +  6  V21  is ^ ,  and  that  the  cube 

3—  ^21 

root  of  27  —  6  ^21  is  — x —  .    Hence  the  value  which  we 

2 

found  for  y  becomes 

,3+v/21    ■       ,8-^/21, 

Now,  since  ^  =  1,  we  have  j:  =  3  for  one  of  the  roots  of  the 
equation  proposed,  and  the  other  two  will  be  found  by 
dividing  the  equation  by  !•  —  3, 

or  -  3  )  ^  —  &r«  +  13x  -  12  (^  -  8ar  +  4 


—  Saf  +  lSx 

-  ar»  +    9* 

4r  — 

4r- 

12 
12 

0. 

Also  making  the  quotient  a:*  —  3x  -r  4  =  0^  we  have 
jc-  =  3j:  -  4  ;  and 


BUCMSlfTH  SECT.  IV. 

which  are  the  other  two  roots,  but  thcj  are  ima^nary. 

749.  It  was,  however,  by  chance,,  as  we  have  remarked, 
that  we  wore  able,  in  the  preceding  example,  to  extract  the 
cube  root  of  the  binomiBls  that  we  obtained,  which  is  the 
case  only  when  the  equation  has  a  rational  root;  con- 
sequently, the  rules  of  the  preceding  chapter  are  more  easily 
employed  for  finding  that  root  But  when  there  is  no 
rational  root,  it  is,  on  the  other  hand,  imposable  to  express 
the  root  which  we  obtain  in  any  other  way,  than  aocording 
to  the  rule  of  Cardan  ;  so  that  it  is  then  imposable  to  apply 
rsductions.  For  example,  in  the  equation  i*  =:  ftr  +  4,  we 
lltvcy=:6  and  ^  s  4;  so  that  x  zzi/{2  +  «v'  -  1)  -h 
{/fS  —  S  >/—  1),  which  cannot  be  otherwise  expressed*. 

*  In  this  example,  we  have  tt^  ^^^  ^han  g\  which  is  the 
well-known  irreducible  case  ;  a  case  which  \%  to  much  the  more 
remarkable,  as  the  three  roots  are  then  always  real.  We  cannot 
here  make  use  of  Cardan's  formula,  except  by  spplying  the 
methods  of  approximation,  such  as  transforming  it  into  an  infinite 
series.  In  the  work  spoken  of  in  the  Note,  Art  40,  Lambert  has 
given  particular  Tables,  by  which  we  may  easily  find  the  nu- 
merical values  of  the  roots  of  cubic  equations,  in  Uie  irreducible, 
as  well  as  the  other  esses.  For  this  purpose  we  may  also  em- 
ploy the  ordinary  Tables  of  sines.  See  the  Spherical  Astro- 
nomy of  Msuduit,  printed  at  Paris  in   1765. 

In  the  present  work  o(  Euler,  we  are  not  to  look  for  all  that 
might  have  been  said  on  the  direct  and  approximate  resolutions 
of  equations.  He  had  too  many  curious  and  important  objects, 
to  dwell  long  upon  this  ;  but  by  consulting  T Histoire  des  3/s- 
ik^matiaueSfTMgeàre  de  hl*  Clciraut,  le  Cours  de  Maihemaiiauet 
dt  M.  Betomt,  and  the  latter  volumes  of  the  Academical  Me- 
moirs of  Paris  and  Berlin,  the  reader  will  obtain  all  that  is  known 
at  present  concerning  the  resolution  of  equations.     F.  T. 

For  a  clear  and  explicit  investigation  of  this  method,  the 
reader  is  also  referretl  to  Bonnyciutlc's  Trigonometr)*  ;  from 
which  the  following  formula:  for  the  solution  of  the  different 
fisses  of  cubic  equations  are  extracted. 

1.  x^  +  ;«  -  9  =  0. 
Put  J  (-^)*  =  tan.  r,  aad  "/(tan.  (45*  -  ;  r)  )  =  Un.  «  ; 

Then  jr  =s  2  ^Z  v  ^  ^^^  ^  "•     ^^'  putting 


P- 


W-  -^  +  10  -  i  log.  r  =  log.  tan.  I 


and 


CRAPr  XII. 


(yp  ÀtoÉBttA.  S69 


QUESTIONS   FOR   PEACTICE. 

1.  Given  y*  +  80y  =  117,  to  determine  y.    Ans,  y  =  8. 

2.  Given  y*  —  36y  r:  91,  to  find  the  value  ofy. 

Ans.  y  =  7. 

i  (log.  tan.  (45*  —  +«)  +  20)  =  log.  tan,  ii. 
Then  log.  x  =  i  log.  -^  +  log.  cot.  2  ti  -  10. 

2.  aP+pap  +  yssO. 

Put  -|-( — )^  s=  tan.  Ä,  and  y  (tan.  (4f5*  -^  4«)  )  at  tan.  «, 

Then  x  =  —  2  -•—  x  cot.  2  tr.    Or,  putting 

Log.  -3-  -f  10  —  i  log.  -^  =  log.  tan.  z,  and 

4^  (log.  tan.  (45"  —  i«)  +  20)  =  log.  tan.  «, 

Then  log.  x  =  10  —  ^  log,  -^  —  log.  cot.  2  «. 

3 

3.  **  —  jpx  —  y  =  0. 

2     p    • 
This  form  has  2  cases,  according  as  — (-^)^isless,or greater 

than  1. 

2      p     ' 
In  the  1st  case,  put  — (  -4"  )^  =  coe.  «, 

■^      y     3 

And  «/(tan.  4.5"  —  i*)  )  =  tan.  u; 
Then  x  =  2  \/-^  X  cosec.  2  m.    Or,  putting 

10  +  T  log.  -| log,  -|-  =  log.  COS.  «,  and 

i  (log.  tan.  (46"  -  4«)  +  20)  =  log.  tan.  ti  ; 

Then  log.  jt  =  10  +  log.  -^  -  log.  sin.  2  u. 

3 

^8     4 
In  the  2d  case,  put -^( — )     s=cos.2,  and  x  will  have  the 

3  following  values  : 

X  =  +  2  \/-|-   X  COS.  -|- 

^=  ^2i/|-xc08.(6a» i) 

'=-2^/1-  X  COS.  (60»  + -|- )  or, 


STD  SLXMXNTS  IXCT.  IT. 

3.  Given  jf^  +  iiff  ^  SSO,  to  find  the  value  of^. 

Jtts.  y  =  5*05. 

4.  Giveny  -  9^  — 8y*  ^  8  s  0,  to  find  ^.  Am.y  =  52. 

Log.  X  =  i  log.  :21  4.  log.  coi.  -g 10, 

Log.x  =  ;log.^  +  log.  coi.  (60*  -  -|-)-10, 

Log.  *  s  ;  log.  ^  +  log.  cot.  (6(r  +  -|-)  -  10, 

Taking  the  value  of  x,  aniwering  to  log.  x,  positively  in  the  fini 
equation,  and  negatively  in  the  two  latter. 

4.  j^  —  fwr  +  y  Ä  0. 

This  form,  like  the  former,  hat  also  two  cases,  according 

at  — (  -^)  '^  is  less,  or  greater  than  1 . 

In  the  1st  case,  put  — (-^-)      =:  cos.  z, 
And  \  (tan.  (45*  —  is)  )  s  tan.  ir,  as  before  ; 
Then  x  =s  ^  2  \/  ~-  cosec.  2  «.    Or,  putting 

P  Ç 

10  +  i  '®§'"« —  *®8-  -n"  =  '®K-  ^^'  ^'  "^ 

; { log.  (tan.  45*  ^is)  -^20]  s  log.  tan.  u  ; 
Then,  »  log.  x  s:  10  +  log  -^  —  log.  sin.  2  a. 

In  the  2d  case,  put  -^i — )  ^  =:  cos.  r,  and  x  will  have  the  S 

X     p 

following  values  : 

x  =  -2v'|.xcos.J- 

x=+2v'-|-  xcos.(60*-.^) 

'  =  +  2  V  -J-  X  cos.  (60*  +  ^).  Or. 

,  4©  r 

Log.  *  =  ;  log.  -^  -h  log.  cos.  —  —  10, 

Log.  X  =  ;  log.  -^  +  log.  cos.  (iiOr  -   ^  )  -  10, 
I^g.'»;log.  ^  +  log. cos.  (6(r  +  -^-)-  10, 


CHAP.  XII.  OF  ALGEBBA.  S71 

5.  Given  y^  +  %^  +  ^  =  13,  to  detennine^. 

Ans.y  zz\. 

6.  Given  x'  —  &r  =  —  9,  to  find  the  value  of  x. 

\  Ans.  j:  n  —  8. 

7.  Given  x^  —  &r*  +  \0x  =  8,  to  find  x.    Ans,  a:  =  4. 

8.  Given  j>5  -  '^'  /?  =  '^°,  to  find;?.    -4fw.|?  =  8f. 

9.  Given  ^  -  y^  =  ^^,  to  find  a:.  2*w^.  x  =  Äf. 

10.  Given  a*  —  91a  =  -  3S0,  to  find  a.       Ans.  a  n:  6. 

11.  Given  ^^  —  ISjy  =  30,  what  is  the  value  ofy  ? 

Ans.  ^  =  5. 

Taking  the  value  of  x,  answering  to  log.  x>  negatively  in  the 
first  equation,  and  positively  in  the  two  latter. 

As  an  example  of  this  mode  of  solution,  in  what  is  usually 
called  the  Irreducible  Case  of  Cubic  Equations,  Let  x'  —  Sxss  1, 
to  find  its  3  roots. 

Here  ^  i—V  =  i (-i)^=  i  =  .5  =  cos.6œ  =  z,  hence 
2     p 

X  =  2  v'^  X  COS.  -|^  =  2  COS.  20«  =  1 .8793852 
3  3 

X  =  -  2  V§-  X  COS.  (6œ  -  1^)  =  — 2C08.40«  =  -  1.5320888 
3  3 

X  =  -  2  */^  X  cos.(6(r  +  4)  =  -  2 COS. 80*»=  —03472964. 
3  3 

Also,  let  x'  —  3x  =  —  1,  to  find  its  three  roots. 

Q     3  \  ' 
Here,  as  before,  -|-( — )^  zz  .5^  cos.oO*»  =  z,  hence 

X  =  -  2  v'-—-  X  cos.  4=  —  2  cos.20^  =  -  1.8793852 
3  3 

X  =  -  2  V^  X  COS.  (60®  — ^)  =  2  cos.  M^  =  1.5320888 

x=-2  V'—x  COS.  (60<*  + -4-)=  «cos. 80°  =0.8472964. 
3  ** 

Where  the  roots  are  the  negatives  of  those  of  the  first  case. 
For  the  mode  of  investigating  these  kinds  of  formulae,  see, 
in  addition  to  the  references  already  given,  Cagnoli,  Traité  de 
Trigon.  and  Article  Irreducible  Case,  in  the  Supplement  to  Dr. 
Hutton's  Mathematical  Dictionary. 


SLXUtNTll  ttCT.  tyt. 


CHAP.  XIII. 

Cffths  Resolution  {/^EqiiatioDs  ^ihe  Fourth  Degree. 

7M.  When  the  highest  power  of  the  quantity  x  rites  to 
the  fourth  degree,  we  have  cquaiions  qftltfjhurth  àegrtt^ 
the  general  form  of  which  is 

x^  +  ox*  +  &r«  +  CT  +  rf  =  0. 

We  shall,  in  the  first  place,  ooonder  pure  equations  of 
tha  fourth  degree,  the  expression  for  which  is  simply  4r*  =; /*; 
the  root  of  wliich  is  immediately  found  by  extracting  the 
bkniadrate  root  of  both  ndes,  since  we  obtain  x  =  ^f, 

751.  As  ji^  is  the  square  of  x%  the  calculation  b  greatly 
fiKilitated  by  beginning  with  the  extraction  of  the  square 
root  ;  for  we  sludl  tMn  have  x*  cs  ^//*;  and»  taking  the 
square  root  again,  we  have  x  =  Vf\  so  that  i/f  is  nothing 
but  the  square  root  of  the  square  root  of^I 

For  examnle,  if  we  had  the  equation  s^  =:  2401,  we  should 
immediately  have  x^  zz  49«  and  then  x  =  1. 

75S.  It  IS  true  this  is  only  one  root  ;  and  since  there  are 
always  three  roots  in  an  equation  of  the  third  degree,  so  also 
there  are  four  roots  in  an  equation  of  the  fourth  degree  : 
but  the  method  which  we  have  explained  will  actually  give 
those  four  mots.  For,  in  the  above  example,  we  have  not 
only  4r*  =  49,  but  also  x*  =  —  49;  now,  the  first  value  gives 
the  two  roots  x  =  7  and  x  =:  —  7,  and  the  second  value 
gives  X  =  ^^ -  49,  =  7  v^ - 1»  .  and  x  =  —  ^-  49  = 
—  7  \>^  —  1  ;  which  are  tlie  four  biqtuulrate  roots  of  52401. 
The  same  also  i«  true  with  respect  to  other  numbers. 

7M.  Next  to  these  |nirc  e<|uation8,  we  shall  consider 
others,  in  which  the  ïtecoml  and  fourth  tenus  are  wanting, 
and  which  have  the  form  x*  -^Jr^  -f  if  =  0,  'rhe>o  may  In? 
resolved  by  the  rule  for  equations  of  the  sei-otul  ilegrec  ;  for 
if  we  make  x*  =  ^,  we  have  y*  -^  ^  +  A*"  =  0,  or 
jf*  Ä  —  J^  —  g^  whence  we  deduce 

y  =  -  ;./  ±  ^'(1/  -  ff)  =  ( o )• 

Now,   J^'=.y\  «>   tluit    x=    t  ^'(-^ -^^ ),  ill 

^jrhich  the  doubk*  signs  t  iiMÜcate  all  tlu*  four  nvKs. 


CHAP.  Xni.  OP  ALOEflRA.  27S 

754.  But  whenever  the  equation  contains  all  the  terms,  it 
may  be  considered  as  the  product  of  four  factors.     In  fact, 
if    we  multiply   these  four  factors  together,    («—/>)  x 
(j:  —  ç)  X  (r  —  r)  X  (x  —  *),   we  get  the  product  x*  — 
(/?-|-g  +  r  +  *)a^  +  (pq  +  pr  +  p*  +  çr  +  y*  +r*)  x* 

—  (/V  ■•"  P9*  +  P^^  +  î'**)  '  "*■  py*5  and  this  quantity 
cannot  be  equal  to  0,  except  when  one  of  these  .four  factors 
is  =  0.     Now,  that  may  happen  in  four  ways  ; 

1.  when  X  =p;  2.  when  x  =:  y  ; 

S.  when  x  =  r  ;  4.  when  «  =  *  ; 

and  consequently  these  are  the  four  roots  of  the  equation. 

755.  If  we  consider  this  formula  with  attention,  we  ob- 
serve, in  the  second  term,  the  sum  of  the  four  roots  multi- 
plied by  —  a^;  in  the  third  term,  the  sum  of  all  the  possible 
products  of  two  roots,  multiplied  by  x^;  in  the  fourth  term, 
the  sum  of  the  products  of  the  roots  combined  three  by 
three,  multiplied  oy  —  x;  lastly,  in  the  fifth  term,  the  pro- 
duct of  all  tne  four  roots  multiplied  together. 

756.  As  the  last  term  contains  the  product  of  all  the  roots, 
it  is  evident  that  such  an  equation  of  the  fourth  degree  can 
have  no  rational  root,  which  is  not  a  divisor  of  the  last  term. 
This  principle,  therefore,  furnishes  an  easy  method  of  de- 
termining all  the  rational  roots,  when  there  are  any  ;  once 
we  have  only  to  substitute  successively  for  x  all  the  divisors 
of  the  last  term,  till  we  find  one  which  satisfies  the  terms  of 
the  equation  :  for  having  found  such  a  root,  for  example, 
X  =  p,  we  have  only  to  divide  the  equation  by  x  —  ^,  after 
having  brought  all  the  terms  to  one  side,  and  then  suppose 
the  quotient  =  0.  We  thus  obtain  an  equation  of  tlie  tliird 
de^ee,  which  may  be  resolved  by  the  rules  already  given. 

757.  Now,  for  tliis  purpose,  it  is  absolutely  necessary 
tliat  all  the  terms  should  consist  of  integers,  and  that  the 
first  should  have  only  unity  for  the  coefficient;  whenever, 
therefore,  any  terms  contain  fractions,  we  must  lieg^  by  de- 
stroying those  fractions,  and  this  may  always  be  done  by 
substituting,  instead  of  x,  the  quantity  ^,  divided  by  a  num- 
ber which  contains  all  the  denominators  of  those  fractions. 

For  example,  if  we  have  the  equation 

x*-4jr^  +  ix«-^^+-rV  =  0, 
as  we  find  here  fractions  which  have  for  denominators  2,  3, 

and  multiples  of  these  numbers,  let  us  suppose  x  =  -^,  and 
we  shall  then  have 

6*  "  6^  "*■  6^  "■  6  "^'^  "■    ' 


•74  BIKMKKTS  tlCT.  IT. 

«n  eciiunkm,  which,  mulüpUecl  by  6*,  beoomes 

If  wc  now  wish  to  know  whether  this  eouation  his  rational 
roots,  we  must  write,  instead  of  ^,  the  oivisors  of  7S  suc- 
ccMvely,  in  order  to  see  in  what  cases  the  formula  would 
really  be  reduced  to  0. 

758.  But  as  the  rooCa  nmy  as  well  be  pontive  as  negative, 
we  must  make  two  trials  with  each  divisor  ;  one,  supposing 
that  divisor  pontive,  the  other,  oonsiderinff  it  as  negative. 
However,  the  followii^rule  will  frcqtienUy  enable  us  to 
dispense  with  this^.  Whenever  the  signs  -^  and  -  suo- 
oeed  eadi  other  regularij,  the  equation  has  as  many  pontive 
roots  as  there  arc  changes  in  the  ngns;  and  as  many  times 
■s  the  same  rign  recurs  without  the  other  intervemng,  so 
many  negative  roots  bdong  to  the  equation«  Now,  our 
example  contûns  four  changes  of  the  rigns,  and  no  sue- 
cession  ;  so  that  all  the  roots  are  positive  :  and  we  have  no 
need  to  take  any  of  the  divisors  of  the  last  term  negativdy . 

759.  Let  there  be  given  the  equation 

X*  +  «r»  —  7jr«  -  ttr  +  12  =  0. 

We  see  here  two  changes  of  ngns,  and  also  two  successions  ; 
whence  we  conclude,  with  certiünty,  that  this  equation  con- 
tains two  positive,  and  as  many  negative  roots,  which  must 
all  be  divisors  of  the  number  12.  Now,  its  divisors  l)eing 
I,  2,  3,  4^  6,  12,  let  us  first  try  jr  =  +  1,  which  actually 
pixiduoes  0  ;  therefore  one  of  the  roots  is  x  =  1 . 

If  we  next  make  j'=:-l,wefind  +  1  -2-7-»-84 
12  =  21  -  9  =  12  :  so  that  x  =  —  1  is  not  one  of  the  roots 
of  the  equation.  Let  us  now  make  x  =  2,  and  we  again 
find  the  quantity  =0;  consequently,  another  of  the  rootn  is 
jr  =  2  ;  but  j-  =r  •-  2,  on  the  contrary,  is  found  not  to  be  a 
root  If  we  suppose  x  =  S,  we  have  81+54  —  63-24 
-|-  12  =:  60,  so  tnat  the  supposition  does  not  answer;  but 
j:  =  -  3,  giving  81  —  54  -  63  +  24  +  lîî  =  0,  this  is 
evidently  one  of  the  roots  sought.  lastly,  when  wc  try 
X  s=  —  4,  we  likewise  see  the*  e<|uation  recfuced  to  nothing  ; 
so  that  all  die  four  roots  are  rational,  and  have  the  following 
values:  X  =  1,  X  =  2,  X  xa  -  8,  and    x  =       4 ;    and,   oc- 

*  This  rule  is  general  lor  ei|uaUofu  of  oil  dimensions,  pro\  idiii 
there  are  no  imapiiar^  rcH»tji.  Tin*  French  OMTibe  it  to  l)r>. 
cartes,  the  EngUMi  to  (fiirri<»t  ;  but  tlu'  general  clenioiintraiiiMi 
Ol' it  wa»  tirftt  gi%vii  b\  >f.  I'Ablta'  dv  (fiUL  »See  tht-  Mcnidin» 
ill*  rAi'ttilcmie  cle«  bcicoci-»  dc  Paris,  tor  1711.     \\  T. 


CKAF.  Xttl.  OF  ALOBB&A.  975 

cording  to  the  rule  given  above,  two  of  these  roots  are 
positive,  and  the  two  others  are  negative. 

760.  But  as  no  root  could  be  determined  by  thb  method^ 
when  the  roots  are  all  irrational,  it  was  necessary  to  devise 
other  expedients  for  expressing  the  roots  whenever  this  case 
occurs  ;  and  two  different  memods  have  been  diaoovered  for 
finding  «uch  roots,  whatever  be  the  nat«ire  of  the  equation  of 
the  fourth  degree. 

But  before  we  expimn  those  general  methods,  it  will  be 
proper  to  give  the  solution  of  some  particular  cases^  which 
may  frequently  be  applied  with  great  advantage. 

761.  When  the  equation  is  such,  that  the  cœfficîenta  of 
the  terms  succeed  in  the  same  manner,  both  m  the  direct 
and  in  the  inverse  order  of  the  terms,  as  hi^ppens  in  the  fol- 
lowing equation  ♦  ; 

or  in  this  other  equation,  which  is  more  general  : 

X*  +  moj^  +  na*x^  +  rru^j:  +  a*  =  0  ; 

we  may  always  consider  such  a  formula  as  the  product  of 
two  factors,  which  are  of  the  second  d^ree,  and  are  eanly 
resolved.  In  fact,  if  we  represent  this  mst  equation  by  the 
product 

(*«  -\-pax  +  a*)  X  (x«  +  qax  +  a*^  n  0, 

in  which,  it  is  required  to  determine  |>  and  q  in  such  a  man- 
ner, that  the  above  equation  may  be  obtained,  wc  shall  find^ 
by  performing  the  multiplication, 

^  +  (P  +  ?)û^'  +  (  W  +  ^)«*^'  +(P  +  î)«**^  +  «♦  =  0  ; 
and,  in  order  that  this  equation  may  be  the  same  as  the 
former,  we  must  have, 

%  pq  -^xzs  n^ 
and,  consequently,  pq  zzn  ^  2. 

*  These  equations  may  be  called  reciprocal^  for  they  are  not 
at  all  changed  by  substituting  —  for  x.    From  this  property  it 

follows,  that  if  a,  for  instance,  be  one  of  the  roots,  — willbeone 

likewise  -,  for  which  reason  such  equations  may  be  reduced  to 
others  of  a  dimension  one  half  less.  De  Moivre  has  given,  in 
his  Miscellanea  Analytica,  page  71,  general  formulœ  for  the  re- 
duction of  such  equations,  whatever  be  their  dimension.  F.  T. 
See  also  Wood's  Algebra,  the  Complément  des  Elemens 
d' Algebra,  by  Lacroix,  and  Wanog's  Medk.  Algeb.  chap.S.  . 

t2 


STB  SLSMBKTS  SXCT.  fT. 

Now,  squaring  the  first  of  those  equations,  wc  have 
1^ -|-2/i7  4~9*  =  *'*'«  and  if  from  this  wc  subtract  the 
second,  token  four  times,  or  4m  =  4fi  —  8,  there  remains 
f^  —  ^nq  +  f*  =  fii*^4fi  +  o«  <uul  taking  the  sc|uare  root, 
we  fina  p  '^  q  zz  ^/(jii*  —  in  +  8)  ;  also,  p  -|-  ç  =  m  ;  we 
shall  therefore  have,  by  addition,  Zp^m  +  \/(iii'— 4fi  -Hi)« 

m+  ^/(m«- 411+8)         ,    .         u        •       « 
ot  p  ^  ■      ,  ;  and,  i)y  subtraction,  xq  ^  m 

-  V(m«  -  4«  +  8),  or  9  = ^-g ^^— ^.     Having 

therefore  foimd  v  and  ç,  we  have  only  to  suppose  each 
factor  s  0,  in  order  to  determine  the  value  of  x.  The  first 
gives  «*  -f/Mur  +  «^  =  0,  orx*=—  pax  -  a\  whence  wc 

.    obtain*=  -Çl^t^-a'), 
orx=-.Ç  ±  lay/ip''  -i). 

The  second  factor  givesx  =  -  V  ±  i«v^(V*  "  '*)» 

and  these  are  the  four  roots  of  the  given  c(|uatioiL 

76^  To  render  this  more  clear,  let  there  Iw  given  tlu* 
equation  x*  —  4r'  —  Sjt  —  4t  +  1  =0.  We  have  Ikti' 
a  n  1, m  =—  4,  »  :=  —  8;  consequently,  m-—  4/i  v  8  =36, 
and   the   8(|uare   root   of  this  i|uanüty  is  =:  G  ;   tlun  lore 

"4+6       .        .         -4-6  ^       ,  , 

p  =  — 2 —  =  1,  and 9  =  — - —    =  —  o;   wlicncc  result 

the  four  root«, 

1st  and  !ed  jr  =r  -  ;  ±  ;  •  -  3  =  I_L  AlZl-  ;  and 

5  4-  ^'*1 

3d  and  4tli  X  =  ;  ±  ;  v/21         =:     ^^  "    ;    that   is,  the 
four  roots  of  the  given  «|uation  ore  : 

I.    J*  —  ^  ,      X.   T  -.  ^^  f 

The  first  two  of  these  mots  are  imaginary,  iir  impo^iublc  ; 
but  the  Ust  two  are  posnible;  since  we  may  cxnn^<^  v'i!!  to 
any  degree  of  exactness  by  meant  of  divtnMl  tractiiHis.  In 
fact,  5ei  being  tlie  same  with  21-OOüOOüOO,  we  have  only  u» 
extract  the  square  root,  which  gives  v^2l  =:  4*58225. 


CHAP.  XIII.  OF    ALGKBBA.  ^77 

Since,  therefore,  V2\  =  4-5825,  the  third  root  is  very 
nearly  a:  =  4*791 2,  and  the  fourth,  x  =  0-S087-  It  would 
have  been  easy  to  have  determined  these  roots  with  still 
more  precision  :  for  we  observe  that  the  fourth  root  is  very 
nearly  -/-g^,  or  -J^  which  value  will  answer  the  equation  with 
sufficient  exactness.     In  fact,  if  we  make  jr  =  -^,  we  find 

sir  -  tÎt  -  âV  -  7  +  1  =  :^-.  We  ouçht  however  to 
have  obtmned  0,  but  the  difference  is  evidently  not  great. 

763.  The  second  case  in  which  such  a  resolution  takes 

|)lace,  is  the  same  as  the  first  with  regard  to  the  coeffidents, 
)ut  difiers  from  it  in  the  signs,  for  we  shall  suppose  that  the 
second  and  the  fourth  terms  have  different  signs  ;  such,  for 
example,  as  the  equation 

X*  -|-  majKr  +  na'.r*  —  ma^x  +  a*  =  0, 

'which  may  be  represented  by  the  product, 

(x*  +  pax  —  a*)  X  (x'  +  qax  -  a*)  =  0. 

For  the  actual  multiplication  of  these  factors  gives 

X*  +  (p  +  q)ax^  +  {pq  —  2)a*x*  —  (p  +  q)a^x  +  a\ 

a  quantity  equal  to  that  which  was  given,  if  we  sujqposç, 
in  the  first  place,  p  -{■  q  ^  m,  and  in  the  second  place, 
pq  -^  2  =  n^  or  pq  zz  n  +  Z;  because  in  this  manner  the 
fourth  terms  become  equal  of  themselves.  If  now  we  square 
the  first  equation,  as  before,  (Art.  761.)  we  shall  nave 
p*  +  ^pq  +  q-  zz  m^;  and  if  from  this  we  subtract  the 
second,  taken  four  times,  or  4/?y  =  4n  +  8,  there  will  re- 
main p*  —  Spy  +  y*  =:  m*  —  ^  —  8  ;  the  square  root  of 
which  is  /;  —  y  z=  \/(mr  —  4n  —  8),  and  thence,  by  adding 
p7i  -\-  q  =  m,  vfo  obtain 

mi- V(m-~4y^-8) 
p  = ;  and,  by  subtracting  p  +  y,  ... 

q  =■ 5 .     Having  therefore  found  p  and  y, 

wc  shall  obtain  from  the  first  factor  (as  in  Art  761.)  the 
two  roots  X  zz—  \pa  ±  {a  >/(/?*  +  4),  and  from  the  second 
factor  the  two  roots  x  :r.—  ^qa  ±  -{a  ^/(y-  -f  4),  that  is,  we 
have  the  four  roots  of  the  ecjuation  proposée! . 

764.  Let  there  be  given  the  equation 

x*-3x2jr»+3xar+16=:0. 

Here   we  have  a  =  2,  wi  =  —  3,   and   n  zz  0;    so   that 

\/(//t*  —  4«—  8)z:l,=j3  —  y;  and,  consequently, 

"3-fl  -3-1 

P  =  — 2 —  =  ""  ^'  ^""  ^  -  — 2^   =-2. 

Therefore  the  first  two  roots  are  x  zzl  ±\/5,  and  the 


ST8  &l«IUI&liT)»  UCT.  IV. 

lui  two  are  X  «  s  ±  ^/8;  to  that  tb«  four  rooU  wug^t 
wiUbe, 

1.  X  =  1  +  v'S,       «•  X  =  1  -  V«, 

3.  x  =  2  +  ^/8,        4.  x  =  2-v^a 

Cooaequcntly,  the  four  factors  of  our  equation  will  be 
(#-  1  -  Vß)  X  (X  -  1  +v^fi)  X  (X  -  «  --v/8)  X 
(#  —  S  4*  v^8)t  ana  their  actual  multiplication  produces 
thegiTen  equation;  for  the  first  two  beinf^  multiplied  to» 
gather,  gire  j*—  2x— 4,  and  the  other  two  give  jt«  —  4x— 4  : 
Mm,  these  products  multiplied  tof^her,  make  j;^  —  (i^  4* 
Mr  •{-  10,  which  is  the  same  equation  that  was  proposed. 


CHAP.  XIV. 


(^HU  Rule  qf  Bombelli>r  reducing  the  Resohition  if 
Equations  o^  UèC  Fourth  Degree  to  that  o^Equatkins  of 
Ar  Third  Degree. 

765.  We  have  already  shewn  how  equations  of  the  third 
degree  are  resolved  by  tne  rule  of  Cardan  ;  so  that  the  prin» 
dpal  object,  with  re^ird  to  equations  of  the  fourth  degree, 
is  to  reduce  them  to  equations  of  the  third  degree.  For  it 
is  impossible  to  resolve,  generally,  couations  of  the  fourth 
degree,  without  the  aid  of  those  of  tne  third  ;  since,  when 
we  have  determined  one  of  the  roots,  the  others  always 
depend  oo  an  equation  of  the  third  degree.  And  hence 
we  majT  coüdude,  that  the  resolution  of  equations  of  higlier 
dimensKms  présupposes  the  resolution  of  all  equations  of  lower 
degrees. 

766.  It  is  now  some  centuries  since  Bombelli,  an  Italian, 
ive  a  rule  for  this  purpose,  which  we  shall  explain  in  this 


there  be  given  the  general  conation  of  the  foiuth 
degree,  x^-f-ax'-f&x^-fcx-fJsO,  in  which  the  letters 
a,  by  c,  J,  represent  any  possible  numbers;  and  let  us 
suppose  that  this  equation  is  the  same  as  (jt^  -f  \ax  ^  yj)^— 
((fM  -|-  r)*  =  0,  in  which  it  is  rec|uired  to  determine  the  lc*t- 
fy  f,  and  r,  in  order  that  wa  may  obtain  the  equation 


*  Thb  rule  nther  belongt  to  Ix>uit  Ferrari.  It  in  improperly 
called  the  Rule  of  Dombelh,  in  the  same  manner  as  the  rule  iii»- 
covered  by  Scipio  Ferreo  has  been  ascribed  to  Cardan.     F.  T. 


CHAP.  XIV.  OP  ALGEBRA.  S79 

proposed«    By  squating,  and  ordering  this  new  equation^ 
we  shall  have 

A*  +  ax^  +  ^a^x^  +  apx  4-  p^ 
9,pœ^  —  2qrx  — r* 

Now,  the  first  two  terms  are  already  the  same  here  as  in 
the  ^ven  equation;  the  third  term  requires  us  to  make 
4a«  +  2p  —  jT*  =  4,  which  gives  j*  =  \a*  +  ^^  ""  *î  ^^ 
fourth  term  shews  that  we  must  make  ap  —  9qr  =  c,  or 
9qr  =z  ap  —  c\  and,  lastly,  we  have  for  the  last  term 
/?*  —  r*  =  d,  or  r*  =  p*  —  d.  We  have  therefore  three 
equations  which  will  give  the  values  of />,  a,  and  r. 

767.  The  easiest  method  of  deriving  those  values  from 
them  is  the  following:  if  we  take  the  first  equation  (bur 
times,  we  shall  have  4g*  =  a^  4"  ^  ""  ^  *  which  equation, 
multiplied  by  the  last,  r*  n  p*  —  ^  gives 

4g*r*  =  8p^  +  (a«  -  4i)p«  -  Sdp  -  d)a*  —  46). 

Farther,  if  we  square  the  second  equation,  we  have 
4gV*  =  arf^  —  9acp  +'C*.  So  that  we  have  two  values  of 
4^7^,  which,  being  made  equal,  will  furnish  the  equation 

Spî  +  tA*  -  4A)p«-8ûiE?  — d(a^-  4Ä)  =  ay-2acp  +  c*, 

or,  brining  all  the  terms  to  one  side,  and  arranging, 

8p'  -  4Äp«  +  (2flc  -  Sd)p  -  Ä«d  +  4M  —  c*  =  0, 

an  equation  of  the  third  degree,  which  will  always  give  the 
value  ofo  by  the  rules  already  explained. 

768.  Having  therefore  determined  three  values  of  p  by 
the  given  quantities  a,  6,  c,  d,  when  it  was  required  to  find 
only  one  of  those  values,  we  shall  also  have  the  values  of 
the  two  other  letters  q  and  r  ;  for  the  first  equation  will 

ap—c 
pve  q  =  \/(:J^*  +  %?  — Ä),  and  the  second  gives  r  =         ■  * 

Now,  these  three  values  being  determined  for  each  j?iven 
case,  the  four  roots  of  the  proposed  equation  may  be  round 
in  the  following  manner  : 

This    equation    having    been    reduced    to    the    form 
(x2  +  4Är  +p)»  -  (qx  +  rf  =  0,  we  shall  have 

(Jf"  +  iax  ^-  pY  =  (qx  -I-  r)=, 

and,  extracting  the  root,  Jt»  -[-  {.ax  -^  p  =^  qx  -\-  r^  or 
x'^  +  i^^  +  P  =  — .  ÇJP  —  r.  The  first  equation  gives 
x^  =  ((^  —  4-tf)x  —  j3  -|-  r,  from  which  wc  may  find  two 
roots;  and  the  second  equation,  to  which  we  may  give 
the  form  x-  =a  —  ( j  -[-  yi)z  ^  p  ^  r,  will  furnish  the  two 
other  roots. 


880  ELBIIIIITS  SICT.  IT. 

769.  Lei  uf  UlusUrate  this  rule  by  «n  example,  and  fup> 
pote  that  the  equation 

jr»  -  lOi«  4.  85r«  -  ÔOr  +  24  =  0 

waa  given.  If  we  compare  it  with  our  general  formula  (at 
the  end  of  Art  767.)>  we  have  a  =:-  10,  6  =  35,  c  =  -  5C>, 
4  s  IM*;  and,  consequently,  the  equation  which  must  give 
the  value  of  p  is 

Sp^  -  140^  4  806p  -  1540  ==  0,  or 
jtp»  -.    S5/I*  4  WStp  —   S85  =  0. 

The  divisors  of  the  last  term  are  1,  6,  7,  11,  &c.;  the 
first  of  which  does  not  answer  ;  but  making  p  =  5,  we  get 
S50  -  875  -I-  1010  -  385  =  0,  so  that  p  »  5;  and  if  we 
fiurther  suppose  0  =  7,  we  get  686  —  1715  + 1*1*  — 
885  =:  0,  a  prootthat  p  =:  7  is  the  second  root.  It  remains 
now  to  find  the  third  root  ;  let  us  tliercfore  divide  the  equa- 
tion by  2,  in  onler  to  have/>*  —  \^p^  +  lOlp  —  »  •  *  =  0, 
and  let  us  consider  that  the  coefficient  of  the  second  term,  or 
Vf  being  the  sum  of  all  the  three  roots,  and  the  first  two 
making  together  1^,  the  third  must  necessarily  be  V . 

We  consequently  know  the  three  roots  required.  But  it 
BMy  be  olwerved  that  one  would  have  been  sufficient,  be- 
cause each  inves  the  same  four  roots  for  our  equation  of  the 
fourth  degr^.  ^ 

770.  lo  prove  this,  let  p  =  5;  we  shall  then  have,  by 
theformula,  ^'^o*  +  S^  —  6),  7  =  ^(25  +10  —  35)  =0, 

and  r  =z z=  ^.     Now,  nothing  being  determined 

by  this,  let  us  take  the  third  equation, 

r»=p<-d  =  25-«4=:l, 

so  that  r  =:  1  ;  our  two  equations  of  the  second  degree  will 
then  he: 

I.  X*  =  5jr  -  4,  2,  J-«  =  5x  -  6. 

The  first  gives  the  two  roots 

5  +  3 
T=  Î  ±,'ï,orx  =  -^, 

that  is  ti»  say,  x  =  4  and  x  =  1. 
The  second  equation  gives 

5  +  1 

-  —  <    i.    /  »  —  — - 


that  is  u>  say,  x  ^  3,  and  x  =  2. 

But  ftupiMAc  now  p  s  7,  we  bhall  have 


CHAP.  XtV.  OF  ALGEBKA.  3S1 

q  =  v/(25  + 14  -  35)  =  2,  and  r  =  ~^^^^^  =  -  5, 

« 

whence  result  the  two  equations  of  the  second  degree, 

1.  x*  =  7j?-12,  a.  **  =  &r-25 

7±1 
the  first  ^ves  Jc  =  ^  +  >/^,  or  «  =  -^5 

so  that  X  =  4,  and  x  =  3  r  the  second  furnishes  the  root 


and,  consequently,  x  =  S,  and  x  =  1  ;  therefore  by  this 
second  supposition  the  same  four  roots  are  found  as  by  the 
first 

Lastly,  the  same  roots  are  found,  by  the  third  value  of  p, 
=  y  :  for,  in  this  case,  we  have  • 


q  =  v/(25  +  11  -  36)  =  1,  and  r  r= 


-55+50 


—  ^  s  . 

2  -         T» 


80  that  the  two  equations  of  the  second  degree  become, 

1.  X«  =  6x,  2.  ;r*  =  4x  -  3. 

Whence  we  obtain  from  the  first,  x  =  3  ±  Vl,  that  is  to 
say,  J?  =  4,  and  jr  =  2  3  and  from  the  second,  a:  =  2  ±  Vl, 
that  is  to  say,  x  ==  3,  and  x  =  1,  which  are  the  same  roots 
that  we  originally  obtùned. 

771*  Let  there  now  be  proposed  the  equation 

.   ^*-l6jr  — 12  =  0, 

in  which  a  :r  0,  6  n  0,  c  =—  16,  d  =—  12;  and  our 
equation  of  the  third  degree  will  be 

Sp'  4-96p  -  256  =  0,  or  ^^4-12?  -  32  =  0, 

and  we  may  make  this  equation  still  more  simple,  by  writing 
p  =  2t;  for  we  have  then 

8^'  -I-  24<  -  32  =  0,  or  ^  +  3<  —  4  =  0. 

The  divisors  of  the  last  term  are  1,  2,  4  ;  whence  one  of 
the  roots  is  found  to  be  ^  =  1  ;  therefore  p  =  2,  g  =. 
>v/4  =  2,  and  r  n  '^  z:  4.  Consequently,  the  two  equa- 
tions of  the  second  degree  are 

a:*  =  2x-  +  2,  and  x*  =—  2a7  -  6; 

which  give  the  roots 

X  z:  1  ±y/3y  andx  =-  1  ±  >/—  5. 

772.  We  shall  endeavour  to  render  this  resolution  still 
more  familiar,  by  a  repetition  of  it  in  the  following  example. 
Suppose  there  were  given  the  equation 


BLBMXlf  TS  SECT.  IT. 

jp*  -  ftr»  +  Iftr*  -  12jr  4  4  =  0, 

which  must  be  oonuined  in  the  formula 

(x*  —  Sx  -f  />)«  -  (qx  -f  r)«  =  0, 

in  the  former  put  of  which  we  have  put  ~  är,  because  — S 
is  half  the  coefficient  ^6f  of  the  given  eciuation.  This 
ionnula  being  expanded,  gives 

«*-  6x»  +  (2/>  +  9  -  î»)x*  —  (6/1  +  Ayr)*  -I- p^ -  r*  =:  0; 

which,  oomporod  with  our  equation,  there  will  result  from 
that  comparison  the  following  aquations  : 

a  1>»  -  r»  =  4. 

The  first  gives  ^  =  2p  *  8; 
the  second,  iqr  =  12  «  6/i,  or  f  r  =  6  —  Sjp  ; 
the  third,  r*  =  p*  -  4. 
Multiplying  r*  by  q\  and  p*  —  4  by  2/i  —  3,  we  have 

ç«r'=:2p>-8pt  — 8p  +  12; 

and  if  we  square  the  value  of  çr,  we  have 

7^=86-8^  +  9^; 

so  that  we  have  the  equation 

S/^-    9p^-    8/)  +  lS  =  g^  — S6p  +  S6,ar 
fpi  _  l2p*  +  «fijp  -  24  =  0,  or 
/!>  -    6/I*  +  I4p  -  12  =  0, 

one  of  the  nx>ts  of  which  is  p  =  2;  and  it  follows  that 
^  =  1,  Ç  =:  1,  and  çr  —  r  =  0.  Therefore  our  equation 
will  be  (x"  -  8r  -h  2)'  =  x\  and  its  square  root  will  be 
X*  —  3x  -|-  2  s  ±  X.  If  we  take  the  upper  sign,  we  have 
x*  =  4r  ^  2;  and  taking  the  kmcrr  sign,  we  obtain 
«•  =  2r  —  2,  whence  we  derive  the  four  roots  x  =;  2  +  ^'2, 
•ndx=  1  i:  ^/-l. 


CHAP.  XV. 


Of  a  new  Method  of  resolving  Equations  of  ike  Fourtli 

Degree. 

T78L  The  rule  of  Bombelli,  as  we  have  seen,  resolvt*5 
aquations  of  the  fourth  degree  by  means  of  an  liquation  of 
toe  tliird  degree;  but  since  the  invention  of  that  Hulc« 


CHAF.  XV.  OF   ALGSBftA.  S83 

another  method  has  been  discovered  of  performing  the  same 
resolution  :  and,  as  it  is  altogether  different  from  the  first,  it 
deserves  to  be  separately  explained  *• 

774.  We  suppose  that  the  root  of  an  equation  of  the 
fourth  degree  has  the  form,  x  =  ^p  +  ^y  -f  ^r,  in  which 
the  letters  p,  j,  r,  express  the  roots  of  an  equation  of  the 
third  degree,  t^-^Jz^  -f  fa  —  7*  =  0;  so  thatp  +  q  +  r==/; 
fq  +  pr  +  qr  ^ g\  and pqr  =  A.  This  being  laid  down, 
we  square  the  assumed  formula,  x  =  Vp  +  Vq  +  ^r^  and 
we  obtain 

and,  ânce|»  '\'  q  ■\-  r  z=:J\  we  have 

we  agmn  take  the  squares,  and  find 

X*- 2/4«+/fc==  4;?y +4/>r+49r +8  v7>*gT+8  Vï^+8v^ 

Now,  4p jf  +  4pr  +  4jrr  =  4g^  ;  so  that  the  equation  becomes 
ar*  — 2)^«  +/*  — 4g  =  8A/wr  X  (>v/p  4-^/?  +  ^/^);  but 
\/p  +  Vy  +  -v/r  =  X,  ana  pgr  =  A,  or  Vpyr  =  a^A; 
wherefore  we  arrive  at  this  equation  of  the  fourth  d^ree^ 
J?*  -  ^  —  8x  a/A  +y^  —  4jr  =  0,  one  of  the  roots  qC 
which  is  j:  =  ^p  -f-  ^y  +  ^r  ;  and  in  which  p,  y,  and  m 
are  the  roots  of  an  equation  of  the  third  degree, 

a;*-^«+g»  — A  =  0. 

775.  The  equation  of  the  fourth  degree,  at  which  we 
have  arrived,  may  be  considered  as  general,  although  the 
second  term  x'^y  is  wanting  ;  for  we  äall  afterwards  shew, 
that  every  complete  equation  may  be  transformed  into  an- 
oüier,  from  which  the  second  term  has  been  taken  away. 

Let  there  be  proposed  the  equation  j?*—  öj:*—  hx — cnO, 
in  order  to  determine  its  root«  This  we  must  first  compare 
with  the  formula,  in  order  to  obtain  the  values  of^  gy  and 
h  ;  and  we  shall  have, 

1,  ^f^aj  and,  con8equently,y*  =  -5-; 

2.  8a/A  =  6,  so  that  A  =  -gj; 

3./^  -4jg=-.c,or-|--4g  +  c  =  0, 

or  ^*  +  c  =:  4g  ;  consequently,  g  =  -^cf^  +  \c. 

*  This  method  was  the  invention  of  Euler  himself.  He  has 
explained  it  in  the  sixteenth  volume  of  the  Ancient  Commenta- 
ries of  Petersburg.    F.  T. 


SM  ELSMENTS  Sicr.  !▼• 

770.  Sinoc»  therefore,  the  cH|tmtiaD 

X*  —  ax*  —  ÄJT  —  c  —  0, 

gtvet   the    values   of  the   letter»  ^  ff^  and   A,   to   tliut 

/=  ;ci,/r  =  tV»»  +  jc,  and  A  =  .,VÄ%  or  v/A  =  ;6, 

we  form  fnim  tliene  values  the  ec|uation  of  the  thini  clega*c 
»■  — ^'  +  g^  —  A  =  0,  in  onler  to  olHain  its  nwts  by 
the  known  rule«  And  if  we  suppose  those  roots,  1.  ?=i>, 
8.  s  s  0,  S.  s  =  r,  one  of  the  roots  of  our  ec |uation  of  the 
fourth  ucgrce  must  be,  by  the  supposition,  Art.  TT-I» 

T77.  This  method  appears  at  first  to  furnish  only  one 
root  of  the  given  equation  ;  but  if  we  consider  tlmt  every 
flgn  V  may  be  taken  negatively,  as  well  as  positively,  we 
shall  imracuiately  perceive  that  Ulis  formuU  contains  all  the 
four  roots.  ^ 

Farther,  if  we  chose  to  admit  all  the  posâble  changes 
of  the  signs,  we  sliould  have  eight  different  values  of  x, 
^  and  yet  four  only  can  exist«  But  it  is  to  be  observed,  tliat 
the  product  of  tHose  three  terms,  or  \/pqr^  must  be  equal  to 
^h  =  |A»  and  that  if  \b  be  pisitive,  tlie  product  of  the 
terms  %^p,  v/j,  v^r,  must  likewise  be  positive;  so  that  all 
the  variations  that  can  be  admitted  arc  reduced  to  the 
four  following  : 

1.  X  =      ^p  +  v'ry  -r  v'r, 

3.  X  --  -  ^-  p  +  ^q  —  x'r. 
i    X  --  v>  -s'fj  +\  r. 

Ill  tho  sfuiic  manner,  wluti  \b  is  negative,  hc  liaicinily 
the  fiHir  fuilouiiig  values  of  x  : 

1.  x=      ^/;,-f  v/v  -^/r, 

:J.  X  =  -  y/p  i-  ^fq  +  ^  r, 

4.  X  =  —  x^/)  -  ^^  _  ^r. 

Thirt  circumstance  enalile«  us  to  ilotcnnine  the  four  nH>i> 
in  all  caMTs;  oü  may  Ik;  seen  in  tlio  tolKmiiig  example. 

77H.  Let  there  l)e  i)ro|)ose<l  the  enuation  of  the  fourth 
degree*,  x*  —  5!Ôx-  f  (ku  —  .*J6  =  0,  in  whieh  the  mxtimuI 
term  is  wanting.  Now,  if  we  c^>m|>are  thi«  with  the  gi*iieral 
formula,  we  have  a  r:  25,  A  =  —  (iO,  and  c  =  J6  ;  and 
aAer  that, 

f^  W^r  ^  V,;    ^  î>  -  '.V»  and  /.  =  ^  -  ; 

by  which  uK^&n»  uur  i<|uaiion  «»t  the  tluni  dtgnt-  Ijix:üuk*.n 


CHAP.  XV.  OF   ALGEBft'A«  985 

«3  _  y ^«  ^  7^0aj  _  »» s  -=  0. 
First,  to  remove  the  fractions,  let  us  make  ziz  —  ;  and  wc 

sliall  l^ave  g;^—  -^  +  -g| 4*         '   ^       multiplymg 

by  the  greatest  denominator,  we  obtain 

u"  -  50tt«  +  769u  -  3600  =  0. 

Wc  have  now  to  determine  the  three  roots  of  this  equation  ; 
which  are  all  three  found  to  be  positive  ;  one  of  them  being 
f/  =  9:  then  dividing  the  equation  by  tt  —  9»  we  find  the 
new  equation  u*  —  41tt  +  400  =  0,  or  u^  zz  41tt  —  400, 
which  gives 

41+9 

«  =  V ±*/(' V  -  •  V3>=  -f-; 

so  that  the  three  roots  are  u  =  9y  u  =  16,  and  u  =  25. 
Consequently,  as  z  =  — r-  the  roots  are 

1.  2  =  I,  2.  «  =  4,  3.  Ä  =  y. 

These,  therefore,  are  the  values  of  the  letters  p,  y,  and  r  ; 
that  is  to  say,  p  =  :J.,  j  =  4,  and  r  =  y .  Now,  if  we  con- 
sider that  x^pqr  =  y/h  =  —  V,  and  that  therefore  this  value 
=  jb  is  negative,  we  must,  agreeably  to  what  has  been  said 
with  regara  to  the  signs  of  the  roots  ^/p,  VOy  and  ^/r,  take 
all  those  three  roots  negatively,  or  take  only  one  of  them 
negatively  ;  and  consequently,  as  x^p  =  ^  \^q  =:  2,  and 
A^r  =  I,  the  four  roots  of  the  given  equation  are  found 
to  be: 

1.  x=       4+2-i  =  l, 

2.  x=       1-2  +  1  =  2, 
8.  x=^i  +  2  +  |=:8, 

4.  x=-.|-2-4=-6. 
From  these  roots  are  formed  the  four  factors, 

(x-l)  X  (x  -  2)  X  (jr  -  8)  X  (jT  +  6)  =  0. 

The  first  two,  mulüplied  together,  give  x*  —  3a:  4-  2; 
the  product  of  the  last  two  is  x*  +  3r  —  18;  again  multi- 
plying these  two  products  together,  we  obtain  exsctlj  tbt 
cxjuation  proposed. 

779.  It  remains  now  to  àhew  how  an  enuatian  of  dke 
fourth  degree,  in  which  the  second  term  is  round,  maw  he 
transformed  into  another,  in  which  tliat  term  iswvtfi^:  fiir 
which  we  shall  give  the  following  rule  ♦. 

*  An  investigation  of  this  rule  may  be  seen  'm 
Ali^ebra,  Fart  II.  chap.  3. 


SLBMairrs  aacr.  i^ 

Let  there  be  proponed  the  gracnil  oqiuUion  ^  +  ^^  + 
Ay*  +  ^'\'à^0.  If  we  add  to  ^  the  fourth  part  of  the 
coefficient  of  the  wcond  term»  or  •]//,  and  write,  instead  of 
the  sum,  a  new  letter  x,  so  tliat  ^  4*  ^a  =:  x,  and  conse- 
quently ^  =  X  —  ^  :  we  shall  have 

y  =  1^-  iÄr+^a\y  =xJ-iiix*  +  V6«*-^-  V*«"! 
and,  kstly,  as  follows  : 

AT?  -  »nV  +  V^x  -  ,^a* 

fix«     —  iaàx  +  Vifl^fi 
ey  Ä  cr  —  ^ac 


?:= 


And  hcooc,  by 


iaar  +  ^cfbi^Q 


We  ha^e  now  an  cq|uation  from  which  the  second  term  is 
taken  away,  and  to  which  nothing  prevents  us  from  applying 
the  rule  before  given  for  determining  its  four  roots.  After 
the  values  of  x  are  found,  those  of  ^  will  easily  be  deter- 
Buned,  flnce  y  =  x  —  ^a. 

780.  This  is  the  greatest  length  to  which  we  have  yet 
arrived  in  the  resolution  of  algeoraic  equations«  All  the 
pains  that  have  been  taken  in  order  to  rt^solve  «iiiations  of 
the  fifth  degree,  and  those  of  higher  dimensions,  in  the  sonte 
Bsanner,  or,  at  least,  to  reduce  them  to  inferior  degrees« 
have  been  unsuccessful  :  so  that  we  cannot  give  any  general 
rules  for  finding  the  roots  of  equations,  which  exceed  the 
fourth  degree. 

The  only  success  that  has  attended  tlieae  atteniDts  ha^ 
been  the  resolution  of  some  particular  cases;  the  cliief  of 
which  is  that,  in  which  a  rational  root  takes  place  ;  for  thiü  is 
easily  found  by  the  method  of  divi^ns  l)ccau!ie  wc  kmiw 
that  such  a  root  must  be  always  a  factor  of  the  last  tenu. 
The  operation,  in  othiT  res|ii*ctH,  is  the  same  as  that  we  lia\e 
ex^ained  for  «luations  of  the  third  and  fourth  degree. 

781.  It  will  ue  nccessar}',  however,  to  apnly  the  rule  of 
Bombelli  to  an  e(|uation  wliich  has  no  rational  nxUs. 

Let  there  be  given  the  e<iualion  y*  —  Hy*  -r  14y'  -^ 
^  —  8  z=  0«  Here  we  must  i)egin  with  destroying  the 
second  term,  by  adding  the  fourth  4if  itsaieflicient  to  r/,  su|>- 
posing  jy  —  S2  s  x«  and  sulntituting  in  the  et|uation»  iiiMeail 
of^.  Its  new  value  x  -f- 12,  im^cad  ofy\  iti«  valut*  x*  -)-  -kr  +  -I  * 
and  doing  tlie  same  with  rvgard  toy*  and  y*,  we  shall  liav«-» 


CHAP.  XV.  OF  ALQKBMA.  StSfl 

y*  =  ;r*  +  ar»  +  Ä4r*  +  SÄr  +  16 

,    -%»=      -.8^-48^«- 9&r  — 64 

1V=  14a?*  +  6&F  +  56 

^=  4jp-j-   8 

-   8  =  —    8 


a*  +  0  -  10.r«  —  4r  +  8=0. 
This  equation  being  compared  with  our  general  formula, 
gives  a  =  10^  6  =  4,  cs— 8;  whence  we  conclude^  that 
y=  6,  g  =  y,  Ä  =  i,  and  V7i  =  4  ;  that  the  product 
^/pqr  will  be  positive  ;  and  that  it  is  from  the  equation  of 
die  third  degree,  z^  —  5z^  +  '^z  —  |.  =  0,  that  we  are  to 
seek  for  the  uiree  roots  j9,  q,  r.     (Art  774.) 

782.  Let  us  first  remove  the  fiactions  from  this  equation, 

fi 
by  making  z  =  -^,  and  we  shall  thus  have,  after  multiply- 
ing by  8,  the  equation  ii*  —  lOw«  +  17t#  —  2  =  0,  in  which 
all  the  roots  are  positive.  Now,  the  divisors  of  the  last 
term  are  1  and  2  ;  if  we  try  ti  =  1,  we  find  1  —  10  + 17  — 
2  =  6  ;  so  that  the  equation  is  not  reduced  to  nothing  : 
but  trymg  w  n  2,  we  find  8  —  40  +  84^-2  =  0,  whidi 
answers  to  the  equation,  and  shews  that  ««  s=  2  is  one  of  the 
roots.  The  two  others  will  be  found  by  dividing  by  u  —  S» 
as  usual  ;  then  the  quotient  w*  —  8w  +  1  =  0  mU  give 
w«  =  8w  —  1.  and  w  =  4  ±  Vl6.  And  since  z  =  4«,  the 
three  roots  ot  the  equation  of  the  third  degree  are^ 

1,  «  =  p  =  1, 

«                  4+  VlB 
^y  2;  =  j  = ^— , 

,5,  5f  =  r  = 5 . 

783.  Having  therefore  determined  p^  jr,  r,  we  have  also 
their  square  roots;  namely,  ^/j9  =1, 

^/(8^-2^/15)♦       ,     ^         V(8— 2>v/15) 
^^?  = 2 ,and  Vr  = j ^. 

*  This  expression  for  the  square  root  of  ^  is  obtained  by  mul- 

4  +  4/15 
tiplying  the  numerator  and  denominator  of ^ by  2,  and 

extracting  the  root  of  the  latter,  in  order  to  remove  the  surd  x 

^,        4-+.^15        ^       8+2v/15         ,v^(8+2v/15) 

Thus, X  2  = ;  and  — ^ ~ — i 

^  4  ^4? 

^(8-1-2^15 


\ 


■LEMBHTS  SECT.  IT. 

But  we  have  alrrady  Mon,  (Art.  675,  and  G7G),  that  tlie 
iqtiarc  root  of  a  ±^/  6^  when    x^{€^  —  A)  =  e,  \n  expressed 

by  ^'(a  ±  s'b)  =  ^^(^2"^)  ±  ^^("^)  •  ^  ^•^^  Û*  >n  ^^« 

nresent  case,  0  =  8,  and  v6  s  2  v^l5  ;  and  consequently, 

o  =  ÜÜ,  and  c  =  vl<i*  —  6)  =  2,  we  have 

-•(8  -H  «  Vl5)  =  ^/5  +  V  S,  and  V(8  -  «  y/lS) 

=5  v'ö  —  \^8.     Hence,  we  have  v^/>  =  1,  s/q  = ^       » 

a/5—   /S 
and  ^r  = 3 ;  wherefore,  nnce  we  also  know  that 

the  product  of  these  quantities  is  positive,  tlie  four  values  of 
jr  wdlbe: 

l.x=  s^p+^q+'/r:sl'\ g 

2.#s  ^^p-  vj—  ^''^=:l+ ^ 

=  l  +  %/5, 

a  .   _L    ,  /  ,  ,  i/5f  x/3-v^5+i/3 

=-l  +  v^3, 

4.*=-K/p-*'?+  ^'r  =  -l+ Î— j^ . 

Lastly,   as  we  have  ^  =  x  -f  2,   the  four  roots  of  tin* 
given  equation  are  : 

1.  y  =:  3  -I-  -v/S,  2.  j^  =  3  —  /r>, 

3,  j^  =  l+  ^^3,  4.4^  =  1  ^Vtl 


C^rESTIOKH    FOR    PEACTHF. 

1.  Given  24  -  4s'  -  8-  + 32  =  0,  t«>  find  tlu-  valncn» 

of  r.  JrtM.     4,  2,  -  1  +  ^   -  3,    -  1  -,    -  ;V 

St  Given  ^  -  4y'  -  .]|y*  -  4y  ^-  1  =  0,  ti»   find  tlu- 

values  of  y.  Ans,  ■  \^- ^,  aiul  ' — ^  ~  '^ 

3.  Gi«vn  X*  —  3^*'  —  Jx  =  3,  t«>  fiiul  iho  >.ilui^  of  1. 


I  f  .13       ,-l  t  ^   -.; 
/Iwj.    — --,-  -,aml 


CHAP.  XTI,  OF  ALGSBmA.  98Q 


CHAR  XVI. 

Of  the  Resolution  ^Equations  by  Approximatioik. 

784*  When  the  roots  of  an  equation  arc  not  rational, 
whether  they  may  be  expressed  oy  radical  quantities,  or 
even  if  we  have  not  that  resource,  as  is  the  case  with  equa- 
tions which  exceed  the  fourth  degree,  we  must  be  satined 
with  determining  their  values  by  approximation  ;  that  is  to 
s^y»  by  methods  which  are  continually  bringing  us  nearer  to 
the  true  value,  till  at  last  the  error  being  very  small,  it  may 
be  neglected.  Different  methods  of  this  kind  have  been  pro« 
posed,  the  chief  of  which  we  shall  explain.  ;   ' 

785.  The  first  method  which  we  shall  mention,  supposes 
that  we  have  already  determined,  with  tolerable  exactness, 
the  value  of  one  root*;  that  we  know,  for  example,  that 
such  a  value  exceeds  4,  and  that  it  is  less  than  5.  In  this 
case,  if  we  suppose  this  value  z:  4  -I- /?,  we  are  certain  that 
p  expresses  a  fraction.  Now,  as  p  is  a  fraction,  and  con- 
sequently less  than  unity^  the  square  of  p^  its  cube,  and,  in 
general,  all  the  higher  powers  of  p,  will  be  much  less  with  re- 
spect to  unity  ;  and,  for  this  reason,  since  we  require  only  an 
approximation,  they  may  be  neglected  in  the  calculation. 
When  we  have,  therefore,  nearly  determined  the  fraction  jt?, 
we  shall  know  more  exactly  the  root  4  -f  2>  ;  from  that  we  * 
proceed  to  determine  a  new  value  still  more  exact,  and  con- 
tinue the  same  process  till  we  come  as  neiar  the  truth  as  we 
desire. 

786.  We  shall  illustrate  this  metliod  first  by  an  easy  ex- 
ample, requiring  by  approximation  tlie  root  of  the  equation 
w'^  =  20. 

Here  we  perceive,  that  or  is  greater  than  4  and  less  thai^ 
5;  making,  therefore,  a:  =  4  -|- o,  we  shall  have  x^  =  16  + 
Sp  -\r  p"  =20;   but  asp*  must  oe  very  small,  we  shall  neg- 
lect it,  in  order  that  we  may  have  only  the  equation  16  + 

•  This  is  the  method  given  by  Sir  Is.  Newton  at  the  beginning  of 
his  Method  of  Fluxions.  When  investigated,  it  is  found  subject 
to  different  imperfections  ;  for  which  reason  we  may  with  ad- 
vantage substitute  the  method  ^iven  by  M.  de  la  Grange,  in  the 
Memoirs  of  Berlin  for  17617  and  1768.     F.  T. 

This  method  has  since  been  published  by  De  la  Grange»  in  a 
separate  Treatise^  where  the  subject  is  discussed  in  the  usual 
masterly  t^tyle  of  this  author. 

u 


BUmilTS  MCT«  BV. 

»p=:  90,  or  8/1  =  4.  Tlib  gives  p  =:  4,  and  x  ts  4f» 
which  already  approaches  nearer  the  true  root.  If^  there- 
fore, we  now  suppose  x  =  4  j-  +  p'  ;  we  are  sure  that  p  ex- 
presses a  fraction  much  smaller  than  before,  and  that  we 
may  neglect  p-  with  greater  propriety.  We  have,  there- 
fore,JE'  =  9ÙI  -H  9p  >■  90,orfi|p'=  -  4;  and oonseqtientl j, 
p'^  -y^;thereforex=:4i.-^  =  4fJ. 

And  if  we  wished  to  approximate  still  nearer  to  the  true 
value,  we  must  make  x  =  4f^  'i'P  f  '^^  should  thus  have 
J^=aOTTVT +  »}?/>'  =  «);  «>  that  8J^>' =  - -nVi» 
«*%>'  =  -  tUt  =  -  TiT»  and 

_L_- 

therefore  x  =  4j-J.  —  -ttttt  =  ^tVto't»  ft  value  which  is  so 
near  the  truth,  tnat  wc  may  consider  the  error  as  of  no  im- 


787.  Now,  in  order  to  generalise  what  we  have  here  laid 
down,  let  us  suppose  the  given  equation  to  be  x-  =  tf ,  and 
that  we  previously  know  x  to  be  greater  than  fi,  but  less 
than  ift  +  1*  If  wc  now  make  x  :^  n  ■\'  p,  p  must  be  a 
fraction,  and  0*  may  be  neglected  as  a  very  small  quantity, 
so  that  we  shaJl  have  x<>  =  n^  +  Sup  =  a  ;  or  Sup  =  a  —  w', 

,  a— n«  ,  ,  a— n*      »•  +  a 

and  p  =:  -^  ;  consequently,  x  =  fi  +  -^  =  -^j^  . 

Now,  if  It  approximatcti  towards  the  true  value,  this  new 

n*+a     . 
value  -3 —  will  approximate  much  nearer  ;  and,  by  suli- 

stituting  it  for  n,  we  shall  find  the  result  much  nearer  the 
truth  ;  that  is,  we  bimll  obtain  a  new  value,  which  may  again 
be  substituted,  in  order  to  appn>ach  still  nearer:  and  the 
same  o|X'raticm  may  Iw  continued  as  long  as  we  please. 

For  example,  let  x*  =  2  ;  that  is  to  say,  Ka  the  square 
root  of  ^  Ik*  requirixl  ;  and  as  we  already  Icnow  a  value  suf- 
ficiently near,  which  is  expressed  by  n,  we  shall  have  a  »till 

nearer  value  of  the  root  expressed  by  —3—^.  Let  therefore, 

1.  n  :r  1,  and  we  shall  have    J  =  |, 
52.   M  =  },  and  we  »hall  have    r  =  \[, 
S.   !•={{,  and  we  shall  have  x  r=  \'  [. 

This  last  %'alue  ap[)n)aclH*s  so  near  \'%  that  its  squxutr 
•  mil  differs  from  the  nunilier  S  only  by  the  small  quantity 
TT«'«  "t  i)  ^'^y  which  it  exceeds  it. 

788.  \Ne  nuiy  proivcd  in  the  same  manner,  wlien  it  i* 


CHAP.  XVI.  OF  ALÇSIKA.  S91 

required  to  find  by  approximation  cube  roots,  biquadrate 
root%  &c. 

Let  there  be  ^ven  the  equation  of  the  third  degree, 
x^  zz  a;  or  let  it  be  proposed  to  find  the  value  ofy/a. 

Knowing  that  it  is  nearly  »,  we  shall  suppose  xzzn  +  p  ; 
neglecting  p^  andp\  we  shall  have  x^  zzn^  +  Sn^p  =  a  ;  so 

a — n^  2n'+0 

that  3n*p  =i  a  —  n^  and pzz  ;    whence  x  =     ^  ,■■» 

If,  therefore,  n  is  nearly  =  ^a,  the  quantity  which  we  have 
now  found  will  be  much  nearer  it  But  for  still  greater 
exactness,  we  may  again  substitute  this  new  value  for  n,  Oßd 
so  on. 

For  example,  let  x^  =  2  ;  and  let  it  be  required  to  deter- 
mine ^«     Here,  if  n  is  nearly  the  value  of  the  number 

2n'-4-2 
sought,  the  formula     ^^     will  exprjBSS  that  member  still 

more  nearly  ;  let  us  therefore  make 

1.  n  =  1,  and  we  ^ball  have  ^  =  y, 

2.  n  =  ^  and  we  shall  have  x  ^  ^ 

3.  »  =  fj^  and  we  shall  havex  =  HîUllU' 

789.  This  method  of  mproximation  may  be  employed, 
with  the  same  success,  in  finding  the  roots  of  all  equations. 

To  shew  this,  suppose  we  have  the  general  equation  of 
the  third  degree,  x^  +  ox*  -j-  *'  +  ^  =  ö>  ^^  wniph  n  is 
very  nearly  the  value  of  one  of  the  roots.  Let  us  make 
X  =  n  ^ p;  and,  since  j)  will  be  a  fraction,  neglecting  the 
powers  of  this  letter,  which  are  higher  than  the  first  degree, 
we  shall  have  x*  =:  »*  —  Ärip,  andx*  =  n^  —  Sn'p ;  whence 
we  have  the  equation  n*  —  Sn^p  +  an*  —  ^tanp  +  on  — 
ip  +  c  z=  0,  or  n*  4-  an*  -\-  bn  '^  c  ^  8n*p  +  ^anp  +  bp 

^       .   »V  1  n'4-ûn'ô+n— c       _ 

=  (8n«  +  ^n^  b)p  ;  sothatp=    g^g^g^^^^  >  and 

n^+anl^+bn-i-c     2n*  +  an^  —  e     _. .        . 

X  =  n— (   a  .  ,  â — nr)^a  x  ■  a r~l-    This  value, 

^   Sn^+2an+b        8n*  +  2an  +  6  ' 

which  is  more  exact  than  the  first,  being  substituted  for  n, 
will  furnish  a  new  value  still  more  accurate. 

790.  In  order  to  apply  this  operation  to  an  example,  let 
x3  +  2^2  +  3x  -  50  =  0,  in  which  a  =  2,  *  =  3,  and 
c  zz  —  50.     If  n  is  supposed  to  be  nearly  the  value  of  one 

2n'+2n*+50  .    ' 

of  the  roots,  x  =  -ttttz — rs  »  will  be  a  value  still  nearer 

the  truth. 

Now,  the  assumed  yalue  ofx  zzS  not  being  fiur  from  th# 

ü2 


XLKMBMTS  SKCT.  IT. 

true  one,  we  shall  tuppose  n  zzS,  whkh  gWes  us  x  =:  }^  ; 
and  if  we  were  to  suDstitutc  this  new  value  instead  of  n,  wc 
riKMitd  find  another  still  more  exact. 

791.  We  shall  give  only  the  fidlowing  example»  for  equ«^ 
tkms  of  higher  dimennons  than  the  tliinil. 

Letj^zr&r-f-lO,  orjr^  —  fijr-lO^O,  where  we  readily 
perceive  that  1  is  too  small,  and  that  2  is  too  great.  Now« 
if  X  r=  n  is  a  value  not  far  from  the  true  one,  and  we 
make  x  zzn-^-  p^wc  shall  have  a-^  =:  it^  -|-  dn^  ;  and,  oon- 
aequently, 

n^+5H*pziGH  +  Gp  +  W;  or 
P{5h^  -  6)  =  6/»  +  10  -  n\ 

pote  M  s  ly  we  shall  have  x  =  — z  =  ~  14;  this  value  is 

altogether  inapplicable,  a  circumstance  which  arises  from  the 
approximated  value  of  n  having  been  taken  by  much  too 
small.  We  shall  therefore  make  n  =  S,  and'  shall  thus 
obtain  x  s  y/  =  ^^,  a  value  which  is  much  nearer  the 
truth.  And  if  we  were  now  to  substitute  for  n,  the  fraction 
^  we  sliould  obtain  a  still  more  exact  value  of  the  root  x. 

792.  Such  is  the  most  usual  methcKl  of  finding  the  roou 
of  an  equation  by  approximation,  and  it  applies  successfully 
lo  all  cases. 

We  shall  however  explain  another  method  ^«  which  de« 
serves  attention,  cm  m^iuiit  of  the  faeility  of  the  caleulatiiin. 
The  foundation  of  thi;«  nietlMnl  amsi^ts  in  detennining  for 

:li  ecpiation  a  MTies  of  numl)ers,  as»  a^  &,  r,  &c.  >uch,  that 

:h  term  of  the  sferie^y  divided  by  the  precetiing  one,  may 
express  the  value  of  the  nxa  with  so  much  the  more  ex- 
actness, aix*i»nling  a»  this  series  of  numbers  w  carried  to  a 
greater  length. 

SupiMise  we  have  already  got  tlie  temiü  ;>,  (j,  r,  «,  /,  &:c. 

^  The  thrtiry  of  approximation  here  ^ivc*ii,  is  foiiiuleil  on  the 
theory  of  »hat  are  called  rn'urrin^  »erie-«,  in>entecl  by  M.  cic 
Moi%'re.  Thit  method  wa»  ^i\en  by  Daniel  Bernoulli,  in  vol.  in 
of  the  Ancient  Coinnientarie?!  of  Pelrrnbur);.  But  Kuler  ba» 
here  prc»ented  it  in  ratlier  a  diHerent  point  of  \iew.  Tbo»«* 
who  wiiih  to  invi*«ti^ate  tbeM*  matter»,  niuy  eoniiult  cbapteri»  l:i 
and  17  of  vol.  i.  of  our  author*»  Incrod.  in  .\niil.  InHn.  ;  an  ex- 
celle.it  work,  in  which  »exerul  »ubjecb*  treated  of  in  tlii*i  fii^t 
|HU1,  beiiide  others  et]ually  connected  with  pure  niutlienmtie»» 
are  profoundly  analysed  and  dearly  explained.     F.  T. 


CHAF.  XVI.  OF  ALGSBEA.  9QS 


—  must  express  the  root  x  with  tolerable  exactness  ;  that  is 

to  say,   we   have  -^,  =:  x  nearly.      We  shall  have   also 

r  ...  .  . 

—  =  X  ♦,  and  the  muIüpIicaUon  of  the  two  values  will 

T  S 

ffivc  —  =  x\  Farther  as  —  =  J^,  we  shall  also  have 
^       p  r  ' 

^ —  =  x^  ;  then,  since  —  =  jr.  we  shall  have  —  =  jr*,  and 
P  *  8  '  p  ' 

so  on. 

793.  For  the  better  explanation  of  this  method,  we  shall 
begin  with  an  equation  of  the  second  degree,  x*  =  x  +  1, 
and  shall  suppose  that  in  the  above  series  we  have  found 

a  r 

the  terms  p,  y,  r,  s^  f,  &c.    Now,  as  -^  =:  jr,  and  —  =  ^t 

we  shall  have  the  equation  —  =  -^  -f  1,  or  q  -\-  p  ;si  n 

And  as  we  find,  in  the  same  manner,  that  «  r:  r  -{-  </.  and 
t  ^  s  -\-r\  we  conclude  that  each  term  of  our  series  is  the 
sum  of  the  two  preceding  terms  ;  so  that  having  the  ^rst 
two  terms,  we  can  easily  continue  the  series  to  any  length. 
With  regard  to  the  first  two  terms,  they  may  be  taken  at 
pleasure  :  if  we  therefore  suppose  them  to  be  0, 1,  our  series 
will  be  0,  1,  1,  2,  3,  5,  8,  13,  21,  34,  56,  89,  144,  &c.  and 
such,  that  if  we  divide  any  term  by  that  which  immediately 
precedes  it,  we  shall  have  a  value  of  x  so  much  nearer  the 
true  one,  according  as  we  have  chosen  a  term  more  distant. 
The  error,  indeed,  is  very  great  at  first,  but  it  diminishes  as 
we  advance.  The  series  of  those  values  of  x,  in  the  order  in 
which  they  arc  always  approxunating  towards  the  true  one, 
is  as  follows  : 

y,  I       I      a      1      s      8       13      11       14      ÏS      «9      141-      9c o 

**   —   ö>  T»  T»  ■$>  T>  T»    T  »  TT>  XT?  TT>  TT>    TT  »  *^^* 

If,  for  example,  we  make  x  =  ^,  we  have  44t  =  xt  "I" 
1  =  ♦l^,  in  which  the  error  is  only'-j-^.  Any  of  the  suc- 
ceeding terms  will  render  it  still  less. 

794.  Let  us  also  consider  the  equation  x^  =  &r  +  1  ; 

q  f 

and  since,  in  all  cases,  x  =  --,  and  x^  =  — ,  we  shall  liave 

P  P 

*  It  must  only  be  understood  here  that  — is  nearly  equal  to  x. 


494  ciMnrrs  f  scr«  rr« 

r      So 

—  =  ~  f  l.or  r  =  &  +  p;  whence  we  infer  that  the 

double  of  each  tcnn,  added  to  the  preceding  tenn,  will  give 
the  succeeding  one«  If»  therefore,  we  hcgin  again  with  0, 
li  we  shall  have  the  series^ 

0,  1,  2,  5, 12,  S9,  70, 169,  408,  &c. 

Whence  it  follows,  that  the  value  of  x  will  be  expressed 
still  tnorc  accurately  by  the  following  Auctions  : 

«._t      «       s       It      «•>      70       169      40t      |L.^ 
•*  —  c*  l>   i>    T  *  "•  1>   1V>    To  >  'i^V»  ***-• 

which,  consequently,  will  always  approximate  nearer  and 
nearer  the  true  value  of  x  =  1  +  ^/  2  ;  so  that  if  we  take 
mity  from  these  fractions,  the  value  of  ^^2  will  be  expressed 
otore  and  more  exactly  by  the  succeeding  fractions  : 

•     I     1     7      17     41     99     «19    Vr 

For  example,  f  ^  has  for  its  square  ^^1%  which  diflTert 
only  by  ^y^  ^  from  the  number  2. 

795.  This  method  is  no  less  applicable  to  equations,  whidi 
liave  a  greater  number  of  dimensions.  If,  for  example^  we 
have  the  equation  of  the  third  degree   x'  =  j^  -|-  Sx  -I-  I, 

we  must  make  x  =  -^,  x*  =  — ,  and  a^  =  —  ;    we   shall 

P  P  P 

then  have  #  =  r  -f-  2y  -{- «  ;  which  shews  how,  by  means  of 

the  three  terms  p^  q^  ana  r,  we  are  to  determine  the  suc- 
ceeding one,  #;  and,  as  the  beginning  is  always  arbitrary, 
we  may  form  the  following  series  : 

0,  0,  1, 1,  3,  6,  18,  28,  GO,  129,  &c. 

from  whieh  result  the  following  fractions  for  the  approximate 
values  of  x  : 

r^o     •      I      I     «     11     >•     60     119     iL'o 

••    —    t»0>l>171>      ^»    I'M     %T9      ^t    7   *^^* 

The  finit  of  these  values  would  be  very  far  from  the  truth  ; 
but  if  we  substitute  in  the  e(|uation  »i,  or  y ,  instead  of  x, 
we  obtain 

1171   —  ««i_L,'®^l    litt 

Ti"!     -"     47    T^    T      I     *    —      r*T» 

in  which  the  em^r  is  only  ^Vy. 

796*  It  mu«t  Im.^  ol>M*r\ed,  however,  that  all  equations  are 
not  i>f  such  a  nature  an  to  admit  the  application  «>f  this 
method  ;  and,  |)articularly,  when  the  seamd  term  i»  wanting, 
it  cannot  lie  made  Uüe  oL     For  example,  let  x-  =  2  ;  if  wo 

wished  lo  make  x  =  -  — ,  and  x^  :=  -*^   we  should  have 

P  P 


CHAP.  XTI.  OF  ALGEBBÀ.  805 

T 

—  =  %  or  r  =  S^,  that  is  to  say,  r  =  Og  +  2p,  whence 

would  result  the  series 

1, 1,  2,  2,  4,  4,  8,  8, 16, 16,  32,  82,  &c. 

from  which  we  can  draw  no  conclusion,  because  each  term, 
divided  by  the  preceding,  gives  always  or  =  1,  or  ;r  =  2. 
But  we  may  obviate  this  inconvenience,  by  making  a:=y — 1  ; 
for  by  these  means  we  have  j^  —  2y  4"  ^  =  ^  »  ^^^  ^  ^c 

now  make^  =  —,  andy  =  — ,  we  shall  obtûn  the  same 

approximation  that  has  been  already  given« 

797.  It  would  be  the  same  with  the  equation  a^  ^%  This 
method  would  not  furnish  such  a  series  of  numbers  as  would 
express  the  value  of  i/2.  But  we  have  only  to  suppose  ar  =  y 

—  1,  in  order  to  have  the  equation^  —  S^  +  %— 1=2, 

OTt/^  =  3y'  —  3y  +  8;  and  then. makings  =  -^,y^=:  — > 

and  y'  =  — ,   we  have  j  =:  3r  —  Sj  +  3p,   by  means  of 

which  we  see  how  three  given  terms  determine  the  succeed* 
ing  one. 
Assuming  then  any  three  terms  for  the  first,  for  example 

0^  0,  1,  we  have  the  following  series  : 

0,  0, 1,  8,  6, 12,  27,  63,  144,  324,  &c. 

The  last  two  terms  of  this  series  give  y  n  ^t  and  x  -n^ 
This  fraction  approaches  sufficiently  near  the  cube  root  of  2  ; 
for  the  cube  of  ^  is  Vr*  »^d  2  =  '^«. 

798.  We  must  farther  observe,  with  regard  to  this 
method,  that  when  the  ec[uation  has  a  rational  root,  and  the 
beginning  of  the  period  is  chosen  such,  that  this  root  may 
result  from  it,  each  term  of  the  series,  divided  by  the  pre- 
ceding term,  will  give  the  root  with  equal  accuracy. 

To  shew  this,  let  there  be  given  the  equation  jr*  =  jr  +  2, 
one  of  the  roots  of  which  is  or  =:  2  ;  as  we  have  here,  for 
the  scries,  the  formula  r  =  y  +  22?,  if  we  take  1,  2,  for  the 
first  two  terms,  we  have  the  series  1,  2,  4,  8,  16,  32,  64,  &c. 
a  geometrical  progression,  whose  exponent  =  2.  The  same 
property  is  proved  by  the  equation  of  the  third  degree 
x^  =  a:*  +  3ar  +  9,  which  has  a:  =  3  for  one  of  the  roots. 
If  we  suppose  the  first  terms  to  be  1,  3,  9,  we  shall  find,  by 
the  formula,  s  =:  r  +  30^  +  9^?,  and  the  series  1,  3,  9,  27, 
81,  243,  &c.  which  is  likewise  a  geometrical  progression. 


196  SLBMKIIT»  SSCr.  IV» 


799.  Bui  if  the  beginning  of  the  teric»  exceed  the 
we  sliall  not  approximate  towards  that  root  at  all;  fbr 
when  the  e(|uation  has  more  than  one  root,  the  series  ffiTca 
by  spproximation  only  the  greatest  :  and  we  do  not  fina  one 
ot  the  L*ss  roots»  unless  tlie  first  terms  have  been  properly 
chosen  for  tliat  purpose.  This  will  be  illustrated  by  the 
fcdiowing  example. 

Let  there  be  given  the  equation  jr>  =  ix  —  S»  whose  two 
loots  are  x  =  1,  and  x  =:  3.  The  formula  for  the  series  is 
r  ^  4q  ^  Spf  and  if  we  take  1,  1,  for  the  first  two  terms  of 
the  series,  which  consequently  expresses  the  least  root,  we 
have  for  the  whole  series,  1,  1,  1,  1,  1,  1,  I,  I,  &c.  but  aa» 
suming  for  the  leading  terms  the  numbers  I,  <5,  which  ooo* 
tain  tne  greatest  root,  we  have  the  series,  1,  3,  9,  27»  81, 
5MS,  729f  &c  in  which  all  the  terms  express  precisely  the 
root  S.  Lastly,  if  we  a^sumc  any  other  beginning,  pro%'ided 
It  be  such  tliat  the  least  term  is  not  comprised  in  it,  the 
series  will  cont'mually  ap[)roximate  towarus  the  greatest 
root  3  ;  which  may  be  seen  by  the  following  series  : 
Beginning, 

0,  I,    4,    13,    40,     l^'l,    364,  8uu 

1,  £,    5,    14,     41,     122,    365,  &c. 

2,  3,    6,     \5y    42,    123,    366,     1095,  &c. 

2,    1,-2,-11,-38,-118,-362,-1091,-3278,  &c. 

in  which  the  quotii*nts  of  the  diviMon  of  the  la&t  termn  by 
the  preceding  alwavs  ap|m)xiniate  towards  the  greater  root 
S»  and  never  towards  the  less. 

BOO.  We  may  even  apply  this  methcxi  to  e(|uations 
which  go  on  to  infinity.  Tne  following  will  furnish  an 
example  : 

X*    rrx'-'+x'-^  +  x'—^  +  X^-^+^&C. 

The  M*ries  for  this  equation  must  l)e  such«  that  each  term 
may  Ik*  it|ual  to  the  sum  of  all  the  preceding  ;  Üuit  i«,  wo 
must  have 

1,  1,  2,  4,  8,  16,  32,  64,  128,  Kc 

whence  we  si*e  that  the  i^reater  rtKit  of  the  given  ecpiation  is 
exmuly  x  =  2;  and  tins  may  Ix*  f>hewn  m  the  following 
manner.     If  we  divide  the  equation  by  x*,  wc  shall  have 

.        1         1  1         Î 

X  X*  x'  X* 

a  giiMuetrical  progn.'s^iim,  wlmie  »uni  U  found  =:  -  ^ .  ;  >o 


CHAF.  XVI.  OF  ALGRBIUU  SOT 


that  1  =: r  ;  multiplying  therefore  by  x  =  I,  we  have 

x  —  1  ==  1,  and  x  =  2. 

801.  Beside  these  methods  of  determining  the  roots  of  an 
equation  by  approximation,  some  others  have  been  invented, 
but  they  are  all  either  too  tedious,  or  not  sufficiently  general*. 
The  method  which  deserves  the  preference  to  all  others,  is 

*  This  remark  does  not  apply  to  the  method  of  finding  the 
roots  of  equations  of  all  degrees,  and  however  affected,  by  The 
Rule  of  Double  Position.    In  order,  therefore,  that  this  chapter 
flight  be  more  complete,  we  shall  explain  this  method  as  bnefly  * 
as  possible. 

Substitute  in  the  given  equation  two  numbers,  as  near  the 
true  root  as  possible,  and  observe  the  separate  results.  Then, 
as  the  diiference  of  these  results  is  to  the  difference  of  the  two 
numbers  -y  so  is  the  difference  between  the  true  result,  and 
either  of  the  former,  to  the  respective  correction  of  eadi.  This 
being  added  to  the  number,  when  too  small,  or  substracted  from 
it,  wnen  too  great,  will  give  the  true  root  nearly.    * 

The  number  thus  found,  with  any  other  that  may  be  sup» 
posed  to  approach  still  nearer  to  the  true  root,  may  be  assumed 
for  another  operation,  which  may  be  repeated,  till  the  root  shall 
be  determined  to  any  degree  of  exactness  that  may  be  re- 
quired. 

Example.     Given  jp  +  x^  +  j  =s  100. 

Having  ascertained  by  a  few  trials,  or  by  inspecting  a  Table  of 
roots  and  powers,  that  x  is  more  than  4,  and  Jess  than  5,  let  us 
substitute  these  two  numbers  in  the  given  equation,  and  calculate 
the  results. 


By  the  first  K-jJ 
supposition  J  ^  _  g^ 

By  the  second! 
supposition    i 

. .  Results .... 

5 
4 

'X 

x^ 

= 

5 

25 
125 

84. 

.    .    * 

•    ■ 

155 

155 
84 

100  true  result. 
84 

Differences         71 

1 

16 

Then,       As  71 

:       1               :: 

16  :  •2253  + 

Therefore  4  +  *2253,  or  4*2253  approximates  nearly  to  the 
true  root. 

It*  now  4*2  and  4*3  were  taken  as  the  assumed  numbers,  and 
substituted  in  the  given  equation,  we  should  obtain  the  value  of 
jc  =  4*264  very  nearly. 


sLEMnm  or  ulgkbra.  »bct.  tv. 

that  which  wc  expUined  first  ;  for  it  applies  suoocsifiiUy  to 
to  all  kinds  of  eouations  :  whereas  the  other  often  mjuim 
the  equation  to  tie  prepared  in  a  certain  manner,  without 
which  it  cannot  be  employed  ;  and  of  this  we  have 
ptoof  in  different  examples. 


QUESTIONS   FOR  PRACTICE. 

1.  Given  jc^  +  2a^  -  93x  ^  70  -  0^  to  tindx. 

Ans.  X  n  5*13450. 
«.  Given  a^-  l&r'  +  03jr-  50  =  0,  to  find  x. 

An9,  X  =  1028039L 
S.  Given  jr*  -  Sx»  -  75jr  =  10000,  to  find  x. 

Am.  X  =  10^515. 

4.  Given  x*  +  2x*  +  ar'  +  4x-  +  5jr  =  5«21,  to  find 
X.  Jns.  X  =  8-4144. 

5.  Let  120x'  +  8G57x-  -  3805ftr  =  8007115,  to  find 
X.  Am.  X  s  34*653«. 


END  OK  PAKT  I. 


ELEMENTS 


OF 


ALGEBRA. 


PART  II. 

Conlainififf  the  Analysis  g^  Indeterminate  Quantities. 


CHAP.  I. 


Of  the  Resolution  o^  Equations  of  the  First  Degree,  wMch 
contain  more  than  one  unknown  Quantity. 

ARTICLE  L 

JLt  has  been  shewn,  in  the  First  Part,  how  one  unknown 
quantity  is  determined  by  a  single  equation,  and  how  we 
may  determine  two  unknown  quantities  by  means  of  two 
equations,  three  unknown  quantities  by  three  equations,  and 
so  on  ;  so  that  there  must  always  be  as  many  equations  as 
there  are  unknown  quantities  to  determine,  at  least  when  the 
question  itself  is  determinate. 

When  a  question,  therefore,  does  not  furnish  as  many 
equations  as  there  are  unknown  quantities  to  be  determined!, 
some  of  these  must  remain  undetermined,  and  depend  cm 
our  will  ;  for  which  reason,  such  questions  are  said  to  bd 
Indeterminate  ;  forming  the  subject  of  a  particular  branch  of 
algebra,  which  is  calleof  Indeterminate  Jnah/sis. 

2.  As  in  those  cases  we  may  assume  any  numbers  for  onew 
or  more  unknown  quantities,  they  also  admit  of  seven! 
solutions  :  but,  on  tne  other  hand,  as  there  is  usually  an- 
nexed the  condition,  that  the  numbers  sought  are  to  be  in- 
teger and  po^tive,  or  at  least  rational,  the  number  of  all  the 
possible  solutions  of  those  questions  is  greatly  limited  :  so 
that  often  there  are  very  few  of  them  posoUe;  at  other 


aOO  ELEXEKTS  PAST  II. 

times,  there  may  be  an  infinite  number,  but  such  as  are  nol 
readily  obtained  ;  and  sometimes,  also,  none  of  them  are 
possible.  Hence  it  happens,  that  this  fNut  of  analvas  fre- 
quently requires  artifices  entirely  appropriate  to  it,  which  are 
of  ^[Tcat  sen'ice  in  exercitiinff  the  juagment  of  bcginncTs,  and 
givmg  them  dexterity  in  calculation« 

3.  To  begin  with  one  of  the  easiest  questions.  Let  it  be 
required  to  find  two  positive,  integer  number»,  the  sum  of 
which  shall  be  equal  to  10. 

Let  us  represent  those  members  by  x  and  y  ;  then  we  hare 
Jr  +  ^  =  10  ;  and  x  =  10  —  y,  where  ^  i»  »o  far  only  de- 
termined, that  this  letter  must  represent  an  integer  and  poiitiTe 
number.  We  may  therefore  sulratitutc  for  it  all  integer 
numbers  finom  1  to  infinity  :  but  since  x  must  likewise  be  a 
positive  number,  it  follows,  that  y  cannot  be  taken  greater 
than  10,  for  otherwise  x  would  l)ecome  negative;  and  if 
we  also  reject  the  value  of  x  =  0,  we  cannot  make^  greater 
than  9;  so  that  only  the  following  solutions  can  take 
place: 

If  ,y  =  1,  2,  3,  4,  5,  6,  7,  8,  9, 
then  X  =  9,  8,  7,  6,  5,  4,  0,  2,  L 

But,  the  last  four  of  these  nine  solutions  being  the  same  as 
the  first  four,  it  is  evident,  that  the  question  really  admits 
only  of  five  different  bolutions. 

If  three  numlxrrs  were  required,  the  sum  of  which  might 
make  10,  we  shouki  have  only  to  diviiic  one  of  i\w  nuiulx^rs 
already  found  into  two  |>arts,  by  which  iiicauä  we  sliouU 
obtain  a  greater  numlKT  of  solutions. 

4.  As  we  ha%'e  found  m»  difficulty  in  this  cjuestion,  we 
will  proceed  to  others,  which  ru(|uire  different  considera- 
tions. 

Qiu'siion  I .  lA*t  it  be  rc<|uired  to  divide  So  into  tu  o  parts 
the  one  of  which  may  be  divisible  by  ii,  and  the  other  by  «$. 

Let  one  of  the  {larts  »ought  l>c  Sir,  and  the  other 
Sjf  ;  we  hholl  then  have  fix  +  «»//  =  Ü.3  ;  consct{uently 
JLr  =  25  —  %;  and  dividing   by   Si,    we  oluain 

X  =  — 3"^  ;  whence  we  coiurlude«  in  tlu»  lir?»t  place»  that 

mm 

8y  must  lie  less  than  25,  and,  conse«|uentK\  i/  is  Ioh  than  8. 
Also,  if,  from  this  value  of  x,  we  take  out  ns  many  intc*gi.'rs 
as  we  {wsftibly  can,  that  is  to  say,  if  we  divide  by  the  de- 

nominator.S,  we  shall  ha\e  x  =  12  -  //  +    -;j-*-  ;  whence 

it  fiiUowa,  that  1  —  ^,  or  raliRT  jy  -*  1  »  mu»t  be  diviaible  by 


If  we  make  z  =    0 

■z  =  1 

Z=:2 

we  have      y  =    1 

y=3 

y  =  5 

and          '   X  =  11 

x=z8 

X  —  s 

CHAP.  !•  OF   ALGKBKA.  SOl 

by  2.  Let  us,  therefore,  make  ^  —  1  =  2s;  ;  and  we  shall 
have  y  =  2s  +  1,  so  that 

a:  =  18  -  2z  -  1  -  «  =  11  -  8;?. 

And,  since  ^  cannot  be  greater  than  8,  we  must  not  sub- 
stitute any  numbers  for  z  which  would  render  it  +  1  greater 
than  8;  consequently,  z  must  be  less  than  4,  that  is  to  say, 
z  cannot  be  taken  greater  than  3,  for  which  reasons  we  have 
the  following  answers  : 

'Z  =3, 

y  =7, 

a?  =2. 
Hence,  the  two  parts  of  25  sought,  are 

22  +  3, 16  +  9, 10  +  15,  or  4  +  21. 

5.  Question  2.  To  divide  100  into  two  such  parts,  that 
the  one  may  be  divisible  by  7,  and  the  other  by  11. 

L.et  Ix  be  the  first  part,  and  1  ly  the  second.  Then  we 
must  have  Tor  +  lly  =  100;  and,  consequently, 

lOO-llj^      98+2-^7v-% 
X  = ^ ^.  =s y ,  or 

x  =  14«-y+-^; 

wherefore  2  —  4y,  or  4y  —  2,  must  be  divisible  by  7. 

Now,  if  we  can  divide  4y  —  2  by  7,  we  may  also  divide 
its  half,  2^  —  1,  by  7.  Let  us  therefore  make  ^  —  1  z:  7«^ 
or  2j^  =  7^:  +  1,  and  we  shall  have  x=:l4— y  —  &; 
but,   since  2^  =  7;k  +  1  =  62  +  «  + 1,    we  shall  have 

z-^1 
y  zz  Sz  -\ 5—.     Let  us  therefore  make  z  +  1  =:  2m,  or 

;5  =  2f/  —  1  ;  which  supposition  gives  y  =  3z  +  w  ;  and, 
consequently,  we  may  substitute  for  u  every  integer  number 
that  does  not  make  x  or  y  negative.  Now,  as  y  becomes 
=  7w  —  3,  and  x  =  19  —  llw,  the  first  of  these  expressions 
shews  that  7m  must  exceed  3  ;  and  according  to  the  second, 
11m  must  be  less  than  19,  or  u  less  than  44  •  so  that  u  can* 
not  be  2  ;  and  since  it  is  impossible  for  this  number  to  be  0, 
we  must  have  m  =  1  :  which  is  the  only  value  that  this 
letter  can  have.  Hence,  we  obtain  jr  =  8,  and  y  =  4; 
and  the  two  parts  of  100  wliich  were  required,  are  66, 
and  44. 

6.  Question  3.  To  divide  100  into  two  such  parts,  that 
dividing  the  first  by  5,  there  may  remdn  2;  and  dividing 
the  second  by  7,  the  remainder  may  be  4. 


^  XLSMXKTt  M»T  H» 

Sinoe  the  firtt  part,  divided  bjr  5,  leaves  the  tmoamàm 
%  let  us  suppose  it  to  be  &r  +  2;  and»  for  a  nmilar  frawib 
we  may  represent  the  second  part  by  7y  +  ^  •  ^®  sl^  ^^ 
have 

a^  +  7y  +  6  =  100,  or  5x  =  94- 7y=90  +  4-5y  -2y  ; 

4->2y 
whence  we  obtain  x  =:  18  —  ^  H ^.    Hence  it  fbUoiwi^ 


that  4  —  %y  or  2y  —  4,  or  the  half  jr  —  S,  must  be  dhiâUe 
by  5.  For  this  reason^  let  us  make  y  —  S  =?  5s,  or 
^  s  52  +  2»  Ai^  ^e  shall  have  x  =:  16  —  7z  ;  whence  we 
conclude,  that  7z  must  be  less  than  16,  and  z  less  than  '/, 
that  is  to  say,  z  cannot  exceed  2.  The  question  propoaed, 
therefore,  aomits  of  three  answers  : 

1.  x  =s  0  gives  X  s  16,  and  ^  =  2  ;  whence  the  two 
parts  are  82  +  18. 

2.  X  =  1  gives  x  =:  9,  and  ^  =s  7  ;  and  the  two  parts 
are  47  +  53. 

S.  r  =  2  gives  x  =  2,  and  ^  =  12;  and  the  two  parts 
aiel2  +  8& 

7.  Oiuêtion  4.  Two  women  have  together  100  eggs  :  one 
says  to  tlie  other;  *  When  I  count  my  eggs  by  eights, 
there  is  an  ovemlus  of  7/  The  second  replies  :  Mf  I  count 
mine  by  tens,  1  find  the  same  overplus  of  7/  How  many 
eggs  had  each  ? 

As  the  number  of  eggs  lK*lon;i:ing  U)  the  first  woman, 
divided  by  8,  leaves  the  remainder  7  ;  and  tlic  number  c€ 
eggs  belonging  to  the  second,  divided  by  10,  gives  the  same 
remainder  7  ;  we  mav  express  the  first  numlxT  bv  Hx  -4-  7, 
and  the  second  bv  l()y  +  7;  so  that  Sx  +  lOy  +'14=100, 
or  8x  =  86  -  lOy,  or  4x  =  4.3  -  5j/  =  40  f  3  -  4y  — jy. 
Conseuuently,  if  we  make^  —  3  =  4zy  so  tliat  j^  =  4«  4-  3, 
we  sliall  have 

x  =  10-4r—  3  —  s  =  7  —  5^; 

whence  it  follows,  that  5z  must  be  less  than  7,  or  :  less 
than  2;  that  is  to  say,  we  shall  only  have  the  two  following 
aBsw(^rs: 

1.2  =  0  gives X  ==  7,  and ^  =  3;  so  that  the  first  woman 
had  63  eggs,  and  the  second  37. 

2.  z  =  t  givi*s  X  =:  2,  and  y  =:  7  ;  therefore  the  first 
woman  had  2^5  eggs,  and  the  second  had  77. 

H.  QmestioH  5«  A  ooin|Niny  of  men  and  women  s|ient 
1000  sous  at  a  tavern.  The  men  paid  each  19  sous,  and  each 
woman  13«     How  many  men  ana  women  were  there  i 


CHAP,  I*  09  AtOKBKA.  108 

Let  tbe  number  of  men  be  x^  and  that  of  the  women  y  y 
we  shall  then  havç  the  equation 

19x  +  13y  =  1000,  or 
18y  =  1000  -  Iftr  =  988  +  12  -  lar  -  Or,  and 

J,  =  76  -  ^  +  -^g-  ; 

whence  it  follows,  that  12  —  Oa?,  or  &r  —  12,  (»r  jt  —  S,  the 
sixth  part  of  that  number  must  be  diviâble  by  13.  If» 
therefore,  we  make  ^7  —  2  =  13r,  we  shall  have  x  =  13sr  +  2, 

and  y  =  76  -  132:  —  2  -  6r,  or  y  =  74  -  19z; 

which  shews  that  z  must  be  less  than  -f^  and,  consequently^ 
less  than  4  ;  so  that  the  four  following  answers  are'  possible  : 

1.  z  =:  0  gives  x  =  2,  and  ^  =  74  :  in  which  case  there 
were  2  men  and  74  wcnnen  ;  the  former  paid  38  sous,  an4 
the  latter  962  sous. 

2.  z  =  1  gives  the  number  of  men  x  =  15,  and  that  of 
women  y  =:  55  ;  so  that  the  former  spent  285  sous,  and  the 
latter  715  sous. 

3.  jz  =  2  gives  the  qumber  of  men  x  =  28,  and  t)iat  of 
the  women  y  =:  36  ;  therefore  the  former  spent  582  sous^ 
and  the  latter  468  sous. 

4.  z  =  3  gives  X  =:  41,  and  ^  =:  17;  so  that  the  men 
spent  779  sous,  and  the  women  2^1  sous. 

9*  Question  6.  A  farmer  lays  out  the  sum  of  177& 
crowns  in  purchasing  horses  ana  oxen  ;  he  pays  31  crown% 
for  each  horse,  and  21  crowns  for  each  ox.  How  many 
horses  and  oxen  did  he  buy  ? 

Let  the  number  of  horses  be  j:,  and  that  of  oxen  y  ; 
we  shall  then  have  31^  +  21y  =  1770,  or  21jf  =  lt7Q^ 
—  31a:  =  1764  +  6  -  21x  —  lOx  ;  that  is  to  say, 

y  =  84  —  X  +  —3= — .  Tlierefore  IOj?  —  6,  and  like- 
wise its  half  5x  —  S,  must  be  divisible  by  21.  If  we 
now  suppose  5x  —  3  =  ^Iz,  we  shall  have  Sx  =  21z  +  3, 
and  hence  y  =  84  —  jr  —  22.     But,   since 

2I2  +  3       ^     ,   r  +  3  ,         ,         ,  o.     .* 

X  =  — - —  =  4;af  "1 — -z-y  we  muBt  also  make  s  +  3  =  ouf 

which  supposition  gives 

z  =  5i*  -  3,  -r  =  21m  -  12,  and 

j^  =  84  -  21m  +  12  •-  10a  +  6  =  102  -  31tf  ; 

Kence  it  follows,  that  u  must  be  greater  tb^  0,  and  yet  kfli- 
than  4,  wbißh  furnishee  the  following  answers  : 


804  suMKKTft  MftT  tr. 

1.  ti  s  1  gives  the  number  of  boraei  i*  »  9,  «ad  that  of 
oxen^sTl;  wherefore  the  former  cost  879  erownt,  and  the 
hitter  1491  ;  in  all  1770  crown«. 

2.  t<  s  2  gives  X  =  80,  and^  =  40;  so  that  the  horses 
cost  9S0  crowns,  and  the  oxen  840  crowns,  which  together 
make  1770  crowns. 

3.  u  =  3  gives  the  number  of  the  horses  x  =  51,  and  that 
of  the  oxen^  =:  9;  the  former  cost  1581  crowns,  and  the 
latter  189  crowns;  which  together  make  1770  crowns. 

10.  The  questions  which  we  have  hitherto  consdered 
lead  all  to  an  equation  of  the  form  ojr  +  ^  s  r,  in  which 
a,  A,  and  r,  represent  integer  and  positive  numbers,  and 
in  which  the  values  of  x  and  y  must  likewise  be  integer 
and  poûtive.  Now,  if  6  is  negative,  and  the  equatioo 
has  the  form  ox  —  2^  =  r,  we  have  questions  of  quite 
a  different  kind,  admitting  of  on  infinite  number  of  an- 
swers, which  we  shall  treat  of  before  wc  conclude  the  present 
diapter. 

The  simplest  questions  of  this  sort  are  such  as  the  fol- 
lowing. Rec^uired  two  numbers,  whose  difference  may  be 
6.  If,  in  this  case,  we  make  the  less  number  x,  and  the 
greater^,  we  must  have  y  —  x  =  6,  and  ^  =  6  +  x.  Now, 
notliing  prevents  us  from  substituting,  instead  of  x,  all  the 
integer  numbers  posâble,  and  whatever  number  we  assume, 
jf  will  always  be  greater  by  6.  Let  us,  for  example,  make 
X  =  100,  we  have  ^  =  lOu  ;  it  is  evident,  therefore,  that  an 
infinite  numlx'r  of  answers  arc  p<)s>iblo. 

11.  Next  follow  questions,  in  which  r  s:  0,  that  is  to  say, 
in  which  ax  nm.^t  simply  he  itpial  to  hv,     \jo\,  tlicre  tx^  n^- 

Îuired,  for  example,  a  number  divitâblo  [M)th  bv  5  and  by  7. 
f  we  write  N  for  that  number,  we  sliall  first  have  n  =  5x, 
since  n  must  he  divisible  by  o;  fartlier,  we  shall  have 
K  s  7^,  because  the  number  must  also  be  divisible  by  7  ;  we 


7y 

shall  therefore  have  5x  =  7^»  and  x  =  >  .      Now, 


since   ê 


cannot  be  divided  by  5,  y  must  he  divisible  by  5  :  let  us 
therefore  make  y  =z  oz^  and  we  liave  x  =s  7*  ;  so  tliat  the 
number  sousht  n  =  35:  ;  and  m  we  may  take  for  :,  any 
integer  nuniuer  whatever,  it  is  evident  timt  we  can  a^ksign 
iiir  N  an  infinite  number  of  values  ;  such  as 

35,  70,  ia5,  140,  175,  210,  &c. 

If,  U-Mile  the  above  condition,  it  were  al«)  requiretl  that  the 
mimber  n  lie  divisilile  bv  9,  we  should  first  tiave  k  =:  3^3, 
as  before,  and  should  farther  make  w  s=  9i«.     In  this  man- 


CHAP.  T.  OF  AL0EB1IA.  305 

ner,  S5z  =  9»/,  and  u  =  —  ;    where  it  is  evident  that  z 

must  be  divisible  by  9  ;  tlierefore  let  s  =  9^  ;  and  we  shall 
thcrt  have  u  =  35«,  and  the  number  sought  irf  ==  QÏSê, 

12.  We  find  more  difiîculty,  when  c  is  rtot"±:0.  For 
example,  when  5a?  =  7y  +  3,  the  equation  to  whiôh  we  arö 
led,  and  which  requires  us  to  seek  a  number  N  such,  that 
it  may  be  divisible  by  5,  and  if  divided  by  1,  may  leave  the 
remainder  3 1  for  we  must  then  have  N  =  &r,  and  also 
X  =  7y  +  3,  whence  resuhs  the  equation  5ar  =  "J^y  -J-  8{ 
and,  consequently, 

T:y+3_%4%f3_  2y43 

If  we  make  2^  -f  3  zr  5«,  or  «  =  -^ — ^,  wchavcx:=:y4js; 
now,  because  2y  +  8  =  6r,  or  ^  =  5js  —  8,  we  havç 
y  =  —g-  >  or  y  =  22  +  -^-  • 

If,  therefore,  we  farther  suppose  r  —  3  =  2w,  we  hate 
jt  =  2a  +  3»  and  ^  =  5t^  +  6,  and 

j:  =  y  +  2  =  (5tt  4-  6)  +  (2u  +  8)  =  7m  +  9. 

Hence,  the  number  sought  n  =  35»  +  45,  in  which  equa- 
tion we  may  substitute  for  u  not  only  all  positive  integer- 
numbers,  but  also  negative  numbers  ;  for,  as  it  is  sufficient 
that  N  be  positive,  we  may  make  u  =  —  1,  which  gives 
N  =r  10;  the  other  values  are  obtained  by  continually  add« 
ing  35  ;  that  is  to  say,  the  numbers  sought  are  10,  45,  80, 
115,  150,  185,  220,  &c 

13.  The  solution  of  Questions  of  this  sort  depends  on  the 
relation  of  the  two  numoers  by  which  we  are  to  divide  ;  that 
is,  they  become  more  or  less  tedious,  according  to  the  nature 
of  those  divisors«  The  following  question,  for  example^ 
admits  of  a  very  short  solution  ; 

Required  a  number  which,  divided  by  6^  leaves  the  re- 
mainder 2  ;  and  divided  by  18,  leaves  tne  rennunder  3. 

Let  this  number  be  n;  first  n^öjt'^S,  and  then 
N  =  13(/  4-  3;  consequently,  6x  +  2  s9  \Sy  +  S,  and 
6x  =  13y  +  1  ;  hence. 


=  1%+1  =  ^  +  SJ.', 


and  if  we  make  ^  +  1  =  6f,  we  obtain  y  =  &  —  1,  and 
X  =  2^  J-  2  =  13s  —  2;  whence  we  have  for  the  number 

X 


906  ELBMF.XTIK  PAIT  U. 

fought  x  =s  78s  —  10;  there^irc«  the  question  admît» of  tbe 
fbUowing  values  of  K  ;  viz. 

N  =  68,  146,  SS4,  302,  S80,  && 

which  numbers  form  an  arithmetical  progression,  whmm 
difference  is  78  =  6  x  13.  So  that  if  wc  kiioir  one  of  tlnf 
values,  we  may  easily  find  all  the  rest  ;  for  we  have  only  to 
add  78  continually,  or  to  subtract  that  number,  as  long  as  it 
islxM^ble,  when  wc  seek  for  smaller  numbers. 

i4.  The  following  question  furnishes  an  example  of  a 
longer  and  more  tedious  solution. 

QiseHion  8.  To  find  a  number  n,  which,  when  divided 
by  ä9f  leaves  the  remainder  16  ;  and  such  also,  tluit  if  it  be 
divided  by  56^  the  remainder  may  be  S7. 

In  tlie  first  place,  we  have  k  =  SQp  +  16  ;  and  in  the 
second,  M  ^  56q  +  87  ;  so  that 

S9/I  +  16  =  56y  +  27,  or  $9p^56q  f  11,  and 

56o  +  ll  170+11 

P  «       39       =  Î  +       39       =g  ^  r,  by  makmg 

h  =  -i^g — .     So  that  30r  =  17?  +  11,  and 

30r-ll       ^       5r-ll       ^ 
9  =»  — yj—  =  2r  f  — ly-  =  2r  +  «,  by  making 

«  =  — p= — ,  or  17#  =  5r  —  11  :  whence  we  get 

17*+11       «        AJf+ll        . 
r  =  ■= —  =  3*  ♦ p —  =  Jit  -f  /,  by  niakiiig 

I  = ■.—  ,  or  3/  =  5Î1  I-  11  ;  whonco  we  fiuil 

5/-I1        .        /— 11 
»  =    — ;j—   =  Ji/  +  —  jj—  =  5i/   ^  M,  hv  ii)akiit|r 

lidding  now  no  longer  any  fractions,  we  mny  take  n 
at  pU^asure,  aiKl  then  we  hiivc  oiily  lo  irncv  Imclc  tlie  fol- 
lowing vnliie5  : 

/  =     '?'/+     II, 

r  =  a#  +  /  =  ITi/  +    77, 
q  ^  Ur-^ê  -•>{}//+  176, 


CHA?.  U  OF  ALGEBEA.  9P7 

and,  lastly,  N  =  99  x  5Gu  +  9888  *.  And  thé  least  pe»* 
siblc  value  of  n  is  found  by  making  t<  =  —  4  ;  fo  .  by  thii 
supposition,  we  have  n  =  1147  :  and  if  we  make  w  =:  jr  —  4, 
wc  find 

N  =  2184x  -  8736  +  9883;  or  x  =  2184jr  +  1147; 

wliich  numbers  form  an  arithmetical  progression,  whose 
first  term  is  1147,  and  whose  common  diflfercnce  is  2184; 
the  following  being  some  of  its  leading  terms  : 

1147,  3J31,  5Ô15,  7699,  9883,  &c. 

15.  We  shall  subjoin  some  other  questions  by  way  of 
practice. 

Question  9.  A  company  of  men  and  women  club  to- 
gether for  the  payment  of  a  reckoning  :  each  roan  pays  25 
livres^  and  each  womgn  16  livres;  and  it  is  found  that  all 
the  women  together  have  paid  1  livre  more  than  the  men. 
How  many  men  and  women  were  there  ? 

Let  the  numl)er  of  women  be  p,  and  that  of  men  q  ;  thai 
the  women  will  have  expended  l6p,  and  the  men  25jr;  so 
that  16/>  =  S5y  +  1,  and 

p  =      ^g     =  ?  +  -^jg-  =  ?  +  r,  or  16r  =  9g  + 1, 

16r-l  •      7r-l 

q  =  — Ö—   =  r  4-      Q  ■    =  r  +  *,  or    9*  =  7r  —  1, 

9^  +  1  ,2^+1  .    ,  r.,        a     li 

r  =  — = —  =  *  +  —w—  =  #  4-  <,  or    7^  =  2*  4- 1, 
7  < 

7^_1/— 1 
s  =  — -r —  =  3^  +  — ô~  =  3j  +  w,   or  2//  =  <  —  1. 

Wc  shall  therefore  obtain,  by  tracing  Iwck  our  substitutions, 

/  =  2m  +  1, 

Ä  =  3/  4-  '^  =  71/  -r  3, 
r  =  .?  +  ^  =  9«  -^  4, 
Ç  =  r  +  *  =  16w  +  7, 
^=    y  4- r  =  25m  +  11. 

So  tlîflt  the  number  of  women  was  25u  +  H»  ^nd  that  of 
men  was  ICm  +  7;  and  in  these  formula?  we  may  substitute 

*  As  the  numbers  176  and  2.53  ought,  respectively,  to  be 
divisible  by  39  and  56;  and  as  the  former  ought,  by  the 
question,  to  leave  the  remainder  16,  and  the  latter  ITT,  the  sum 
9883  is  formed  by  multiplying  176  by  56,  and  adding  the  re* 
niaindcr  27  to  the  product  :  or  by  multiplying  253  by  39,  and 
adding  the  remainder  16  to  the  product.     Th  is, 

(176  X  56)  +  27  =  9883  j  and  (253  x  39)  +  16  =  SMS. 


90B  SLBMSKTS  PAET  It.  ' 

fnr  «I  any  integer  numlwra  whatever.  The  least  results, 
therefore,  will  he  as  follow  : 

Number  of  women,  11,  36,  Gl,  86,  111,  &c. 
-of  men»         7,28,(59,55,    71,  &c, 

Acoonling  to  the  first  answer,  or  that  whieh  contains  the 
least  nurooers,  the  women  expc^ed  176  livres,  and  tlie  men 
170  livres  ;  that  is»  one  livre  less  than  the  women. 

^16.  Qutêiicn  10.  A  person  buys  tome  horses  ami  oxen  : 
lie  nays  SI  crowns  per  horse,  and  SO  crowns  for  each  ox  ; 
and  be  finds  that  the  oxen  cost  him  7  crowns  more  titan  the 
horses»     How  many  oxen  and  horses  did  he  buy  ? 

If  we  stippose  p  to  be  the  number  of  the  oxen,  and  q  tlie 
ninnber  of  tne  horses,  we  shall  have  the  following  c<|iiaüon  : 

81y+7  .   117+7  ,  OA        11    .- 

P  =      ao— =  Î+      «ô"  -Ç  +  ^or20r  =  II9  +  1, 

80r-7  ,  9r->7 

r  -— ^-  '^'  +  ~f"  =#+/,or   9t^    2#+7, 

0/  —  7  /  —  7 

#  =  ^=-^  =  4<  +  -^  =4<  +  tt,or2u=      /-7, 

whence  / =    Sm  -f*    7,  and,  consc(|uentlv, 

#  =  4<  +  M  =    9m  +  28, 

r  =    #+  /  =  11II+S5, 

y  =    r  -|-  *  =  20m  4-  6.%  nunilwr  of  liorst*^ 

p  ^    9  -|-  r  =  81m  +  98,  numlKT  ofoxcii. 

Whence,  the  least  positive  values  of />  nnd  7  nre  foiiiul  hy 
roakinc  u  =  —  8  ;  thoce  which  are  greater  ^üixx'ed  in  ilie 
fiJIowing  arithmetical  prDgressionA  : 

Number  of  oxen,  ;;  =a  5,  36,  67,  98,  129,  160,  191,  22;>, 
253.  &c. 

Number  of  Iwrbcs,  <;  =  :J,  2:3,  W,  63,  83,  10Î3,  123,  143, 
IflS,  &c. 

17.  If  now  we  aiUMtler  how  tlie  letters  p  and  9,  in  tliiü 
example,  arc  determined  by  the  Hucceetüng  letters  we  sliall 
pervetv«  that  tliii«  di*tenni nation  defK'ndu  on  the  mtio  of  tin.* 
numbers  31  ainl  20,  nnd  |iurtieularly  on  the  nitio  ykWuh  i»e 
discover  by  mvLin^  the  ^r%*at4>t  n»nnnoiidi>iM>r  of  thiM.*  tvio 
nunilter*.     In  lUet,  if  we  |M*rr«»rin  tlim  o|ii*rattc)ii. 


CHAP.  I. 

* 

OF  ALQEMA. 

SO)  31  (1 
20 

11)  20  (1 

11 

9)  11  (1 
9 

/ 

2)  9  (4 
9 

J)  2  (2 
2 

ao9 


0, 

it  is  evident  that  the  quotients  are  found  also  in  tlic  sikv 
çessive  values  of  the  letters  ^^  q,  r,  êj  &c.  and  that  they  are 
connected  with  the  first  letter  to  the  right,  while  the  last 
always  remains  alone.  We  see,  farther,  that  the  number  7 
occurs  only  in  the  fifth  and  last  equation^  and  is  affected  by 
the  sign  +9  because  the  numlx^r  of  this  e({uation  is  odd; 
for  if  that  number  had  been  even,  wo  should  have  obtained 
—  7.  This  will  be  made  more  evident  by  the  following 
Table,  in  which  we  may  observe  the  dccompontion  of  the 
numl>ers  31  and  20,  and  then  the  determination  o(  the  values 
pf  the  letters  p,  q,  r,  &c. 


31  =s  1  X  20  +  11 

20  =  1  X  11  +    9 

11  =  1  X    9  +    2 

9  =  4  X    2  +    1 

2  =  2  X     1  +    0 


/>=  1  X  Ç  +  r 

q  si  X  r  -r  s 

r  =s:l  X  s  +  t 

jr  t=  4  X  ^  -f  tt 

t  =  2  ^  tt  +  7. 


18.  In  the  same  manner,  we  may  represent  the  example 
in  Art.  14. 


56  =  1  X  39  +  17 

39  =  2  X  17  -h    5 

7  =  3  X    5  +    2 

5  =  2  X    2  +    1 

2  =  2  X    1  +    0 


p  =  1  X 
j  =  2  X 
r  =  3  X 


1  +  r 
s  +t 

/    =2   X  M+  11. 


#  =2x 


19.  And,  in  the  same  manner,  we  may  analyse  all  ques- 
tions of  this  kind.  For,  let  there  be  given  the  eqtiatîàii 
bp  :=:  aq  -k-  »,  in  which  a,  by  and  ft,  are  known  numbers  ; . 
then,  we  have  only  to  proceed  as  we  should  do  to  find  the 
greatest  common  divisor  of  thç  numbers  a  and  ^  and  w« 


no 


ELUIEXT» 


PAST  II. 


may  immediately  di  termine  p  and  y  by  tlic  succeeding  let- 
ters, as  f ollowä  : 


Ui 


1a  ^  Ab  i-  c 
b-Bc^d 
c  =  Cd  +  V 


aid  we  sliall 
fimi 


pzzjq+r 
(J-  Br  -k-  n 
J  r  =  Ch   \   t 
»  *  =  l)t  +  u 
t  =  Eh  +  r 
u  =  Fv  +  w. 


d  =  /Jir  +  /• 
r  =  £/•+> 

AVe  ]iavo  only  to  obsenc  further,  that  in  the  last  eaiutioii 
the  %v^\  +  must  be  prefixed  to  n,  when  the  numuer  of 
«{uations  is  odd  ;  and  that,  on  the  contrar)*,  we  must  take 
—  n,  when  the  number  is  even  :  by  these  means,  the  que^ 
tions  wliich  form  the  subject  of  the  present  chapter  may  be 
readily  answered«  of  which  we  shall  give  some  examples. 

S!0.  ilutstion  II.  Rec)uired  a  number,  which,  being  di- 
vided by  11,  leaves  the  remainder  '3;  but  being  divided  by 
19,  leaves  the  remainder  5. 

Call  this  number  n;  then,  in  the  first  place,  we  have 
X  s  Wp  -f-  3y  and  in  the  second,  n  =  \9q  -f  5;  thcrefbrr, 
we  ha%*e  the  equation  lip  =  lO?  -f~  ^»  which  furnishes  the 
following  Table  : 


19=  1 

11  =  1 

8=r  2 

5  =  1 

5^  =  2 


X 
X 
X 
X 
X 


11  +8 

Î5+9 
2-h  1 
1  +0 


p=    Î+  r 

Ç  =s    r  +  * 

r  =5t»  ^  i 

n  :=z     i  ^  u 

t  =  2i/  -f  î>, 


wlierc  we  may  assign  any  value  to  i/,  and  determine  by  it 
the  prcrciling  letters  successively.     We  find, 


/ 

$  z:z    i    -i-   u 

r  -îlf+  / 
9  =   r  -♦"  J 

=  7-1- 


=    2/1  + 
=    {\h^ 
=    8w  4 
=  lli/  + 
r  =  19i/   I 


2 
o 

i\ 

8 
14; 


mhence  ^i*  obtain  the  nunilxT  sought  k=:209m+157  ;  there- 
fore l«")?  is  the  least  number  that  can  express  n,  or  satisfy 
the  tcrniA  of  the  question. 

21.  Quntion  12.*  To  find  a   numlier    n   such,  that  if 
we  divido  it  by  11,  then*  remains  *5,  and  if  we  divide  it  by 
\%  there  n*mains  5;  and  farther«  if  we  divide  it  by  :A), 
there  remains  10. 

Tlic  laiit  condition  re(|uin*s  that  s  =  29/>  +  1^«  ^^^  ^^ 
we  lui\c  aln*afiy  |ierf<Nrnii*d  the  ealrtilation  (in  the  U«t 
question)  fur  tlic  tmo  otlicr>  we  must,  in  coiidequence  of  that 


CMAF,  1. 


OF  AtGEniA. 


811 


result,  have  N  =  ^Ofw  +  l^îi  instead  of  w'licli  we  shall 
write  N  =  WSq  +  157  ;  so  that 

89/»  +  10  =5  2097  -^  1^7,  or  29/?  =  2099  +  147; 
whence  we  have  the  following  Tabic  ; 

209  =  7  X  29  +  6 


29  =  4  X  6'\'Ô 
6= 1 X  5+1 
5  =  5  X    1-4-0 


»  hl  çfore  \  ^  _ 


fpz='ïg-\-r, 
)q=.Ar  —  s, 


V.t 


5t  ^  147, 


And,  if  we  now  retrace  these  steps,  we  have 

* .=      5/-     147, 

r-  s+  tts:  6i—  147, 
y  =  4r+  «=  29^—  735, 
;?  =  7y  +  r  =  209^-5292«.    ■ 

So  tliat  N  =  60C1/  -  1534Ô8:   and  the  least  number  is 
Ibund  by  making  /  =  26,  which  supposition  rives  n  =  4128. 

22.  It  is  necessary,  however,  to  observe,  m  order  that  an 
equation  of  the  fonn  ip  =  oj  4-  n  niay  be  resolvible,  that 
the  two  numbers  a  and  b  must  have  no  common  divisor; 
for,  otherwise,  the  question  would  be  impossible,  unless  the 
number  n  had  the  same  common  divisor. 

If  it  were  reouired,  for  example,  to  have  Qp  =  I&7  +  St\ 
since  9  and  15  nave  a  common  divisor  S,  and  which  is  not  a 
divisor  of  2,  it  is  imposable  to  resolve  the  question,  because 
9p  —  15q  béin^  always  diviûble  by  3,  can  never  becofne 
=  2.  But  if  m  this  example  n  ==  3,  cr  n  =s  6,  &c,  the 
question  would  be  posssible:  for  it  would  be  sufficient  first 
to  divide  bjr  3;  since  we  should  obtain  3p  =  5^  +  1,  an 
equation  easily  resolvible  by  the  rule  already  given.  It  is 
evident,  tlier^ore,  that  the  numbers  a,  i,  oueht  to  have  no 
common  divisor,  and  that  our  rule  cannot  apply  in  any  other 
case. 

23.  To  prove  this  still  more  satisfactorily,  we  shall  con* 
sider  the  equation  9p  =  15^  -f"  ^  according  to  the  usual 
method.     Here  we  find 

157+^  60  +  2 

9r  =  (i^r  +  2,  or  6?  :r  9r  -  2  ;  or 

9r  -  2         ,  3r  —  2  .  ,       ^         ^       ^ 

q  =  — 75 —  =  r-| j, —  =  r +;r;    so  that  3r  —  2  =  6^, 


Ç  -j-  r  ;  so  that 


6 


6 


♦  That  is,   -  5ii92  x  '29  =  —  1531G8  j  to  which  if  the  re- 
maiiulcr  +10  rcquiicd  by  the  question  be  added,  the  sum  i« 


81S  XLKMENT»  FABT  lt. 


or  Sr  =  ßff  4-  S  :   oonsoquently,  r  -=     J"^  =  Stt  -|.  * 

Now,  it  is  evident,  tliat  this  can  never  become  an  integer 
nunilx^r,  liecauac  s  is  necessarily  an  integer  ;  which  flbewa 
the  impo:isi)>ility  of  such  questions*. 


J LJ 


CHAP.  II. 

Of  the  Rule  which  is  catted  Reguk  C«ci,  Jbr 
by  means  cf  two  Equations,  three  or  more  Unknown 
Quantities. 


94.  In  the  preceding  chapter,  we  have  seen  how,  by 
of  a  single  equattoo,  two  unknown  quantities  may  be  deter- 
mined, so  far  as  to  express  them  m  intej^  and  poshive 
numbers.  If,  therefore,  we  had  two  eouations,  in  order  that 
the  question  may  be  indeterminate,  tnose  equations  must 
contain  more  than  two  unknown  quantities.  Questions  cf 
this  kind  occur  in  the  common  books  of  arithmetic  ;  and  arc 
resolved  by  the  rule  called  Jtegula  Cari^  PosUtcm^  or  The 
RtilcofFake;  the  foundation  of  which  we  shall  now  ex« 
plain,  neginning  with  the  following  example  : 

S5.  QucJutoH  1.  lliirty  ])erRons,  men,  women,  and  chikU 
reo,  »|xiul  50  crowns  in  a  tavern  ;  the  share  of  a  man  is  S 
crowns,  that  of  a  woman  2  crowns,  and  that  of  a  child  is  1 
crown  ;  how  many  nersons  were  there  of  each  class? 

If  the  number  oT  men  be  p,  of  women  9,  and  of  children  r, 
we  shall  have  the  two  followmg  equations  ; 

1.  p  \     f  +  r  =  ÎM),  and 

2.  Sp  +  29  +  r  =  60, 

from  «huh  it  is  re<|uired  to  find  the  value  of  the  three 
letters  y>,  9,  and  r,  in  integer  and  ]}u^itive  nunilicni.  The 
fin»t  €*(|uation  givt»n  r  =  îlO  —  /i  —  j;  whence  we  imme- 
diate! v  amclude  that  p  -¥  q  mu»t  be  Icmi  than  :U)  ;  and,  sul>- 
fttitutin;^  thi^  value  of  r  m  the  mh^vhuI  rcjuation,  uc  have 
9p  ^  tj  ^  :;0  =L  50  ;  HO  that  7  =  î.'0  -  îiys  und  />  +  9  = 

*  See  the  Ap|>ciiilix  to  thi«  iliapttr,  at  Art.  3.  üillii*  Adiliiioiu 
by  Dv  la  Cf  range. 


CUAP.  II.  OF  ALGEBEA.  ,  313 

go  —  27,  which  evidently  is  also  less  than  30.  Now,  as  we 
may,  m  this  equat'ion,  assume  all  numbers  for  p  which  do 
not  exceed  10,  we  sliall  have  the  following  eleven  answers: 
the  number  of  men  p,  of  women  q^  and  of  children  r,  being 
as  follow  ; 

pzz    0,    1,    2,    8,    4,    5,    6,    7,    8,    9,10; 

ç  =  20,  18,  16,  14,  12,  10,     8,     6,     4,    2,     0; 

r  =  10,  11,  12,  13,  14,  15,  16,  17,  18,  19,  «3; 
and,  if  we  omit  the  first  and  the  last,  there  wUl  remain  9. 

26.  Question  2.  A  certain  person  buys  hogs,  goats,  and 
sheep,  to  the  number  of  100,  for  100  crowns  ;  the  hogs  cost 
him  3^  crowns  apiece  ;  the  coats,  1-^  crown  ;  and  the  sheep, 
Y  a  crown.     How  many  had  he  of  each  ? 

Let  the  number  of  hogs  be  py  that  of  the  goats  g,  and  of 
the  sheep  r,  then  we  shall  have  the  two  following  equations  : 

1.  p+      y  +    r  =  100, 

2.  8ip  +  lj47  +  ^r  =  100; 

the  latter  of  which  being  multiplied  by  6,  in  order  to  remove 
the  fractions,  becomes,  21p  +  8y  +  3r  ==  600.  Now,  the 
first  gives  r  zi  100  —  p  —  J  ;  and  if  we  subsdtute  this 
value  of  r  in  the  second,  we  have  18/7  -f  5y  =  300,  or 

5gr  =  300  -  18p,  and  g  r=  60 ~  :    consequently,   18p 

must  be  divisible  by  5,  and  therefore,  as  18  is  not  divi^ble 
by  5, /?  must  contain  5  as  a  factor«.  If  we  therefore  make 
p  =  55,  we  obtain  g  =  60  —  18î,  and  r  =  13j?  +  40  ;  in 
which  we  may  assume  for  the  value  of  s  any  integer  number 
whatever,  provided  it  be  such,  that  q  does  not  become  ne- 
gative :  but  this  condition  limits  the  value  of  «  to  3  ;  so  that 
if  we  also  exclude  0,  there  can  only  be  three  answers  to  the 
question  ;  which  are  as  follow  : 

When      *=    1,    2,    8^ 


(p  =    6,  10,  16, 
We  have  -<  g  =  42,  24,     6, 
(r  =  63,  66,  79. 
27.  In  forming  such  examples  for  practice,  wc  must  take 
particular  care  that  they  may  be  possible  ;  in  order  to  which, 
we  must  observe  the  following  particulars: 

Let  us  represent  the  two  equations,  to  which  we  were  just 
now  brought,  by 

1.    a?  4"   y  +    2  =  o,  and 
2-^+Äy  +  /w{  =  ^ 
^n  which^  g,  and  A,  as  well  as  a  and  i,'arc  given  numbers. 


814  KLBMKN'Tt  râlT  II. 

Now,  if  we  suppote  that  among  the  number»  f.  g^  and  A, 
the  îiXfX^fy  is  tne  greatest,  ana  h  the  least,  noce  we  have 
J^.^.fS  \fiyOx(x^y  f  2)/;=/&,(bccau8edr+jf+2=«) 
H  b  evident,  ÛvfXfx  ^f^f  -^fi  is  greater  tlian^  +  /Qf  +  At  ; 
consequently ,^/xi  must  (»e  greater  than  6,  or  6  must  be  leas 
than  A.  Farther,  since  ax  +  hy  +  A.?,  or  (x  +  y  +  s)  A  =:  Ao, 
ami  hx  4-  Ai/  +  A;  iit  undoublcdlv  less  than^  +i^  +  ^« 
Aa  must  be  Toss  than  A,  or  b  must  l>e  größter  than  ha.  Hence 
it  follows,  that  if  b  lx>  not  less  than  fti^  and  also  greater  than 
Aa,  the  question  will  be  impossible  :  which  oondition  it  also 
expressed,  by  saying  that  b  must  be  contained  between  the 
limits  ^fh  ancl  ha  ;  and  care  must  also  be  taken  that  it  mav 
not  approach  either  limit  too  nearly,  as  that  would  render  it 
impossible  to  determine  the  other  letters. 

In  the  preceding  example,  in  which  a  =  100./*=  3i,aiid 
A  =  {«  the  limits  were  «îôO  and  50.  Now,  if  we  sup{kMe 
b  s  51,  instead  of  1(K),  the  equations  will  become 

^  +.5^  +  2  =  ÏW,  and  S\x  +  liJ^  +  Jz  =  51*; 


mains  IKr  +  «V  ^  ^«  which  is  evidently  impossible,  becauüc 
s  and  y  must  be  integer  ami  po^tive  numbers  *. 

S8.  Goldsmiths  and  coiners  make  great  use  of  this  rule, 
when  they  propose  to  make,  from  three  or  more  kinds  of 
metal,  a  mixture  of  a  given  %'aluo,  as  the  following  example 
will  »hew. 

Question  S.  A  coiner  has  three  kinds  of  silver,  the  first 
of  7  ounces,  the  second  of  5  J  ounces,  the  third  of  4!  ounces, 
fine  per  marc  "f"  ;  and  he  wishes  to  form  a  mixture  of  the 
weignt  of  SO  innres,  at  (>  ounces  :  how  many  marcs  ol*  each 
sort  must  he  take  ^ 

If  he  lake  x  luarcs  of  the  first  kiiul,  i/mnrc^  (ïf  the  st\i>iul, 
and  r  marcs  of  the  third,  he  will  have  x -f- ^  +  •;  =  îJO, 
iiliich  is  the  Hr>t  e<|uatiou. 

Then,  siiH-v  a  marc  t>f  the  firsl  sort  a»ntain>  7  ounce*  of 
fine  silver,  the  .r  marcs  of  this  «curt  ««ill  contani  7j  oiniccs  of 
»uc-h  KiUcr.  AImi,  tlie^  nmn*s  of  the  bivoiid  Mirt  \rill  a»n- 
toin  o\y  ounces,  and  tin*  ;  niaro  of  the  tliinl  sort  h  ill  con- 
tain 4!*:  ounces,  «>f  lino  si  l\  er  ;  so  that  the  viKolc  niaas  uill 
contain  7x  h  5' v  -f  ^\:  iMUiee*  o(  fine  siKer.  A*  this 
mixture  i^  to  i\ti>:h  M  uiarcN  and  each  of  tlie^  marcs  niu»C 
ciHUain  Vi  ouiiee^  of  li:ie  >il\er,  it  f«  IloUî%  that  the  ulu»le  tna^s 


•   VmI.    Xrt.i!.-  -J J 


GHAP.  II.  OF  ALGEBKA.  818 

will  contain  180  ounces  of  fine  silver  ;  and  thence  results  the 
second  equation,  7x  +  5^y  +  élz  =  180,  or  14^^  -I-  1  ly  -f" 
Qz  =  î$60.  If  we  now  subtract  from  this  equation  nine 
times  the  first,  or  9^  -|-  9y  +  9^?  =  270,  there  remains  5x  -(- 
2y  =  90,  an  equation  whicli.  must  give  the  values  of  x  and 
1/  in  integer  numbers;  and  with  regard  to  die  value  of  z,  we 
may  derive  it  from  the  first  equation  s  =  30  —  x  —  y. 
Now,  the  former  equation  gives  2y  =  90  —  5xy  and 

i/=zi5  — Q-  ;  therefore,  if  x  =  2m,  we  shall  have  y  =  é5 

—  5w,  and  r  =  3w  —  15;  which  shews  that  u  must  be 
greater  than  4,  and  yet  less  than  10.  Consequently^  the  ques- 
tion admits  of  the  following  solutions  : 

If     w=:    5,     6,     7,    8,    9, 


\x  =  10,  12,  14,  16,  18, 

Then   [•?/ =  20,  15,  10,    5,    0, 

)z  =    0,    8,    6,    9,  12. 

29.  Questions  sometimes  occur,  containing  more  than  three 
unknown  quantities  ;  but  they  are  also  resolved  in  the  same 
manner,  as  the  following  example  will  shew. 

Question  4.  A  person  buys  100  head  of  cattle  for  10Ö 
pounds  ;  viz.  oxen  at  10  pounds  each,  cows  at  5  pounds, 
calves  at  2  pounds,  and  sheep  at  10  shillings  each.  How 
many  oxen,  cows,  calves,  and  sheep,  did  he  buy  ? 

Let  the  number  of  oxen  l)e  o,  that  of  the  cows  9,  of  calves 
r,  and  of  sheep  s.     Then  we  nave  the  following  equations  : 

1.  J»  -I-    7  -h    r  -f    J  =  100  ; 

2.  10/>  +  5?  +  2r  +  i^r  =  100; 

or,  removing  the  fractions,  20p  +  lOj  4-  4r  +  *  =  20Q  : 
then  subtracting  the  first  equation  from  this,  there  remains 
19/?  +  9|7  +  .'^r  =  100  ;  whence 

3r  =  100  -  19p  -  9y,  and 
r  =z    33  +    -f    —  (^  —  ^j!?  —  g  ;  or 

r=    33-    6?>-a7  +  ^; 

whence  1  ~  p,  or  jj  —  1,  must  be  divisible  by  3;  therefore 
if  we  make 

^  —  1    =5  3/,  we  have 

^^■^^^■••^^^  ■        ■ 

i'  =  3f  +  l  , 

5=73  +  2y  +  le/; 


816  CLKMCKTt  TAUT  WL 


whence  it  ftJloim,  iliat  19i  -¥  Sq  must  be  k»  than  5^7» 
tliai,  provided  this  condition  be  ohacrved,  we  may  ghre  any 
value  to  q  and  i.  We  have  therefore  tooonnder  tbefiiUow. 
bgcasct: 

1.  If<  =  0  f.  If<=    1 

we  bavep  =  1  p  =    4 

q^q  7=    q 

#=s7a  +  «j.  #  =  88  +  «y. 

We  cannot  make  1  =  2,  because  r  would  then  booomc 
Bcsative. 

Now,  in  the  first  case,  q  cannot  exceed  9;  and,  in  the 
second,  it  cannot  exceed  À;  so  that  tliese  two  cases  give 
the  following  solutions,  the  first  giving  the  following  ten 
answers  : 

1.   «.  S.   4.   6.   &   7.   a    9.  10. 
ji=:    1111111111 

7=0188456789 
r  =  S7  24  21  18  15  12  9  6  8  0 
#=:  72  74  76  78  80  82  84  86  88  90. 

And  the  second  funmhes  the  three  following  ansm-crs  : 

L   2.  3. 

p=    4    4  4 

y=   0    1  2 

m    8    5    2 

*  =  88  90  92. 

There  are,  thcrefon.*,  in  all,  tliirtcen  answers,  which  arc  re- 
duced to  ten  if  we  exclude  thoae  that  contain  ziro^  or  0. 

80.  The  method  would  still  be  the  same,  even  if  tlie  k*ttcrs 
in  the  first  e<iuation  were  multiplied  by  given  numbers,  as 
will  l)e  seen  Irom  the  following  example. 

(Question  5.  To  find  thrive  such  integer  numbeni,  thst  if 
the  first  be  multi|>lied  by  3,  the  second  bv  5,  snd  the  third 
by  7,  the  sum  of  the  products  may  Ih*  5C0;  ami  if  we  mul- 
tiply the  first  by  9»  the  seamd  by  25,  and  the  third  by  49, 
the  sum  <»f  the  pnHlucts  may  l)e  2921). 

If  the  first  numlnrr  Ik*  x,  the  second  y^  and  tlie  tliird  a,  wc 
sluill  luve  the  two  c>f(uaticm.s 

1.  îlr  +    l^y  4-    72  =    500 

2.  9r  +  2.'>*y  4-  *Ö5  =  2î>20. 

And  hen»,  if  we  Mubtrart  tlini*  time«  the  first,  or  ÎU*  -|-  l.^v  + 
21  s  =  16H0,  fnmi  the  second,  then*  n*main^  l<!y  +  2H: 
s  1210  ;  dividing  by  2,  we  have  by  +  1*^^  ^  620  ;  whence 


CHAK  III.  OT  ALGEBRA. 


an 


14« 

we   obtain  y  =  124 r-  :  so  tliat  jsmust  be  divisible  by 

o 

5.  If  therefore  we  make  z  =  5w,  we  shall  have  y  =± 
124  —  14m  ;  which  values  of^  and  z  being  8ul)stituted  in  the 
first  equation,  we  have  Sx  —  35u  +  620  =  660  ;  or  Sx  = 

S5u 

35u  —  60,  and  x  =  -^ 20  ;    therefore  we  shall  make 

o 

u  =:  3/,  from  which  we  obtain  the  following  answer, 
X  =  S5t  —  20,  jy  =  124  —  42^,  and  z  =  15/,  in  which  we 
must  substitute  for  t  an  integer  number  greater  than  0  and 
less  than  3  :  so  that  we  are  limited  to  the  two  following 
answers  : 

IfV  =  ^'    wehavel^  =  ^^'^  =  ^'^  =  p- 
^^|/  =  2,    ^®"*^^Jj?  =  50,y  =  40,Ä  =  30. 


CHAP.  III. 


O/"  Compound  Indeterminate  Equations,  in  which  one  rftke 
Unknown  Quantities  does  not  exceed  the  First  Degree. 

31.  We  shall  now  proceed  to  indeterminate  equations,  in 
which  it  is  required  to  find  two  unknown  quantities,  one  of 
them  l)cing  multiplied  by  the  other,  or  raised  to  a  power 
higher  than  the  first,  whilst  the  other  is  found  only  m  the 
first  degree.  It  is  evident  that  equadons  of  this  kind  may 
be  represented  by  the  following  general  expression  : 

a f  6.r  f  cy -h rfx*+ exy \fx^ -^rgx^ •\'ha^\  Jcxh)  + ,  &c.  =0. 

As  in  this  equation  y  does  not  exceed  the  first  degree,  tliat 
letter  \^  easily  determined  ;  but  here,  as  before,  the  values 
both  uf  .r  and  of  V  must  be  assigned  in  integer  numbers. 

\Ve  shall  consider  some  of  those  cases,  beginning  with  the 
easiest. 

32.  Qtiestion  1.    To  find  two  such  numbers,  that  their 
proiluct  added  to  their  sum  may  be  79. 

Call  the  numbers  sought  x  and  y:  then  we  must  have 
jry  -\-  X  -{-y  =  ^Q;  so  that  jy  +  ^  =  79  —  ^,  and 

we  see  thai  .r  -f  1  must  be  a  divisor  of  80.     Now,  80  Inving 


318  ELEMENTS  »AET  II. 

lèverai  diviinn,  wc  sha]!  ml»  have  several  values  of  x»  as  tbe 
IMIowîng  Table  will  shew  : 

The  divisors  of  80  are      1     2     4    5     8  10  16  20  40  80 


therefore  x=013479  15  19ä979 
aiul.y  =  79  5)9  19  15    9    7    4    8    10 

But  as  the  answers  in  the  bottom  line  are  the  same  as 
those  in  the  first,  inverted,  wc  have,  in  realily,  only  the  five 
following;  viz. 

x=:    0,     1,    3,    4,    7,  and 
jf  =  79,  80,  19,  15,    9. 
S3.  In  the  same  manner,  we  may  also  resolve  tlie  general 
equation  xy  -¥  ax  -k-  by  ^  c;  for  we  sliall  have  xy  -k^  ijf^ 

c  ~~  AT  üb  "^  e 

c  —  fljr,  and  y  = r-i or  y  =  — r~L— '*î  thatistosaj, 

X  -^  b  must  be  a  divisor  of  the  known  number  ab  +  e; 
so  that  each  divisor  of  this  number  gives  a  value  of  x.  If 
we  therefore  make  cié  +  c  =/gt  we  have 

y  =  -^^  —  a  ;  and  supixwing  x  +  b  =/;  or  x  =y*—  A,  it 

b  evident,  that  y  zu  ß  —  a;  and,  con8ec|uently,  that  we  have 
also  two  answers  for  every  method  of  representing  tlie  num- 
ber oA  +  r  by  a  product,  such  as^^.  Of  these  two  answers, 
one  is  x  =,/'^  A,  and  y  :=z  *r  —  //,  and  the  other  is  ob- 
tained by  niakiufr  j-  +  &  =  ^',  in  whieh  c»u»c  .i  =  ^'  *-  A, 

and  y  =y  -  a. 

If,  therefore,  the  ecjuntion  ry  +  iir  +  ;>v  =  42  were  jmïv 
posed,  we  MuHild  have  a  =:  ii«  A  =  :K  and  r  =  4!i  ;  ciki* 

sc<|uently,  y  zz  —  ii.     Now,  the  number  48  nmy  be 

*  X  "f"  •' 

repnwentixl  in  H*veral  wavs  hy  two  factors,  ntifir:  and  in 
eO(*h  of  tlioHC  CÜSVS  we  sliafl  always  have  either  x  =./*—  3, 
and  ^  =  ^'  —  îi;  or  elx*  x  =  /r  —  «1,  ond  v  =./  ~  ^-  *! '^^ 
aiialv»is  ol*  this  example  ih  a^  lollows  : 

raitori»    1   X  l^  -  X  •.'^.J  X  I'i  k  X   i'J<i  X  b 


I 


Nmiibeni  .'J    4<i  - 1    'Jl'j     0   It.l        U    i      (> 
or  4'>-l    'J\      »    !•>      ll^)  ;  '»_  J 

34.  The  expiation  may  lie  ixjwvs  eil  Mill  more  generally, 
liy  writing  m.ry  ^  ax  -^  by  -^^  ri  w  here  a.  A,  r,  and  m ,  art» 


eu  AT/  m«  OF   ALGEBB4*  3l9 

given  numbcrS)  and  it  is  required  to  find  integers  for  x  and  < 
f/  that  are  not  known. 

If  we  first  separate  y,  we  shall  have  y  = r  ;  and  re* 

■•  tnw  —0 

moving  x  from  the  numerator,  by  multiplying  both  sides  by 
nif  we  have 

max-^-mc  ,   mc-^ab 

my  = r-  =  Ö  +  — '"TT* 

We  have  here  a  fraction  whose  numerator  is  a  known  num-i 
ber,  and  whose  denominator  must  be  a  divisor  of  that  num- 
ber ;  let  us  therefore  represent  the  numerator  by  a  product 
of  two  factors,  ^^Jk  (^hich  may  often  be  done  in  several 
ways),  and  see  if  one  of  these  factors  may  be  compared  with 
mx  —  &,  so  that  mx  --  b  ^f.    Now,  for  this  purpose,  since 

/•-f  ft 
X  =s  5^*+  *  iwust  be  divisible  by  m  ;  and  hence  it  fiJa 

Ipws,  that  out  of  the  factors  of  mc  4-  ^^t  we  can  employ  only 
those  which  are  of  such  a  nature,  that,  by  adding  h  to  them^ 
the  sums  will  be  divisible  by  m*  We  shall  illustrate  this  by 
an  example. 

Let  the  equation  be  &ry  =  Ar  -f"  %  +  18«     Here,  we 
have 

2x+18       ,  ^        iar-l-90      '     ,      96 

it  is  therefore  required  to  find  those  divisors  of  96  whicl\, 
added  to  3,  will  give  sums  divisible  by  5.  Now,  if  we  con- 
sider all  the  divisors  of  96^  which  are  1,  2,  3,  4,  6,  8,  12, 16, 
24,  32,  48,  96,  it  is  evident  that  only  these  three  of  them, 
viz.  2,  12,  32,  will  answer  this  condition. 
Therefore, 

1.  If  Sjt  —  3  =  2,  we  obtain  5y  =  50,  and 

consequently  ,r  =  1,  and  y  =  10. 

2.  If  6-r  —  3a  12,  we  obtain  %  =  10,  and 

consequently  a:  ==  3,  and  y  =  2. 

3.  If.&r  —  3  =  32,  we  obtain  5y  =  5,    and 

consequently  x  =  7,  and^  =  1. 

35.  As  in  this  general  solution  we  have 

mc\-ab 
my  —  a=  ¥-> 

it  will  be  proper  to  observe,  that  if  a  numlx?r,  contained  in 
the  formula  «wc+aft,  have  a  divisor  of  the  form  mx  —  ft,  the 
quotient  in  that  case  must  necessarily  be  contained  in  thé 
formula  my  —  a:  we  may  therefore  express  the  number 
mc  +  nb  by  a  product,  suon  as  (iw.r  — .  ft)  x  («■/  —  a\  For 


S90  tt£MBNn  ^AEt  n. 

«amploi  let  m  =:  liî,  a  =  ff,  fr  :r  7,  and  c  =:  15,  and  ve 
Iiavc  12y  —  6  =  «^^    ^^     Now,  the  divÎBori  of  315  are 

1,  5,  43,  SI5;  and  wc  must  select  from  these  such  a5  are 
contained  in  the  formula  l&r  -  7«  or  such  as,  by-  abiding  7 
to  thtfui,  the  sum  may  lx>  divisible  by  IS:  but  5  fs  the  only 
di%'ifîor  that  satisfies  this  condition  ;  so  tliat  ISr  —  7  =  5, 
and  llfy  —  5  =:  4d.  In  the  same  manner,  as  the  first  of 
these  iquationa  gives  x  =  1,  we  also  find  y^  in  integer  num« 
tiers,  from  the  other,  namely,  ^  =  4.  '1  bi^i  pro()er1y  is  of 
the  greatest  importance  with  regard  to  the  theory  ol  num- 
bers, and  therefore  deserves  particular  attention. 

S6.  Let  us  now  consider  also  an  equation  of  tliis  kind, 
jry  +  x*=:Sx  +  Sy  +  S9.    First,  it  gives  ua 

»-       ^.8     ,orjf=-jr-^l+^-^;and 

26 
y-|-'+  1  = a'  SO  that  T  -  SmustbcadivinroTSS; 

and,  in  thb  case,  the  divisors  of  86  being  1,  S,  18^  S6^  w« 
obtain  the  three  following  answers  : 

1.  X— SäI,  orT  =  4;  so  that 

y  +  X  +  1  =^  +  5  =  S6,aiid^  =:S1; 

2.x  —  S=5S,orx  =  5;  so  that 

y +  X  +  1  =J^  +  6  =  13,andy  =  7; 

&  X  —  ä  =  13,  or  X  =  16  ;  so  that 

y  +  x  +  l=:j^+17  =  2,  and  y  =  —  15. 

This  last  value,  l)emg  negative,  must  be  omitted  ;  and, 
for  the  same  reason,  we  cannot  include  the  lost  case, 
x-3=r26. 

37.  It  uould  be  unnecessary  to  analyse  any  more  of  these 
Ibrmulft,  in  which  we  find  only  the  first  power  of  y^  and 
higlier  powers  of*  x  ;  for  theitc  cases  occur  but  seldom,  ami, 
besides  they  may  always  be  resolved  by  tlie  meÜMxl  whicli 
we  luive  explained.  But  when  j^  also  is  raised  to  the  sccimhI 
power,  or  to  a  degree  still  higher,  and  we  wish  to  detennin« 
Its  value  by  the  above  ndes,  we  obtain  radical  signs«  whii^h 
contain  tlie  second,  or  higlier  powers  of  x  ;  and  it  is  then 
necessary  to  find  such  values  of  x,  as  will  dotroy  the  radical 
aigns  or  the  irrationality.  Now,  the  great  art  of  Indetcr^ 
mimUe  AmdyêU  cim^st»  in  rendering  those  surd,  or  iiioum- 
inenMiral)le  formula'  rational  :  tia*  methods  of  |ierfomiing 
which  will  be  explained  in  tlie  following  cliapters*. 

*  See  the  .appendix  to  thi»  chapter,  at  .Art.  4,  of  iIk*  Ad- 
dilîiinft  by  Dc  la  (■  range. 


6 


CHAP.  III.  OF  ALGEBRA.  321 


QUESTIONS    FOR    PRACTICE. 

1.  Given  24jj:  r=  1%  -|-  16,  to  find  x  and  y  in  whole 
numbers.  Jns.  j*  =  5,  and  y  z:  8. 

2.  Given  87a:  +  256^  =  15410,  to  find  the  least  value  of 
x^  and  the  greatest  of  y,  in  whole  positive  numbers.   /        '  \^ 

Am,  or  =  30,  and  y  =0280^  ' 

3.  What  is  the  number  of  all  the  possible  values  of~f,  y^ 
and  z,  in  whole  numbers,  in  the  equaüon  5j7  -^  7^  4" 
11;2  =  224?  Ans.  60. 

4.  Howfmany  old  guineas  at  21^.  6d  ;  and  pistole^  at  17^, 
will  pay  100/.  ?  and  in  how  many  ways  can  it  be  done  ? 

Ana,  Three  different  ways  ;  that  is, 
19,  62,  105  pistoles,  and  78,  44^  10  guineas. 

5.  A  man  bought  20  birds  for  20  pence  ;  consisting  of 
geese  at  4  pence,  quails  at  id.  and  larks  at  \d.  each  ;  now 
many  had  he  of  each  ? 

Ans.  Three  geese,  15  quails,  and  2  larks* 

6.  A,  B,  and  C,  and  their  wives  P,  Q,  and  R,  went  to 
market  to  buy  hogs  ;  each  man  and  woman  bought  as  roanjjL^  iJ> 
hogs,  as  they  gave  shillings  for  each  ;  A  bougnt  (25  h(^ 
more  than  Q,  and  B  bought  11  more  than  P.  Alio  eadi 
man  laid  out  three  guineas  more  than  his  wife.  Which  two 
persons  were,  respectively,  man  and  wife  ? 

Ans.  B  and  Q,  C  and  P,  A  and  R. 

7.  To  determine  whether  it  be  posûble  to  pay  100/.  in       » 
guineas  and  moidores  only  ?  Ans.  It  is  not  possible.    *^  ,3 

8.  I  owe  my  friend  a  shilling,  and  have  nothing  aoout  me 
but  guineas,  and  he  has  nothing  but  louis  d  ors,  valued  at 
17*.  each;  how  must  I  acquit  myself  of  the  debt  ? 

Ans.  I  must  pay  him  13  gumeas,  and  he  must  give  me 
16  louis  d^ors. 

9.  In  how  many  ways  is  it  possible  to  pay  1000/.  with 
crowns,  guineas,  and  moidores  only  ?  Ans.  70734« 

10.  lo  find  the  least  whole  number,  which  bang  (Uvided 
by  the  nine  whole  di^ts  respectively,  shall  leave  no  re- 
mainders. Ans.  252Qi, 


92i  PI.BMKNTS  FABT  II. 


CHAI».    IV. 

I 

On  the  RIoÜkhI  nfnmlcrinff  Siircl  Quantities  ofihejbrm 

y/^a  f  éx  +  cx')  Hationiil. 

38.  Il  is  required  in  the  present  case  to  determine  the 
values  which  are  to  he  adopted  for  x,  in  onior  tliat  the 
(bmiula  a'\'Lv'^cx'  may  become  a  real  M|uare;  and» 
eonftec|uently«  that  a  rational  root  of  it  may  be  aans^ncd. 
Now,  tlie  letters  a,  h^  and  c,  represent  given  numbers  ;  and 
the  determination  of  the  unknown  tpiantit^  depends  chiefly 
«m  the  nature  of  these  numbers  ;  there  bein|i:  many  coMm  in 
which  the  solution  becomes  imix>sKibIe.  But  even  when  it  is 
possible,  we  must  content  ourselves  at  first  with  bein^  al)le  to 
assign  rational  values  for  the  letter  .r,  without  n^quihng  those 
vahii*s  also  to  be  intecer  numbers  ;  as  this  latter  condition 
pnxluces  researches  altogether  peculiar. 

99.  We  suppose  here  tliat  the  fonnula  extends  no  farther 
than  the  5ecom{  {»wer  of  x  ;  the  hi;*her  dimension^  rct]iiirv 
different  metlkxls,  which  will  be  explained  in  their  pn>{i(*r 
plants. 

We  shall  obser%*e  first,  that  if  the  M-ccmd  |)i>wcr  Mere  n<»t 
in  the  fonnula,  and  c  were  =  0,  tin*  pri>1)l(in  ViUiM  Iv  :\\- 
tendcxt  with  no  ditlicultv  ;  for  if  s\a  hv)\\\'iv  \\w  i:i\iii 
fiHinula,  aiul  it  were  rei]uin'd  to  d«'trrinini'  .r.  so  tiKit  a  •  /u 
might  be  a  square,  we  should  only  have  to  ir.aki»  //  +  hx  z=  ;,  , 

wie  iCi»  we  should  imiiKnlintelv  obtain  .r  zz  " — ; —  .       Nrw . 

what(-\iT  niiri!»i-r  \\v  sul)stitute  here  for  //,  t!u*  ^aluoDr^' 

woulil  alwnv«  U-  su«*h,  that  n   I    /u*  would  1h'  a  M|ii:irr,  and 

conM(|Uiiill\,  •.  (//  4-  hj)  would  Ik*  a  nitu>nal  ()unnti(\. 

-10.  Wi»  shall  tliv-n  \\*rv  lH*;;in  with  tlu'  ft^nnula  x  (If.:  ). 

tlut  iii  to  say.  wc  :;iv  to  find  mk-Ii  valui-^  tS u\  tliat«  by  atlii- 

inir  unity  to  their  ^qu  ire^,  llie  stîm^  \u.i\-  likewiM*  Iv  Miiiaiv?»  ; 

I       •  "  •        •  I         I         1  1  I     • 

and  as  it  i<«  exiilent  tn  .:  ilKi^e  \.-i!ui>>  «.I  .r  cnniiot  Iv nit(-<:vrs, 

1ft i*  nuii^t  Ik*  ^iti'-üiil  uitli  (iiuliii'j:  till   iV.u-tioiis  ulii'.  Il  i\|.u'^^ 

thrni. 

II.     If  Hi»  sU]l|M>M'd    I     I     J  •      .:    -^  \  nIihi»   1    -f-  .       IMU^t   Iv  a 

M|uan*,  1*1*  kIiouIiI  lia\r  .r  zz  //■  1,  :r.\:\  .:•  —  \'(  v  —  1  . 
Mithat  ill  tarder  t<»  i!  lui  .'•  we  «^fi-'i.!  !  ].i\r  :  ♦  -«iL  i.iiii.lvr«» 
for//,  ulîi)s4'  Mpiiri-,  ciiiiMiii-'!<  (1  !\  mi/x.  '»I'liltl  al-M»  lij\i 
Mpiarv«^ ,  uiitl«  i*>nM-4|iu'iitlv,  ^^»'  '««loitM  \\  Ifd  i«i.i  <|iit^tii>ti  as 
difficult  A>  the  f«>nni'r,  ^itliotit  ail\.iiu*in;:  a  ^ini^le  «^tip. 


CK  AP.  IV.  OF  ALGEBRA.  âSS 

It  is  certain,  however,  that  there  are  real  fractions,  which, 
beinç  substituted  for  x,  will  make  1  +  iT^  a  square  ;  of 
which  we  may  be  satisfied  from  the  following  cases  : 

1.  If  ^  =  ^,   we  have   1  +  j;*  =:^;  and  consequently 

2.  !+•*'*  becomes  a  square  likewise,  if  a;  =  4^,  which 
gives  >/(!  +  T*)  =  |. 

3.  If  we  make  x  =  ^t»  ^®  obtain  14-^*  =  ^^,  the 
square  root  of  which  is  44* 

But  it  is  required  to  shew  how  to  find  these  values  of  jc» 
and  even  all  possible  numbers  of  this  kind. 

42,  There  are  two  methods  of  doing  this.  The  first  re- 
quires us  to  make  v/(l  +  •^*)  =  ^  +  i?  »  from  which  sup- 
position we  have  1  +  jt*  =  j:*  +  2px  -j-  p^,  where  the  squari( 
X'  destroys  itself;  so  that  we  may  express  x  without  a' 
radical  sign.     For,  cancelling  jr  on  botn  sides  of  the  equa- 

1 — «2 
tien,  we  obtain  ^px  -{-  p-  =  1  j  whence  we  find  x  =  — ^ —  ; 

a  quantity  in  which  we  may  substitute  for  p  any  number 
wliatever  less  than  unity. 

Let  us  therefore  suppose  p  =  — ,  and  we  have 


1- 


VI' 


v  = 


^— ,  and  if  we  multiply  both  terms  of  this  fractkm 


Urn 
n 


71-  — 771- 


by  71-,  we  shall  find  x  zz  -^ . 

x,7nn 

43.  In  order,  therefore,  that  1  +  x-  may  become  a  square, 
v/e  may  take  for  m  and  n  all  possible  integer  numbers,  and 
in  this  manner  find  an  infinite  number  of  values  for  x, 

n^  —  m^ 
Also,  if  we  make,  in  general,  x  rr  — ,  we  find,  by 

squaring,  1  +  x-  =  1  H —^^ ,    or,   by   putüng 

4w*  .      ,                        ,    .     „       7Î*  +  27»*n*  +  m* 
1  =  -; — :  m  the  numerator,  1  +  x^  zz  — ■ — z — ;  a 

fraction  which  is  really  a  square,  and  gives 

AVe  shall  exhibit,  according  to  this  solution,  some  of  the 
least  values  of  *r; 

\  *> 

1    <v 


\ 


S84  ELSif tNTt  Fâmr  tv 

If  »  =  8,    8,    8,    4,    4,    5,    5,    5,    5, 
and  III  =  1,    1,    «,     1,    8,     1,    S,    3,    4, 

ifYC  iwve  X ft      fj     TT,     y  ,    T^     y  ,    ^jj,    y^,    ^ç. 

44.  We  hare,  therefore,  in  general, 

and,  if  we  mtdtiply  this  equation  by  {imn)\  we  find 

ao  that  we  know,  in  a  general  manner,  two  squares,  whoic 
sum  gives  a  new  square.  This  remark  will  lead  to  the 
solution  of  the  following  quesUon  : 

To  find  two  square  numbers,  whose  sum  is  likewise  a 
square  number. 

We  roust  have  ji*  +  j«  cs  r*  ;  wc  have  therefore  only  to 
make  p  s=  2mn,  and  f  =  n*  —  m\  then   we  shall  nave 

Farther,  as  (n«  +  m<)«  —  (2mii)«  =  (n^  —  m^)\  we  may 
also  resolve  the  following  question  : 

To  find  two  squares,  whose  difference  may  also  be  a  square 
number. 

Here,  since  p^  —  f*  =  r*,  we  have  only  to  suppose 
p  xn^  -k-  m\  and  q  =  Smn,  and  we  obtain  r  =  n*  —  «•*. 
We  mi^t  also  make  o  =  n*  -h  m%  and  ^  =  n^  —  jh*, 
from  which  we  should  find  r  =  9mn. 

45.  We  spoke  of  two  methods  of  giving  the  fi>nn  of  a 
square  to  the  formula  1  +  x\     The  other  is  as  follows  : 

tnx 
If  we  suppose  \^(1  +x*)  =  1  -f  — ,  we  shall  have 

1  4-  •«■*  =  1  + 1 T"  »   subtractinf^  1  from  both  sides, 

'  ffi>i*      ill  J* 
we  have  x*  = 1 ;-.     This  equation  may  be  divided 

bv  X,  so  tliat  we  liave  .r  =  —  +  — r-f  o'  w*-»"  —  ^^*^  +  ^*^9 
^  ft        « 

Ommwg 

whence  we  find  x  =:  -p ^     Having  found  tlii*  value  of 

fl     *-   HI 

X,  wo  have 

thc  square  of  -^ -,.     Now,  as  we  obtain  from  tliat,  the 


CHAI*.  IV.  OF    ALGSBRA.  3S6 

equaüon  1  +  .— —  =  — —^  we  shall  have,  as  be- 

fore,  (fi'-m''Y  +  (2m»)*  =  (n*  +  m«)«; 

that  is,  the  same  two  squares,  whose  sum  is  also  a  square. 

46.  The  case  which  we  have  just  analysed  furnishes  two 
methods  of  transforming  the  general  formula  a  +  ox  +  cj^ 
into  a  square.  The  first  of  these  methods  applies  to  all 
the  cases  m  which  c  is  a  square  ;  and  the  second  to  those  in 
which  a  is  a  square«  We  shall  consider  both  these  sup- 
positions. 

First,  let  us  suppose  that  c  is  a  square,  or  that  the  given 
formula  is  a  +  6j?  +y^«J?*.     Since  tnis  must  be  a  square, 

ffi 
we  shall  make  ^/(a  +  ox  +y^^)  =^H >  and  shall  thus 

have  a  +  bx  +^*x«  =y*j:«+  — —  +  — ^,    in    which    the 

terms  containing  x*  destroy  each   other,   so   that 

a'\'  bx  =  — ^-^ — J-.     If  we  multiply  by  n\  we  obtain 

n^a  4-  n'ôx = 2mnfx\-m^  ;  hence  we  find  or  =  xi^^o — >»  *^^' 
substituting  this  value  for  x,  we  shall  have 

47.  As  we  have  got  a  fraction  for  x,  namely, 

•—i — -p: —  .  let  us  make  .r  =  -^,  then  p  =  w*  —  n^a.  and 
n'b-2mnf  y  '  ^  ' 

bp     J^p^ 
n  =  n^b  —  Smnf;  so  tliat  the  formula  a  -4 — ^-  +  — t"  is  a 
i  ./  '  9  9 

square;  and  as  it  continues  a  square,  though  it  be  mul- 
tiplied by  the  square  q^,  it  follows,  that  the  formula 
aq'^-{-hpq+f^p^  is  also  a  square,  if  we  suppose  p=m*— n*«» 
and  q  =  n^ô  —  9,miif.  Hence  it  is  evident,  that  an  infinite 
number  of  answers,  in  integer  numbers,  may  result  from 
this  expression,  because  the  values  of  the  letters  m  and  n  are 
arbitrary. 

48.  The  second  case  wliich  we  have  to  consider,  is  that  in 
which  a,  or  the  first  term,  is  a  square.  Let  there  be  pro- 
posed, for  example,  the  formula  y  *  +  ox  +  ex',  whicn  it 
IS  required  to  make  a  square.     Here,  let  us  suppose 


9Stß  ELEMENTS  PAET  II. 

-•(/*  +  &r  +  ex*)  =y  +  -^  f  and  we  shall  have 

^        ■              »       ^.   .   2/fifx  ,  fwV  , .  , 

/^  +  bx  +  CT'  ="y    +  ^^^ —  H p»  in  whitii   cquaUoo 

the  tcrmsy^  destroying  each  other,  we  may  divide  the  re- 
maining terms  by  x,  so  that  we  obtmn 

6  +  ex  =:  -^  +  — ~,  or 

«  H* 

11*6  +  n'-cx  =:  ^mfif-\'  wt^x,  or 

x(n"c  —  m')  =  Hmnf'^  n'6  ;  or,  lastly, 

nV  — III* 
If  we  now   subàtitulc   this   value  instead  of  x,  we  have 

and  making  x  =  -^--,  we  may,  in^thc  hume  manner  as  Ixîforc, 

transform  the  expreî»iuny*'y*  +  hpq  +  cp*j  into  a  square, 
by  making /I  =  flrmif  —  n-h,  and  y  =  wV  —  w<-. 

40*  Here  we  have  chiefly  to  distinguish  the  case  in  which 
o  s=  0,  that  is  to  say,  in  which  it  is  requirctl  to  make  a 
square  of  the   formula   bx  -f  ex";    for  we   have   only    to 

suppose  V(Ax  -f  rx')  n  -  — ,  from  which  we  have  the  c*qua- 

Vt'X' 

tion  bx  +  ex'  =  —  -  ;  which,  dividc<l  !)v  x,  and  nuiltiplicd 

by  fi*,  fçivt»s  bn'  +  rn'x  =  vrx:  and,  tx>nsv(jucntlv, 

r  zz :. 

ffi*  — rw- 

If  we  seek,  for  ix;mij)li',  all  ihr  trian;;ii!ar  nund)crs 
tliat  are  at  the  same  time  ^quarc5^  it  wi!!  Ik*  ni^ccs.vir}*  tlmt 

—3 — ,  which  is  the  form  of  triangular  nunilHrrs,  must  be 
a  square;  ami,  c«inse({ucntly«  2ir  -H  ^2x  must  al>€>  be  a 
squan.'.      I*ei  us,  therefore,  >u|)|X)Si*  -    .^    to  Ik*  that  Miuarc» 


n 


',ln 


and  wc  shall  have  Ji«*.r  4-  ^i'|•  ~  »"  r.  and  .r  zr  -r—  ;  in 

tu  —  lifi- 

whicli  value  wc  may  ^ubl4itutc,  instead  of  ifi  ami  ft,  all  |m*s- 


CHAP.   IV.  OF  ALG£BRA.  327 

sible  numbers  ;  but  we  shall  generally  find  a  fraction  for  .r, 
though  sometimes  we  may  obtain  an  mteger  number.  For 
example,  if  m  =  3,  and  n  =  2,  we  find  j:  —  8,  the  triangular 
number  of  which,  or  36,  is  also  a  square. 

We  may  also  make  w  =  7,  and  w  =  5  ;  in  this  case, 
JT  rz  -  50,  the  triangle  of  which,  1225,  is  at  the  same  time 
the  triangle  of  +49,  and  the  square  of  35.  Wc  should 
have  obtained  the  same  result  by  making  «=:7  and  ?>i  nlO  ; 
for,  in  that  case,  we  should  also  have  found  x  zl  49. 

In  the  same  manner,  if  m  =:  17  and  n  =  12,  we  obtain 
X  =:  288,  its  triangular  number  is 

f<f±i>  =  ??«|^  =  m  X  289, 

which  is  a  square,  whose  root  is  12  x  17  =  204. 

50.  We  may  remark,  with  regard  to  this  last  case,  that 
we  have  been  able  to  transform  tne  formula  hx  -f  cm-  into  a 
sijuare  from  its  having  a  known  factor,  x  ;  this  observation 
leads  to  other  cases,  in  which  the  formula  a  -^  hx  \  cx^ 
may  likewise  become  a  square,  even  when  neither  a  nor  c 
are  squares. 

These  cases  occur  when  a  -{-bx  -{-  ex*  may  be  resolved 
into  two  factors  ;  and  this  happens  when  Ir  —  ^ac  is  a 
s^|uare:  to  prove  which,  we  may  remark,  that  the  factors 
depend  always  on  the  roots  of  an  equation;  and  that, 
therefore,  we  must  suppose  a  -\'  hx  ^  CJ7*  =  0.  This 
being  laid  down,  we  have  c*r'  =  —  or  —  0,  or 

.1-  = ,  whence  we  find 

c         c 

b  h'        a  ^  b        ^/(6--4/7c) 

2cr  —      He-        c  2c  2c 

and,  it  is  evident,  that  if  b^  —  ^ac  be  a  square,  this  quantity 
l>ecoincs  rational. 

Therefore  let  &•  —  4öc  =  d*  ;    then   the  roots   will   be 

—b^-d    ,      .  -6+d        ,  ,       , 

— ö^=^>  ^"^^  *^  ^  ^y>  -^  —  ""^'  ^  ®"  '  consequently,  the 

b-d 

divisors  of  the  formula  a'\-bx  -\-  cx^  are  x  -| — 5— ,  and 

X  -f  -- — .   If  we  multiply  these  factors  together,  we  are 

!)rought  to  the  same  formula  again,  except  that  it  is  divided 

bx       b''         d^ 
by  r  ;  for  the  product  is  x^-  -f h  175 Iir  '   ^""  ^ïicc 

d*  =  b'  —  'kic,  we  have 


328  ELEMI&NTS  rAET  11. 

Diultiplied  by  c,  gives  tjt*  +  *^  +  ^«  Wc  have,  thereTore, 
imly  to  multiply  one  of  the  factors  by  r,  and  we  obtain  the 
formula  in  question  expressed  by  the  product, 

b        d  b       d 


and  it  is  evident  that  this  solution  must  be  applicable 
ever  b-  —  ^c  is  a  square. 

51.  From  this  results  the  third  case,  in  which  the  formula 
/I  -f-  A'  +  cx^  Q3ay  be  transformed  into  a  square  ;  which  we 
shall  add  to  the  other  two. 

52.  This  case,  as  we  have  already  observed,  takes  place, 
when  the  formula  may  be  represented  by  a  product,  such 
as  (  /  -I-  gx)  X  (A  +  kx).  Now,  in  order  to  make  a  8C|uan* 
of  this  quantity,  let  us  suppose  its  root,  or 

^/C/-^-  gx)  X  (/i  -h  kx)  =  -^ — ^—  -,  and  we  shall  then 
hti\c(f+gx)  X  (A  I   kx)  =  !!l!^Z+— ;  ami,  dividing 

this  equation  byy+^.r«  we  have  A -f  Ax  =:  —  ~^' —  i  **r 

ÄIJ*  -f  kn^x  ^^fiti^  +  gm*x  ; 

and,  consciiuentlv«  x  =  r— ^ . 

'         •  kn'-^gm 

To  illustrate   this,    Ift   the  follow  in»;  i)iic>tions    hr  pn>- 

|)OSO(l. 

Qui'Jitn^n  1.  To  Knd  all  the  numbers,  a,  mk*Ii,  that  i(^ 
lie  subtraetetl  from  iwict*  their  s<|iiarc,  the  reiiuiinder  may  be 
a  8C|uare. 

Simv  îix*  —  iî  is  ilie  quantity  whieli  is  to  l)e  a  M|uare,  we 
mUHt  obser\e,  that  tins  (|uantity  is  expressed  by  the  factorN 
ä  X  (x  4-  1)  X  (r  -   1).      If,  therefore,  we  sup|)0!)e  its  Pui>t 

w'(rf  1)  .         ^.      ,   ,.       ,  -,        m\x  +  I) 

—  .  we  have  îi{r  +  1)  x  (x  -  1)  =; 


n  If 

dividing  by  x  -h  1,  and  multiplying  by  n-,  we  obtain 

"«'  +  2«* 
lia*a  —  un"  s=  mx  4-  m-,  and  x  —  ^-p-; :. 

If,  tlieretitre,  we  make  i/t  =  1,  and  /i  s  1,  we  find  f  =  o« 
ami  *Z/    -  ii  =  1(5=  4. 

If  r/i  =  'Ô  ami  /i  =  tl^  we  have  .r  =  »   17.     Now,  a->  u  i^ 


CUAF.  IV.  Ol*  ALQEBUA.  dS9 

only  found  in  the  second  power,  it  Is  indifferent  whether  we 
take  x  =  —  17,  or  a:  =  +  17  ;  either  supposiüon  equally 
gives  2^*  -  2  =  576  =  24«. 

53.  Qjiestion  2.  Let  the  formula  6  +  l&r  +  60:*  be  pro- 
posed to  be  transformed  into  a  souare.  Here,  we  have 
a  =  6,  6  =  13,  and  c  ==  6,  in  whicn  neither  a  nor  c  is  a 
square.  If,  therefore,  we  try  whether  6*  —  4sac  becomes  a 
square,  we  obtain  25  ;  so  that  we  are  sure  the  formula  may 
be  represented  by  two  factors  ;  and  those  factors  are 

(2  +  ar)  X  (3  +  ar). 

^.  m(2-^3x)  ...  , 

If  '  ,s  their  root,  we  have 

n 


which  becomes  3n*  -h  2w«a:  =  2m*  -|-  3m'a:,  i^hence  we  find 
2m*— 3»«      3n--2m2     ^    ■      .        ^      ^      , 

"*  =  2;F33^* = sî^^Ti;?-    ^^^'  '"  ^'^''  '''^'  '^^  """^- 

rator  of  this  fraction  may  become  positive,  3n*  must  be 
greater  than  27/}*;   and,  consequently,  2m*  less  than  3f»': 

m^ 
that  is  to  say,  — -  must  be  less  than  4.     With  regard  to  the 

denominator,  if  it  must  be  positive,  it  is  evident  that  Sm* 

must  exceed  2f^*  ;  and,  consequently,  — p  must  be  greater 

than  y.     If,  therefore,  we  would  have  the  positive  values 
of  0*,  we  must  assume  such  numbers  for  m  and  n,  that 


m« 


n 


p  may  be  less  than  i,  and  yet  greater  than  y. 


n' 


For  example,  let  m  =  6,  and  n  =  5  ;  we  shall  then  have 
=  1^,  which  is  less  than  |,  and  evidently  greater  than 


y,  whence  x  =  -À-, 

54.  This  thira  case  leads  us  to  consider  also  a  fourth, 
which  occurs  whenever  the  formula  a^  bx  +  ex*  may  be 
resolved  into  two  such  parts,  that  the  first  is  a  square,  and 
the  second  the  product  of  two  factors  :  that  is  to  sa^,  in  this 
case,  the  formula  must  be  represented  by  a  quantity  of  the 
form  p^  +  ^r,  in  which  the  letters  ^,  9,  and  r  express  quan- 
tities of  the  formy  +  gx.     It  is  evident  that  the  rule  for  this 


990  ELKMENTH  PAST  II. 


will  be  to  make  \'  (/»'-|*  9'')  ^^  P  A «    '^'^'  ^^  d^l 

ibiis obtain p+çr  =  p'A ^  +-  '-,inwhichtbct€TUM 

/»'  vanish  ;  after  which  we  nmy  divide  by  7,  to  that  we  find 

r  =  — -  -| j',  or  n'r  —  xnmp  +  w'y,  an  equation  fiüoi 

which  X  is  easily  determined.  Thb^  tliervlbre,  is  the  tourUi 
casein  which  our  fonnula  may  be  transibniied  into  a  Miiiarv; 
the  application  of  which  is  easy»  and  we  i>liall  illustrate  it  by 
a  few  examples. 

55.  Qu€st\ofi  ä.  lle(iuire<i  n  number,  d\  such,  that  double 
iu  square,  shall  exceed  some  other  mpiare  by  unity  ;  that  in 
if  we  subtract  unity  from  this  double  s()uari*,  t!ie  remainder 
may  be  a  square. 

For  instance,  the  case  applies  to  the  nnTiil)er  5,  wIiom* 
square  ii5,  taken  twice,  pvcs  the  numbir  50,  which  is» 
greater  by  1  than  the  Mptarc  19. 

According  to  this  enunciation,  är'  —  1  mu>t  \yi  a  5<|uarp; 
and  a»  we  have,  by  the  fonnula,  rr  —  -  1,  A  =r  0,  and  c  -  Ü, 
it  is  evident  tliat  neither  a  nor  c  is  a  scpiare;  and  forihtr. 
that  the  given  quantitv  cannot  Ix*  re5olvLtl  into  \\\o  iacton, 
Muce  h' —  'Uic  ■=■  8  wfiich  is  not  a  Mjuaro  ;  m»  lli.il  »«mi*  of 
the  lir>t  thnv  cases  will  apply.  But,  accoiilin«:  to  tlu*  fourth« 
this  fonnula  may  Ik*  n*prcM*iititl  by 

.1     -r  { J    -  1  )  -  .r    +  (u-  —  I  )   X  ^  J   -   I }. 

,^     ,         .  m  .r  -     1  ) 

If.  tlicrelore,  we  supiiose  its  root   =  x  H ,    wi- 

'  '  n 

shall  have 

,       ,           ,,                 .                   Ür;i.r(.r-|-1)       •.^(.1  +  !)• 
x'  +  (x+  1)  X  (x-l)  =  J  + 4._L-__Î. 

u  n' 

This  equation,  alter  having  exinuiginl  the  terms  .r-,  anti 
divitlitl  the  other  tcrin.s  by  j*  -f  1,  gi\e.^ 

n^x  —  n^  =  iif/i/ij-  +  m  ,v  t  m- ;   uhuuv  \*e  <înd 

III«  J.  y|t 

X  =  -- — -T ■  ;  and,  since  in  our  fi»rmula,  ?tr'  —  I,  ihv 

fi  * — xmn  —  III 

square  X' alone  is  found,  it  i^  inditliTcnt  win  tin  r  ui*  taki 
positive  or  iH'gati\r  \a!lu^  tor  .r.  Wi-  iii.i\  i-.t  first  i%iii 
wnti-    —  w,  instead  of  4-  wi,  in  «»rdti  t*»  luivi- 


CHAP.  IV.  OF    ALGEBRA.  3S1 


X  =£ 


If  we  make  m  =  1,  and  n  =  1,  we  find  or  =  1,  and 
Sx*  —1  =  1;  or  if  we  make  m  =  1 ,  and  »  =  2,  we  find 
a:  =  f ,  and  2a:^  —  1  =  ^ç'^;  lastly,  if  we  suppose  wi  =  1, 
and  w=:  —  2,  we  find  a:=  —5,  or  a:  =  +6,  and  &r*— 1  =49. 

56.  Question  4.  To  find  numbers  whose  squares  doubled 
and  increased  by  2,  may  likewise  be  squares. 

Such  a  number,  for  instance,  is  7,  since  the  double  of 
its  square  is  98,  and  if  we  add  2  to  it,  we  have  the  square 
100. 

We  must,  therefore,  have  2x'  -h  2  a  square  ;  and  as 
a  =z  2y  Ä  =  0,  and  e  =  2,  so  that  neither  a  nor  c,  nor 
i-  —  4ac,  the  last  being  =  —  16,  are  squares,  we  must, 
tlicrefore,  have  recourse  to  the  fourth  rule. 

Let  us  suppose  the  first  part  to  be  4,  then  the  second 
will  be  2jr*  —  2  =  2{x  +  1)  x  (x  —  1),  which  presents 
tlie  quantity  proposed  in  the  form 

4  4-  (cr  +  1)  X  (.r  -  1). 

Now,  let  2  H be  its  root,  and  we  shall  have 

'  n 

the  equation 

4  +  2(.  +  l)  X  (.  -  1)  =  4  +  lî"(-+l)  .  -'(-  +  ^)^ 


7i  7*2 


in  which  the  squares  4,  are  destroyed  ;  so  that  after  having 

divided  the  other  terms  by  a?  +  1,  we  have 

2n^x  —  2n^  =  4mn  +  wi'o:  +  w'  ;  and  consequently, 

4mn4-w2+2n- 


X  = 


2w*— m« 

If,  in  this  value,  we  make  m  =  1,  and  n  =s  1,  we  find 
.r  =  7,  and  2x2  -f  2  =  100.  But  if  m  =  0,  andn  =  1,  we 
liave  r  =  1,  and  2x*  +  2=4. 

57.  It  frequently  happens,  also,  when  none  of  the  first 
three  rules  appUes,  that  we  are  still  able  to  resolve  the 
formula  into  such  parts  as  the  fourth  rule  requires,  though 
not  so  readily  as  in  the  foregoing  examples. 

Thus,  if  the  question  comprises  the  formula  7  +  l&r 
4-  I3x^,  the  resolution  we  speak  of.  is  possible,  but  the 
method  of  performing  it  does  not  readily  occur  to  tlie  mind. 
It  recjuires  us  to  suppose'  the  first  part  to  be  (1  —  xY  or 
1  -  2jr  +  a:%  so  that  the  other  may  be  6  -|-  17x  +  l^^i 
and  we  perceive  that  this  part  has  two  factors,  because 
17-  —  (4  X  6  X  12),   =  1,  IS  a  square.     The  two  factors 


996t  XUUI£NT»  PAET  U^ 

therefore  are  (2  +  ^)  x  (3  +  4r)  ;  so  that  t^ie  formula 
becomes  (1  -  xY  +  (2  +  8j:)  x  (8  +  ix),  which  we  mmj 
now  resolve  by  the  fourth  rule. 

But,  as  we  have  obseri-ed,  it  cannot  be  said  that  this 
analysis  is  easily  found  ;  and,  on  this  account,  we  shall  ex- 
[dain  a  ccneral  method  for  discovering,  beforehand,  whether 
the  resolution  of  any  such  formula  be  possible  or  not  ;  for 
there  is  an  infinite  number  of  them  which  cannot  be  re- 
served at  all  :  such,  for  instance,  as  the  formula  So**  +  5t^ 
which  can  in  no  case  whatever  become  a  square.  On  the 
other  hand,  it  is  sufficient  to  know  a  sins^e  case,  in  which  a 
formula  is  possible,  to  enable  us  to  find  tSï  its  answers;  and 
this  we  shall  explain  at  some  length. 

58.  From  what  has  been  said,  it  may  be  observed,  that  all 
the  advantage  that  can  be  expected  on  these  occa^ons,  b 
to  determine,  or  suppose,  any  case  in  which  such  a  formula 
as  a  -f  &r  -f  rx*,  may  be  transformed  into  a  square  ;  and 
the  method  which  naturally  occurs  for  tliis,  is  to  substitute 
small  numbers  successively  for  x,  until  we  meet  with  a  case 
which  gives  a  square. 

^ow,  as  X  may  be  a  fraction,  let  us  begin  with  substituting 

for  X  the  general  fraction  —  ;  and,  if  the  formula 

bi       c(^       . 
a  4-  —  +     ,  which  rcsulu  from  it,  be  a  square,  it  will  be 
u         w 

so  also  after  having  l)een  multiplied  by  ii-  ;  so  that  it  onlv 
remains  to  try  to  find  such  integer  values  for  t  and  m,  as  will 
make   the  formula   aw  -|-  biu  -|-  rf *   a  sc)uare  ,  and  it    is 

evident,  that  after  th'is,  the  supposition  of  x  =  —  cannot  fail 

to  give  the  formula  a  -f  Aj  -f-  ^•'*'  equal  to  a  s<)uare. 

But  if,  whatever  wc  do,  we  cannot  arrive  at  any  satisfac- 
tory case,  we  have  ever}*  reason  to  sup|M>sc  that  it  is  aluigether 
impossible  to  transform  the  formula  into  a  M|iiare  ;  which,  a> 
we  have  already  said,  very  frciiuenlly  happens. 

59.  We  shall  now  shew,  on  the  other  hand,  that  when  one 
satisfactory  case  is  determined,  it  will  lie  easy  to  find  all  the 
other  cases  which  likewise  give  a  square  ;  and  it  will  lie  |kt- 
oetvc*d,  at  the  same  time,  that  the  number  of  those  ^olutloll.s 
b  always  infinitely  great 

Let  us  first  consider  the  formula  2  +  7x-,  in  which  «  =  2, 
6  s  0,  and  r  s  7.  Thi<»  evidently  lieooines  a  !k|uare,  if  we 
sumMwc*  X  =  1  ;  let  UÄ  then-fore  make  x  =  1  +  #/,  and,  bv 
MiDstitution,   we   bhall   have   x-  =  1  +  %  t  v,   and  our 


CHAP.  IT.  OF  ALGEBRA.  388 

formula  becomes  9  +  14v  +  Ty-,  in  Which  the  first  term  is 
a  square;  so  that  we  snail  suppose,  conformably  to  the 
second  rule^  the  square  root  of  the  new  formula  to  be 

3-1 — -   and  we  shall  thus  obtain  the  equation 

9  -f.  14y  -f.  7y2  =:  9  ij jL^ ^,  in  which  we  may  ex- 
punge 9  from  both  âdes,  and  <Uvide  by  y  :  which  being 
done^  we  shall  have   14n*  +  7n'y  =  6mn  +  m^y  ;  whence 

6m»— 14n-         ,  , 

y  =    ,y^^_^g    ;  and,  consequently, 

6mn  — 7n*— wi*  .       ,.  ,  ,    . 

X  =  — TT-r""» — '  "^  which  we  may  substitute  any 

values  we  please  for  m  and  n. 

If  we  make  m  =  1,  and  n  =  1,  we  have  j?  =  —  ^;  or, 
since  the  second  power  of  x  stands  alone,  x  =  -f  -f)  where- 
fore 2+ 7^:"=  V- 

If  w  =  3,  and  n  =  1,  we  have  x  =:  —  1,  or  x  =  +1. 

But  if  m  =  3,  and  n  =  —  1,  we  have  x  =  17  ;  which 
gives  2  +  7j72  =  2025,  the  square  of  46. 

If  97»  =  8,  and  n  =  3,  we  shall  then  have,  in  the  same 
manner,  x  =  —  17,  or  x  =  -f- 17. 

But,  by  making  9?i  =  8,  and  n  =  —  3,  we  find  x  =  271  ; 
so  that  2  -f  7x2  =  514089  =  1\T. 

60.  Let  us  now  examine  the  formula  5x^  +  3x  +  7,  which 
l)ecomes  a  square  by  the  supposition  of  x  =  —  1.  Here,  if 
wc  make  x  =  ^  —  1,  our  formula  will  be  changed  into  this  : 

5y*  —  IQy  +  5 

+    %-3 

+  7 


fny 
the  square  root  of  which  we  shall  suppose  to  be  3 ;    by 

which  means  we  shall  have 

5j^- 7^  +  9-=  9-^+^,  or 

^I'^y  —  In^  =  —  Qmn  +  mry  ;  whence  we  deduce 
ln"-6mn         ,  ,     ,  2n--6mn-f  m- 


Sd4  hULURiiTA  JPABT  IL 

If  m^  52«ftnd  n  s  1,  wehavex  =5  *  6,aIldGonseqllenü%' 
filt:^.ar4.7-  109=  1». 

But  lfm  s  —  $2  and  n  =  1,  we  find  x  sz  18,  and  &r'  -|- 
ar  +  7  =  168l  =  41-. 

61.  Let  US  now  consider  the  formula«  Tjt-  +  l&r  -)-  IS),  in 

which  we  must  begin  with  the  supposition  of  x  =  — .   Hav- 
ing substituted  and  multiplied  ti-»  wc  obtain 
71*  -|-  ^^"  4~  li}''*»  which  must  be  a  square.     Let  us  tbenv 
fore  try  to  adopt  some  small  numbers  as  the  values  of  t 
and  I/. 
If/ =  l,and»  =  l,  r=r    a> 

!  S  I  Ha  Ï  =  -  1,  theformulawiUbecomei  =    J{ 
1  =  3,  andw  =  l,  (  =  121. 

Now,  121  beinjT  a  sc^uare,  it  is  proof  that  the  value  of 
X  zi  3  answers  the  rec|uurcd  condition  ;  let  us  therefore  huyu 
pote  ;r  =  y  -I-  3,  and  we  shall  have,  by  substituting  this 
value  in  the  formula, 

7y'  +  42y  -h  63  +  15y  f  45  +  13,  or 

y-  +  sy  +  i«i. 

Therefore  let  the  root  be  represented  by  11  H — ^,   and   wi« 

diall  have  7^   +  57*/  +  121  =  121  +  ^— ^  +  -'^\  nr 

7w*^  +  *>*'*'  =  22w/i  +  m-^  ;  whence 

57m*  -  22wn        ,           36«*— 22wfi4.3m^ 
y  = : :.— 7- ,  and  r  =  .— ;r-i . 

Sii|)|xïsi»,  for  c>\ami)le,  tn  zz  3,  niul  «  =  1  ;  wo  sliall  ilicti 
find  a  ~  —  :,  anil  the  formula  Ik-couica 

7x-  \   I5x  +  13=  V  =  (;>'. 
If  fw  =  1,and  ft  =  1,  we  find  .r  =  —   •,'  ;  if  m  =  ,>,  and 
«  =  —  1,  we  liave  .r  =  '  * ',  and  llie  foiuuila 

7t«  +  Mr 4-  13  =  "  7«  •  =  (  ^  *  •  )\ 

62.  Ihit  fritjitontlv  it  is  only  lt>st  labor  to  endeavour  u* 
find  a  ca»i%  in  which  t)ie  pn>i)0!:cd  formula  may  lx*conic  a 
square.  We  have  already  said  that  l\x*  -f-  ^  i^^  ^*i><*  <'f  tli^^* 
unmanageable  fonnulie  ;  and,  by  giving  it,aci*or(ling  to  thi^ 
rule,  the  form  3/- -|- 2m-,  ui»  hhall  jx'rcci\c  that,  uhatc\cr 
value*»  ue  give  to  t  and  r/,  this  quantitv  iK*ver  Uromo  a 
M|uare    iumhIkt      A«  the   Innmila-  of  tliis   Lind   un-  \iT\ 


CHAF.  V.  OF  ALCfrKBRA.  3S5 

numerous,  it  will  be  worth  while  to  fix  on  some  characters, 
by  which  their  impossibility  may  be  perceived,  in  order  that 
wc  may  be  often  saved  the  trouble  of  useless  trials  ;  which 
shall  form  the  subject  of  the  following  chapter*. 


CHAP.  V. 


Of  the  Cases  in  which  the  Formula  a  4-  é x  +  ex*"  can  never 

become  a  Square. 

63.  As  our  general  formula  is  composed  of  three  te^s, 
we  shall  observe,  in  the  first  place,  tliat  it  may  always  be 
transformed  into  another,  in  which  the  middle  term  is  want- 

ing.  This  is  done  by  supposing  x  ^  "S^  ;  which  substitu- 
tion changes  the  formula  into 

by^  b'  ,  y-%+^^         4aç-AH-y-         .    .        ,,. 
a  4-   ^ 1 T- ;  or ZT"      »  *^"  ^"^^  ^^® 

iiuKst  be  a  square,  Ictus  make  it  equal  to  —,  we  shall  then 

4cz* 
have  4ar  —  b-  -^7/-  zz  —j— »  =  cz%  and,  consequently, 

if  =  cz'  -J-  b^  —  4ac.  Whenever,  therefore,  our  formula  is 
a  s(|uare,  this  last  cz^  +  6'  —  4ac  will  be  so  likewise  ;  and 
reciprocally,  if  this  be  a  square,  the  proposed  formula  will 
l)o  a  square  also.  If  therefore  we  write  t,  instead  of  ô^— 4«€?, 
the  whole  will  be  reduced  to  determin'mg  whether  a  quantity 
of  the  form  ez*  +  t  can  become  a  square  or  not  And  as 
tliis  formula  consists  only  of  two  terms,  it  is  certainly  much 
easier  to  judge  from  that  whether  it  be  possible  or  not;  but 
in  any  furtlier  inquiry  we  must  be  guided  by  the  nature  of 
the  given  numbers  c  and  /. 

6Ï,  It  is  evident  that  if  ^  =  0,  the  formula  cz*  can  become 
a  square  only  when  e  is  a  square  ;  for  the  quotient  arising 
from  the  division  of  a  square  by  another  square  being  like- 
wise a  square,  the  quantity  cz^  cannot  be  a  square,  unlegs 

*  See  the  Appendix  to  this  chapter,  at  Article  5.  of  the  Ad- 
ditions by  V  ^  la  Grange. 


SSC  SLFMF.KTJ)  rABT  Tf. 

-^,  that  is  to  say,  c,  be  one.     So  that  when  c  is  not  a  BC]iiarc, 

the  formula  rz*  can  by  no  means  become  a  square  ;  and  on  tlie 
contrary,  if  r  be  itself  a  M|uare,  cz*  will  also  be  a  square, 
whatever  number  be  assumed  for  s. 

65.  If  we  wish  to  conadcr  other  cases,  we  must  have  re. 
course  to  what  has  been  already  sud  on  the  subject  of  dif- 
ferent  kinds  of  numbers,  considered  with  relation  to  tlanr 
division  by  other  numbers. 

We  have  seen,  for  example,  tlmt  the  divisor  3  produces 
three  düTerent  kinds  of  numbers.  The  first  comprehends 
the  numbers  which  are  divisible  by  S,  and  may  he  expressed 
by  the  formula  Sn. 

The  second  kind  comprehends  the  numbers  which,  being 
divided  by  8,  leave  the  remainder  I,  and  are  contained  in 
the  formula  3rt  4-  !• 

To  the  third  class  belong  numbers  which,  being  dividetl 
by  9»  leave  ft  for  the  remainder,  and  which  may  be  repre- 
sented by  the  scneral  expression  3ii  +  2. 

Now,  since  Su  numbers  are  comprehended  in  these  three 
ibrmul«,  let  us  therefore  consider  their  squares.  First,  if 
the  question  relate  to  a  number  included  in  tlie  formula  Sn, 
we  see  that  the  square  of  this  quantity  being  O/i*,  it  is  divisible 
not  only  by  3,  but  also  by  9. 

If  the  given  numlx^r  be  included  in  the  formula  on  -{-  I, 
we  have  the  Miüare  î>n-  -f*  ^>'*  +  ^»  which,  citvidcd  by  3, 
gives  Sn-  -^  2n,  witli  the  remainder  1  ;  and  which,  ctm- 
sequentiv,  belongs  to  the  socimd  class,  îiw  +  1.  lastly,  if 
the  nuni1)er  in  question  Ik*  included  in  the  formula  3n  -^  i!, 
we  have  to  consider  the  S(]uare  !)/<'  4-  I'^^'t  +  *K  and  if  wc 
divide  it  by  3,  we  obtain  3n-  -f  4/i  -4-  1,  and  the  remainder 
1  ;  so  tliat  this  square  belongs,  as  well  as  the  fonner,  to  the 
class  3#i  +  l. 

Hence  it  is  obvious,  that  scjuare  nunil>ers  an*  only  of  two 
kind»  with  relation  to  the  nuinl)er  «>  ;  for  thev  arv  cither 
divisible  by  3,  and  in  this  c^isi*  arc  nivl*s^arily  divisible  alM> 
by  9;  or  they  an*  not  (li\iNiblc  by  3,  in  h  Inch  case  the  re- 
maindiT  is  always  1,  and  never  :^;  for  uliich  re:Lson,  no 
numlier  contained  in  the  formula  3/i  -f  ^  ^'^"  be  a  M|uarc. 

66.  It  is  easy,  fn>in  what  ha»  junt  l)een  ^id,  to  shew,  th.*ii 
the  formula  3r*  ^  Ü  ean  never  lit*conie  a  sc|uare,  uliatever 
integiT,  or  fractional  iiumlKT,  we  ch€iose  to  Milistitute  for  j  . 
For,  if  .r  U*  an  integiT  numUT,  niul  ue  tlivide  ihc  foriniil.i 
;kr-    •   *•   hv  :J,  then*   n*inain>  *i  .  thcn-forc  il   cannot  Ik*  a 


CHAP.  V. 


OF  ALOEBRA.  337 


square.     Next,  if  jt  be   a  fraction,  let  us   express   it   by 

t  .      . 

y  supposing  it  already  reduced  to  its  lowest  terms^  and  that  t 


u 


3^2 
and  1^  have  no  common  divisor.  In  order,  therefore,  that  — r-  +  2 


w« 


may  be  a  square,  we  must  obtain,  after  multiplying  by  tt% 
3/*  -f  2w*  also  a  square.  Now,  this  is  impossible  ;  for  the 
number  u  is  either  divisible  by  3,  or  it  is  not  :  if  it  be,  /  will 
not  be  so,  for  t  and  u  have  no  common  divisor,  since  the 

fraction   —  is  in  its  lowest  terms.    Therefore,  if  we  make 
u 

M  =  3^  as  the  formula  becomes  3/*  -|-  18/*,  it  is  evident  that 
it  can  be  divided  by  3  only  once,  and  not  twice,  as  it  must 
necessarily  be  if  it  were  a  square  ;  in  fact,  if  we  divide  by  3, 
we  obtain  /*  +  6^*.  Now,  though  one  part,  6/**,  is  divisible 
hy  3,  yet  the  other,  f-,  being  divided  by  3,  leaves  1  for  a 
remainder. 

Let  us  now  suppose  that  u  is  not  divisible  by  3,  and  see 
what  results  from  that  supposition.  Since  the  first  term  is 
divisible  by  3,  we  have  only  to  learn  what  remainder  the 
second  term,  2m-,  gives.  Now,  vr  being  divided  by  8, 
leaves  the  remainder  1,  that  is  to  say,  it  is  a  number  of  tlie 
class  3/1  -h  1  ;  so  that  2t*-  is  a  number  of  the  class  6/1  4-  2  ; 
and  dividing  it  by  3,  the  remainder  is  2  ;  consequently,  the 
formula  St-  +  2m%  if  divided  by  3,  leaves  the  remainder  2, 
and  is  certainly  not  a  square  number. 

C7.  We  may,  in  the  same  manner,  demonstrate,  that  the 
formula  3^-  +  5//^,  likewise  can  never  become  a  square,  nor 
any  one  of  the  following  : 

3^2  +  8mS  3/«  +  \\u\  Sf-  +  14t*S  &c. 

in  which  the  numbers  5,  8,  11,  14,  &c.  divided  by  8,  leave 
2  for  a  remainder.  For,  if  we  suppose  that  u  is  divisible  by 
3,  and,  consequently,  that  /  is  not  so,  and  if  we  make  u  =  3n, 
we  shall  always  be  brought  to  formulas  divisible  by  3,  but 
not  divisible  by  9  :  and  if  u  were  not  divisible  by  3,  and 
consequently  u^  a  number  of  the  kind  3n  +  1,  we  should 
have  the  first  term,  St-,  divisible  by  3,  while  the  second 
terms,  5^^,  8m^,  11m-,  &c.  would  have  the  forms  15n  +  5, 
24/t  +  8,  33n  +11,  &c  and,  when  divided  by  3,  would 
constantly  leave  the  remainder  2. 

68.  It  is  evident  that  this  remark  extends  also  to  the  se- 
neral  formula,  St^  +  (3w  +  2)  X  u%  which  can  never  be- 
come a  square,  even  by  taking  n^^tive  numbers  for  n.  If, 
for  example,  we  should  make  n  =  —  1,  I  say,  it  is  im- 

z 


338  ELEMENTS  FABT  11. 

pcMSÎble  for  the  lonniila  3i^  —  ii*  to  become  a  square.  Thb 
M  evident,  if  u  lie  dimible  by  3  :  and  if  it  be  not,  tlien  ti- 
is  a  number  of*  the  kind  3n  +  1^  and  our  formula  beoomcs 
S/*  —  «511  —  1«  wlijch,  being  divided  by  3,  gives  the  re- 
mainder —  ly  or  -I-  12;  and  in  general,  if  n  be  =  —  ai,  we 
obtain  the  formula  3r-  —  (3m  —  2)  m-,  which  can  never  be- 
come a  M]uare. 

69.  So  far,  therefore,  are  we  led  by  considering  the  di- 
visor 3  ;  if  we  now  consider  4  also  as  a  divisor,  we  see  that 
every  number  may  be  comprised  in  one  of  the  four  fcdlowing 
formula?; 

4n,  4n  +  1,  4fi  +  2,  4fi  +  3. 

The  square  of  the  first  of  these  classes  of  numbers  is  IGn-  ; 
and,  consequentlv,  it  is  divisible  by  16. 

That  of  the  'second  class,  4n  -f  1,  is  16n-  +  Sn  ^-  I  ; 
which  if  dindcd  by  8,  the  renuiinder  is  1  ;  so  that  it  belongs 
to  the  formula  Hn  +  1. 

The  square  of  the  third  cla»s  4n  +  2,  is  IGn-  +  iGn  +  4 ; 
which  if  we  divide  by  lf>,  there  remains  4;  therefore  this 
square  is  included  in  the  formula  \&n  -f-  4. 

Lastly,  the  square  of  the  fourth  class,  4ii  -f~  •%  bong 
16ii'*  -H  24n  -h  9,  it  is  evident  tlmt  dividing  by  8  there  re- 
mains 1. 

70.  This  teaches  us,  in  the  first  place,  that  all  the  even 
square  numbers  are  cither  of  the  fonn  IG/i,  or  \Gh  H-  4; 
and,  consequently,  tliat  all  the  other  even  fonnula%  namely« 

16fi+2,  16/j+'6,  16n+8,  ICij+lO,  IG/i-f  12,  l&i  f  14,' 

can  never  Ixîcome  s*iuare  numliers. 

Secondly,  tliat  all  the  odd  scjuares  are  contained  in  the 
formula  Hn  4-  1  ;  that  is  to  say,  if  we  divide  them  by  8« 
they  li*ave  a  remaimler  of  1.  And  hence  it  follows,  tliat  all 
the  other  (nIcI  laniilH^rH,  which  have  the  form  either  ol* 
Hit  +  3,  or  i>f  8ii  •+  5,  or  of  8«  -f  7,  can  never  be  squares. 

71.  These  |»rincipli*s  furnish  a  new  prcmf,  that  the  formula 
9i^  4-  2m*  cannot  Ik«  a  squan*.  For,  either  tlie  two  number» 
I  and  f»  art*  Uith  (xld,  or  tlie  one  \%  even  and  the  other  odd. 
They  canncit  l)e  both  even,  liecaiiM.*  in  that  cose  they 
would«  at  least,  have  the  aimmim  divi^Yr  2.  In  the  first 
case,  thereftire,  in  which  both  (^  and  m*  are  contained  in  the 
fcjrmula  Hn  +  1,  the  first  term  *ii',  lieing  divided  by  K, 
would  leavt*  the  n*mainder  3,  and  the  other  term  HW  would 
leave  the  rrmainder  2  ;  so  that  the  whole  rt*niainder  would 
be  5  :  consequently,  the  formula  in  (|Ue^tion  cannot  lie  a 
square.  But,  if  the  «xxNid  cose  Ik*  sup|iose<l,  ami  /  be  even« 
ami  M  odd»  tin*  fir>t  term  3r  will  U*  divisible  bv  4,  and  tht* 


CHAP.  V.  OF    AL6F.BKA.  889, 

second  term  2m-,  if  divided  by  4,  will  leave  the  remainder  S  ; 
so  that  the  two  terms  together,  when  divided  by  4,  leave  a 
remainder  of  2,  and  therefore  canno^  form  a  square.  Lastly, 
if  we  were  to  suppose  u  an  even  number,  as  ^,  and  t  odd, 
so  that  t^  is  of  the  form  8n  -f  1,  our  formula  would  be  changed 
into  this,  24n  +  3  +  8«^  ;  which,  divided  by  8,  leaves  3, 
and  therefore  cannot  be  a  square. 

This  demonstration  extends  to  the  formula  St^  +  (8w + 2)t«*  ; 
also  to  this,  (Sm  +  3)  ^^  +  2u%  and  even  to  this, 
(Sm  +  S)t^  +  (Sn  +  2)  tt«  ;  in  which  we  may  substitute  for 
m  and  n  all  integer  numbers,  whether  positive  or  negative. 

72.  But  let  us  pix)ceed  farther,  and  consider  the  divisor  5, 
with  respect  to  which  all  numbers  may  be  ranged  under  the 
five  following  classes  : 

ÔM,  5n  -h  1,  5n  -I-  2,  5n  +  3,  5n  +  4. 

We  remark,  in  the  first  place,  that  if  a  number  be  of  the 
first  class,  its  square  will  have  the  form  25/»^  ;  and  will  con- 
sequently be  divisible  not  only  by  5,  but  also  by  25. 

Every  number  of  the  second  class  will  have  a  square  of 
the  form  25n-  +  lOn  +  1  ;  and  as  dividing  by  5  gives  the 
remainder  1,  this  square  will  be  contained  in  the  formula 
on  +  1. 

The  numbers  of  the  third  class  will  have  for  their  square 
25/1-  -h  20n  +  4;  which,  divided  by  5,  gives  4  for  the  re- 
mainder. 

The  square  of  a  number  of  the  fourth  class  is  25n^  4- 
30«  +  9  ;    and  if  it  be  divided  by  5,  there  remains  4. 

Lastly,  the  square  of  a  number  of  the  fifth  class  is 
25n'  +  40n  +  16  ;  and  if  we  divide  this  square  by  5,  there 
will  remain  1. 

When  a  square  number  therefore  cannot  be  divided  by  5, 
tlie  remainder  after  division  will  always  be  1 ,  or  4,  and  never 
2,  or  3  :  hence  it  follows,  that  no  square  number  can  be  con- 
tained in  the  formula  5n  -f  2,  or  6n  -f  3. 

73.  From  this  it  may  be  proved,  that  neither  the  formula 
5t"  4-  2w-,  nor  5t^  +  3u*,  can  be  a  square.  For,  either  u  is 
divisible  by  5,  or  it  is  not  :  in  the  first  case,  these  formulae 
will  be  divisible  by  5,  but  not  by  25  ;  therefore  they  cannot 
be  squares.  On  the  other  hand,  if  u  be  not  divisible  by  6, 
u^  will  either  be  of  the  form  5n  -f  1,  or  5n  -f  4.  In  the 
first  of  these  cases,  the  formula  51-  -f  2w*  becomes  5^  + 
lOn  +  2;  which,  divided  by  5,  leaves  a  remainder  of  2; 
and  the  formula  5t^  +  3m^  becomes  5f^  +  15n  -f  3  ;  which, 
being  divided  by  5,  gives  a  remainder  of  3  ;  so  that  neither 
the  one  nor  the  other  can  be  a  square.  With  regard  to  the 
case  of  ir  =  5n  -h  4,  the  first  formula  becomes 6<*  -f  lOn  +  8; 

z  2 


340  KI.EMP.KTS  TAIT  II. 

whidu  clivkk^cl  bv  5,  IcoveH  S  ;  aiul  the  other  beoome» 
iU*  -h  I5fi  4-  IS,  which,  divided  by  5,  leaves  2;  io  that  in 
tbb  cane  also,  neither  of  the  two  formuls  can  be  a  square. 

For  a  similar  reason,  we  may  remark,  that  neither  the 
formula  5/'  +  {5n  +  H)u\  nor  5/^  +  (5n  -h  8)f/<,  can  be- 
come  a  scpiare,  since  they  leave  the  same  remainders  that  we 
have  just  found.  VVc  miffht  even  in  the  first  term  write 
Bmi^f  instead  of  5i',  provi€led  m  be  not  divisible  by  5. 

74.  Since  all  the  even  squares  are  contained  in  the  formula 
4fi,  and  all  the  odd  squares  in  the  formula  4fi  +  1  ;  and» 
consequently,  since  neither  4#i  +  S,  nor  4fi  -h  3,  can  become 
a  square,  it  follows  that  the  general  formula  (4fii  4-  3)  I'  -h 
(4fi  +  d)M'  can  never  be  a  square.  For  if  I  be  even,  i*  will 
be  divisible  by  4,  and  the  otner  term,  being  divided  by  4, 
will  give  8  for  a  remainder;  and,  it  we  suppose  the  two 
numbers  /  and  u  odd,  the  remainders  of  i^  and  ot*  u^  will  be 
1  ;  consequently,  the  remainder  of  the  whole  formula  will  be 
S:  now,  tliere  is  no  square  number,  which,  when  divided  by 
4b  leaves  a  remainder  of  2, 

We  sliall  remark,  also,  that  both  m  and  n  may  be  taken 
negatively,  or  :=:  0,  and  still  the  formulae  Hi-  -f-  S''**  ^od 
Si*  —  M*,  cannot  be  transformed  into  squares. 

75.  In  the  same  numner  as  we  have  found  for  a  few  di- 
▼iaors,  that  some  kinds  of  numbers  can  never  beanne  square», 
we  might  determine  similar  kinds  of  numbers  for  all  other 


If  we  take  the  divisor  7,  we  sliull  have  to  distiiieui&li 
seven  different  kinds  of  numbers,  thr  M|uares  of  which  we 
shall  also  examine. 


KimU  of  nuiiibem. 

Th 

eir  square«  arc 

of  the  kiiii 

1. 

in 

49m' 

;     "" 

1» 

7m  -I-  1 

49m' 

+  14m  +  1 

1  7«  +  1 

± 

7/1  -f  U 

4J)m* 

+  Mn  +  4 

7«  +  4 

4. 

7m  -^  .1 

49/r 

+  4i2M  +  9 

7«  +  îi 

,•;. 

7m  +  4 

4î)m' 

-h  r,Gn  ■*-  If) 

7«  +  2 

6. 

7«  4-  .'S 

4î)m» 

-f  7()m  -f  îi.> 

7».  4  4 

7. 

7//  +Ü 

4J)m' 

+  H^n  4   'Mi 

7h    J  1. 

Therefore,  since  the  M|uarcs  wiiioh  an»  nt>t  divisible  bv  7, 
are  all  containeil  in  the  three  fortnulir  7m  -|-  If  7m  4*  ^^ 
7fi  -^  4,  it  is  e^'idcnt,  that  the  tliri-«»  ckIkt  fonnula*,  7m  ^  ti^ 
7a  -»-  5»  and  7«  +  6,  do  not  a^nv  witli  the  nature  of 
squares. 

76.  To  make  this  concluMcm  htill  nuire  a|>(iarent,  we  shall 
remark,  tliat  the  la'»t  kind,  7w  ^  6,  may  l>e  also  expre^taetl 


CHAP.  V.  OF  ALGKliEA.  341 

by  7n  —  1  ;  that,  in  the  same  manner,  the  formula  7i»  -f  5 
is  thé  same  as  7n  —  2,  and  In  +  4s  the  same  as  In  —  i). 
This  being  the  case,  it  is  evident,  that  the  squares  of  the 
two  classes  of  numbers,  7/*  +  1,  and  In  —  1,  if  divided  bv 
7,  will  give  the  same  remainder  1  ;  and  that  the  squares  of 
the  two  classes,  7n  +  2,  and  In  —  2,  ought  to  resemble 
each  other  in  the  same  respect,  each  leaving  the  remainder  4. 

77.  In  general,  therefore,  let  the  divisor  be  any  number 
whatever,  which  we  shall  represent  by  the  letter  a,  the  dif- 
ferent classes  of  numbers  which  result  from  it  will  be 

dn; 

dn  +  1,  dn  +  2,  dn  +  3,  &c. 

dn  —  1,  dn  —  2,  dn  —  3,  &c. 

in  which  the  squares  of  dn  -f  1,  and  dn  ^  1,  have  this  in 
common,  that,  when  divided  by  d,  they  leave  the  remainder 
1,  so  that  they  belong  to  the  same  formula,  dn  -{-  I  ;  in  the 
same  manner,  the  squares  of  the  two  classes  dn  +  S,  and 
dn  —  2,  belong  to  the  same  formula,  d?i  +  4.  So  that  we 
may  conclude,  generally,  that  the  squares  of  the  two  kinds, 
dn  +  a,  and  dn  —  a,  when  divided  by  d,  give  a  common 
remainder  a%  or  that  which  remains  in  dividmg  a*  by  d. 

78.  These  observations  are  sufficient  to  pomt  out  an  in- 
finite number  of  formulae,  such  as  at*  +  bu\  which  cannot 
by  any  means  become  squares.  Thus,  by  considering  the 
divisor  7,  it  is  easy  to  perceive,  that  none  of  these  three 
formulae,  V"  +  3wS  7<«  +  5n%  7^  +  6a«,  can  ever  become 
a  square  ;  because  the  division  of  w*  by  7  only  gives  the  re- 
mainders 1,  â,  or  4;  and,  in  the  first  of  these  formulae, 
there  remains  either  3,  or  6,  or  5  ;  in  the  second,  5,  3,  or  6  ; 
and  in  tlie  third,  6,  5,  or  3;  which  cannot  take  placé  in 
scjuare  numbers.  Whenever,  therefore,  we  meet  with  such 
formula?,  we  are  certain  that  it  is  useless  to  attempt  discover- 
ing any  case,  in  which  they  can  become  squares  :  and,  for 
this  reason,  the  considerations,  into  which  we  have  just 
entered,  are  of  some  importance. 

If,  on  the  other  hanci,  the  formula  proposed  is  not  of  this 
nature,  we  have  seen  in  the  last  chapter,  that  it  is  sufficient 
to  find  a  single  Case,  in  which  it  becomes  a  square,  to  enable 
us  to  deduce  from  it  an  infinite  number  of  ûmilar  cases. 

The  given  formula,  Art.  63,  was  properly  ax*  -h  Ä; 
and,   as   we  usually  obtain   fractions  for  x,  we  supposed 

X  =  — ,  so  that  the  problem,  in  reaUty,  is  to  transform 
at'  -f  bu^  into  a  square. 


942  KLKMENTS  rABT   II* 

But  there  is  frequently  an  infinite  number  of  cases,  in 
which  T  may  be  assigned  even  in  integer  numbers;  and  the 
determination  of  those  cases  shall  form  the  subject  of  the 
foUowiug  chapter. 


CHAP.  VI. 

Of  the  Cases  tn  Integer  Numbers,  m  ichtch  the  Formula 

«rJT*  -h  b  becomes  a  Sijuarc. 

79.  We  have  already  shewn.  Art.  63,  how  such  fonnube 
as  a  -h  &r  4-  ex*,  arc  to  be  transformed,  in  order  that  the 
second  term  may  be  destroyed  ;  we  shall  therefore  confine 
our  present  inqmrios  to  the  formula  ax-  -i-  b,  in  whidi  it  is 
required  to  find  for  x  only  integer  numbers,  which  mav 
transform  that  formula  into  a  scpiare.  Now,  first  of  all, 
such  a  formula  must  be  possible  ;  for,  if  it  be  not,  we  shall 
not  even  obtain  fractional  values  of  x,  far  less  integer  ones. 

8Ul  Let  us  suppose  then  ax*  -{•  b  ^  y  \  a  and  b  being 
integer  numbers,  as  well  as  x  and  y. 

Now,  here  it  is  al)«ioiutely  necetwary  for  us  to  know,  or  to 
have  already  found  a  case  in  integer  nuinl)or:i  ;  otherwise  it 
would  be  loHt  labor  to  seek  for  other  similar  cases,  as  the 
formula  might  hapix^n  to  be  impossible. 

We  shall,  therefore,  suppose  that  this  fonnula  becomes  a 
squans  by  making  x  :=zj\  and  we  shall  n'presont  that  square 
by  /f*\  «>  that  af*  -f  6  =  *;•,  where/'aiMl,A'  are  known  num« 
bers.  Tlu*n  we  have  only  to  deduce  from  this  case  other 
similar  iMüt^fi  ;  and  this  inquiry  is  so  nuirh  the  more  im- 
portant, as  it  is  suhji*ct  to  ctMisiderable  (liuScullies;  which, 
nowever,  we  shall  Ik*  able  to  surmount  hy  (»articular  artifices. 
81.  Since  we  have  alreailv  found  af*  ^  b  =  t:\  and  like- 
wine,  hy  liv|xithe!4s  ax*  -^  b  =  y\  let  us  subtract  the  first 
«t|uation  iroin  tlK*  second,  and  we  shall  obtxiin  a  new  one^ 
ax'  —  «/**  in^  —  I»*,  which  may  be  represented  hy  factors 
in  the  folk>wing  nuuiiKT  ;  a{x  -f  /')  x  (x  — ./  )  =  (i/  -^ff)  ^ 
Cy— -^)t  And  which«  by  multiplying  both  sidi^  hy  /xy,  biv 
come«i/i;x/ix  -I-./  )  x  fV  — /)  =  /^/{y  4  ^r\  x  (//  -  ç).  If 
luiw  deeomuiund  this  et|uation,  hy  making ///;(x  -f,/')  = 


9<.y   "*■  A')»  *"*■  yt«**  •"./')  ^/'(y  ~  ^^  ^^  "•">'  derive,  fnmi 
these  twu  ix|uations,  values  of  the  two  Wtters  x  ami  y.     Th«* 


CHAI».  VI.  OF  ALGEBRA.  343 

first,  divided  by  y,  gives  y  -\-  ff  =  -^ '-  ;    a«d  the  se- 

gx — of* 
cond,  divided  by  /?,  gives  y  ^  gzz ^ .  Subtracting  this 

latter  equation  from  the  former,  we  have 

^ — ^  ««• 

ggpy  =  (ap^ — j')x + {ap^  +  ?')/*;  therefore 
J.  —  — 7^^, e      y  9  from  which  we  obtain 

y=g  +  — p— ,—  ,  g  y  •  -  — .  And  as,  m  this  laU 
ter  value,  the  first  two  terms,  both  containing  the  letter  g-, 
may  be  put  into  the  form^ — -  ^^   ,  and  as  the  other  two, 

containing  the  letteryj  may  be  expressed  by  — r^^,  all  the 

up     q 

terms  will  be  reduced  to  the  same  denomination,  and  we 
d^  have  ^  =Äl±|!bM2:       . 

S%  This  operation  seems  not,  at  first,  to  answer  our  pur- 
pose  ;  since  having  to  find  integer  values  of  x  and  y^  we  are 
Drought  to  fractional  results  ;  and  it  would  be  required  to 
solve  this  new  question, — What  numbers  are  we  to  substitute 
for  p  and  g,  in  order  that  the  fraction  may  disappear  f  A 
question  apparently  still  more  difficult  than  our  original  one  : 
but  here  we  may  employ  a  particular  artifice,  that  will 
readily  bring  us  to  our  object,  which  is  as  follows  : 

As  every  thing  must  be  expressed  in  integer  numbers,  let 

us  make  -^^-- — \  =  m,  and      ,       ,  =  n,  in  order  that  we 
ap*—q  ap*  —  q^ 

may  have  x  =  ng  —  mfy  and  y  =  mg  —  nqf. 

Now,  we  cannot  here  assume  m  and  n  at  pleasure,  since 
these  letters  must  be  such  as  will  answer  to  what  has  been 
already  determined  :  therefore,  for  this  purpose,  let  us  con- 
sider their  squares,  and  we  shall  find 


m' 


"  aY-'^apY'^q^ 


n  =  "TT — a     i  1  . — i'  ^™  hence 


M4  ELEMENT»  fAET  II. 


m'- 


83.  We  see,  Uiercfore,  that  the  two  nunibrrs  m  and  ft 
must  be  such,  that  m^  =  on*  +  1.  So  that,  as  a  »  a  known 
number,  we  must  begin  by  considering  the  means  of  d«v 
termining  auch  an  integer  number  for  n,  as  will  make 
an*  4-  1  a  scjuare  ;  for  then  m  will  be  tlie  root  ofthat  square  ; 


and  when  we  have  likewise  determined  the  number /*  so, 
that  af^  4-  b  may  l)ecome  a  s(|uare,  namely-  g^y  we  shall  ob- 
tain for  X  and  y  the  following  values  in  mteger  numbers  ; 
X  =s  f lyf  —  fw/î  y  =  W;?"  —  naf\   and  thence,  lastly,  ax*  -h 

84.  It  is  evident,  tliat  having  once  detern/ineil  m  and  ft, 
We  may  write  iristead  of  them  —  m  and  —  ?i,  because  the 
square  ti*  still  remains  tlie  same. 

But  we  have  alreaily  shewn  that,  in  order  to  find  x  and^ 
in  integer  numbers,  so  that  ax^  +  />  =  y^^  we  mu5t  fira 
know  a  case,  such  tliat  qf^  -f-  b  may  be  equal  to  g^  ;  when 
we  have  therefore  found  such  a  case,  we  must  also  endeavour 
to  know,  beside  the  number  <#,  the  values  of  m  and  ti,  which 
will  give  a/i*  -|-  1  =  m*  :  the  method  for  which  shall  be  de- 
•cribed  in  the  sequel,  and  when  this  is  done,  we  shall  have  a 
new  case,  namely,  x  =  tig  +  ifi/*,  and  y  =  t/iij  4-  wo/J  also 

Putting  this  new  case  instead  of  the  prt^ix^ding  one,  which 
was  considered  as  known  ;  that  is  to  hay,  writing  fig  -h  mf 
(orjl  and  mg  4-  naf  for  g,  we  siiall  have  new  values  of  x 
and  //,  fntni  which,  if  they  be  again  subslitutcil  for  x  and  y^ 
we  may  tSnd  as  many  other  new  value*»  «xs  we  please:  so 
that,  by  means  of  a  single  can;  known  at  first,  ue  may  after- 
wards  determine  an  infinite  number  of  others. 

H5.  The  manner  in  which  we  have  arrive<l  at  this  solution 
has  bi'en  very  emlmnrossi^l,  and  si-emctl  at  first  to  lead  us 
fnwn  our  objt*ct«  since  it  brought  us  to  coniplicati'd  fractions, 
which  an  uccidi*iital  circumstance  onlv  enableil  us  to  rcxluixr  : 
it  will  Im*  |m){MT,  therefiire,  to  explain  a  sliorter  methiKl, 
which  leads  to  the  same  solution. 

86.  Since  we  must  have  /ix*  4-  ä  =  //*,  and  hove  already 
f«Hind  «/''4-  A  —  /»',  the  first  ecjuaticm  gives  uj%  />=#/•— /ix\ 
and  the  Si-coml  gives  b  zz  g*  qf^\  conseniiently,  alx», 
y^  —  <ii'  ss^»*  —  iif\  und  the  vliole  i«»  ntlucetl  t<»  de- 
termining the  unkiumn  (piantities  x  nnd  y,  by  means  of  the 
known  quantities^ and  g.     It  is  evident,  tluit  for  this  |>ur. 


CHAP.  VI.  OF  xXLÙËBRA.  345 

pose  we  need  only  make  x  =J'  and  y  =  g\  but  it  is  also 
evident,  that  this  supposition  would  not  furnish  a  new  case 
in  addition  to  that  already  known.  We  shall,  therefore, 
suppose  that  we  have  already  found  such  a  number  for  n, 
that  on*  +  1  is  a  square,  or  that  a/i*  +  1  =  m*  ;  which  be- 
ing laid  down,  we  have  wi*  —  a/**  =  1  ;  and  multiplying  by 
this  equation  the  one  we  had  last,  we  find  also  v*  —  ox*  = 
(g"  -  af^)  X  (m*  -  an'\  =  g*w^  -  a/'w"  —  ag^n'^  ^afW. 
Let  US' now  suppose^  =  gm  +  o/w,  and  we  shall  have 

^'w*  +  2qfgvin  +  «y^n«  -  oj?«  = 

in  which  the  terms  g-m"  and  a^f-w?-  are  destroyed  ;  so  that 
there  remains  aî'^  =  qf*m'^  +  ag^n*  +  2afgmn^  or  x^  = 
f-wr  +  ^fiJiV^n  4-  ^V.  Now,  this  formula  is  evidently  a 
square,  and  gives  x  =ifm  +  gn.  Hence  we  have  obtained 
the  same  formula;  for  x  and  y  as  before. 

87.  It  will  be  necessary  to  render  this  solution  more 
evident,  by  applying  it  to  some  examples. 

Question  1.  To  find  all  the  integer  values  of  or,  that 
will  make  ^iaf^  —  1,  a  square,  or  give  2a^  —  1  =  y*. 

Here,  we  have  â  =  2  and  6  =  —  1  ;  and  a  satisfactory 
case  immediately  presents  itself,  namely,  that  in  which  or =1 
and  y  zz\:  which  gives  usyz=  1  and  ^  z=  1.  Now,  it  is 
farther  required  to  determine  such  a  value  of  w,  as  will  give 
9,nr  -f  1  z=  m^  ;  and  we  see  immediately,  that  this  obtains 
when  n  zz.  2,  and  consequently  m  =  3  ;  so  that  every  case, 
which  is  known  for  J"  and  g,  giving  us  these  new  cases 
a:  =  3/'  -h  ^,  and  y  =  ^  -f  ^  we  derive  from  the  first 
solution,y*=  1  and  g  zz,!^  the  following  new  solutions: 


169 
239,  &c. 


x=/=l    I    5    I    29 

J/  =  g=  1    I    7    I    41 

88.  Question  2.     To  find   all   the  triangular  numbers, 
that  are  at  the  same  time  squares« 

Let  z  be  the  triangular  root  ;  then  -^—    is  the  triangle, 
which  is  to  be  also  a  square  ;  and  if  we  call  x  the  root  of  this 

2^  +  2 

square,  we  have — - —  =ar*:    multiplying  by  8,  wc  have 

4z'    -f  4r  =  Sx"  ;    and  also  adding  1    to    each   side,   we 
have 

fc'  +  fe  +  1  =  (2«  -f  1)'  =  &r'  +  1. 
Hence  the  question  is  to  make  Sx"   +1  become  a  square  ; 


346 


ELEMKKTk 


rAST  II« 


for,  if  we  find  Rr'  -h  I  =  y\  we  shall  have  ^  =s  2»  -h  It 
and,  consequently,  the  triangular  root  required  will  be 

Now,  we  have  a  =  8,  and  6  =  ],  and  a  satistactory  esse 
immediately  occurs,  namely,^  ==  0  and  /f  =  1-  It  is  farther 
evident,  tliat  8ii*  -h  1  =:  m*,  it*  we  make  n  ;=  1 ,  and  m  =:  3; 
therefore  ^  =  ^  -f  ^,  and  ^  =  ^g*  -f  ^\  and  since  • 


X  =     ^   ,  we  shall  have  the  following  solutions  : 


-r  =/=0 


1 

3 


6 

17 


I 


35 
99 

49 


804 
6T7 

288 


1189 
3363 

1681.  ace. 


89.  Question  3.  To  find  all  the  pcnutgooal  numben, 
«lueb  arc  at  the  same  time  squares. 

Sz'—z 
If  the  root  be  z,  the  pentagon  will  be  =  — 5— ,  which 

«e  shall  make  equal  to  t\  so  that  3z-  —  z  =  Sx*  ;  then 

multiplying  by  1^  and  adding  unity,  we  hare 

a6s*  -  1&  +  1  =  (6r  -  1)'  =  24r«  +  1  ;  also,  making 

w  +  1 

84i*  +  1  =y,  we  have^  =  <«  -  1,  and  z  =  --7-- 

Since  a  =  24^  and  b  =  \,  we  know  the  case  J"  =  0,  and 
^  =  1  ;  and  as  we  must  have  i24n*  +  I  =  m*,  we  shall  make 
»  =  1,  which  gives  m  =  5:  s»  that  wc  shall  have  x=iS^4-ç 

s  a  ~o    »  because  we  may  write  ^  =  1  —  6r  :  whence  wc 

find  the  following  results  : 
x=/=0 
y  =/?  =  1 

6 

»-^ 
ors  = 


6 


—  T 

=  0 


1 

10 

99 

5 

4i) 

485 

1 

1 

81 

~  T 

-8 

_  *  *  » 

1 

980 
MOI 


1  4  -r  I 
J 


-  800,  Uc. 


90.  Question  4.  To  find  all  the  inti*ger  M)unn*  num. 
tiers  which,  if  multiplied  hy  7  and  incrcaMxi  hy  1^.  Ux-oinr 
M|uare». 


CHAP.  VI. 


OP  ALGEBRA. 


S47 


It  is  here  required  to  have  7x*  +  2  =  y*,  or  a  =  7,  and 
6  =  2;  and  the  known  case  immediately  occurs,  that  is  to 
say,  j:  =.  1  ;  so  that  x  =y  =  1,  and  y  =  g-  =  3.  If  we 
next  consider  the  equation  In-  +  I  =  m\  we  easily  find 
also  that  w  =  3  and  m  =  8  ;  whence  x  =  Sf-\-  3g*,  and 
y  =  Sg  +  2\f.  We  shall  therefore  have  the  foUowing 
results  : 


r=/=l 


17 
45 


271 
717,  &c. 


91.  Question  5,    To  find  all  the  triangular  numbers,  that 
are  at  the  same  time  pentagons. 

Let  the  root  of  the  triangle  be/7,  and  that  of  the  pentagon 

q  :  then  we  must  have      ^     =  — ^-^,  or  3g'  —  q=zp^  -{.p  ; 

and,  in  endeavouring  to  find  9,  we  shall  first  have 


r  =  iq  + 


q  =  i±^(^  + 


P''+P 


),  or  J  = 


,  and 

1±  v/(lV4-12p+l) 


3     „  ^^  /  -  6 

Consequently,  it  is  required  to  make  12p*  +  12p  +  1  be- 
come a  square,  and  tnat  in  integer  numbers.  Now,  as 
there  is  here  a  middle  term  12p,  we  shall  begin  with  making 

p  =  —^ ,  by  which  means  we  shall  have  1 2p*  =  3x^  —  6a? + 3, 

and  12p  =  Cor  — 6;  consequently,  12/>*-f  12p-|-l  =  3j:-— 2'; 
and  it  is  this  last  quantity,  which  at  present  we  are  required 
to  transform  into  a  square. 

If,  therefore,   we   make  Sx*  —  2  =  y%  we   shall  have 

JT— ■  1  1  ~f"t/ 

p  =  -Ô— >  and  q  =  — ^  ;  so  that  all  depends  on  the  formula 

3x*—  2=y;  and  here  we  have  a=3,  and  J=— 2.  Farther, 
we  have  a  known  case,  x  =y*=  I9  and^  =  g  =  1  ;  lastlj,  ^ 
in  the  equation  m*  =  3fi^  -f  1,  we  have  n  =  1 ,  and  m  =  2  ; 
therefore  we  find  the  following  values  both  for  x  and  y^  and 
for  27  and  q  : 

First,  X  =  ^f-^g,  and  V  =  ^  +  ftT;  then, 
x=  /•=  11      3    1      11         41 


y  =g=  1 

or  g  =  0 


i-y 


5 
1 
1 

T 


19 
5 


41 
71 
20 
12 


I  O 

T     , 

-3  1  -y 


because  wc  have  also  q  =  — ^ 


348  BLKMftlXTst  rAftT  II. 

92.  Hitherto,  when  the  given  famiuhi  contained  m  teooad 
tenn,  we  were  obliged  to  expunge  it,  but  the  method  we 
have  now  given  may  be  applied,  without  taking  away  that 
aecond  term,  in  the  following  manner. 

Let  or'  -t-  &r  -f  e  be  the  given  formula,  which  mutt  be  a 
iquare,  ^,  and  let  us  suppose  tliat  we  abready  know  the  case 

Now,  if  we  subtract  this  equation  from  the  first,  we  shall 
have  fl(jr*  — y^)  +  b{x  -^J")  -=  y  — g^f  which  may  be  ex- 
pressed by  factors  in  this  manner  : 

(•»•-/)  X  (ax  ^af^b)^{y  - g)  X  <j^  +^); 

and  if  we  multiply  both  sidea  by  pq^  we  shall  have 

which  equation  may  be  resolved  into  these  two, 

i^.  y(ajr  -»-  af-^  b)  =  pijf  +  ^)- 

Now,  multiplying  the  first  by  />,  and  the  »ocond  by  7,  ami 
subtracting  the  first  product  Irom  the  second,  wc  ublaiii 

.Hich  giv«  X  =  4^..  if?y^«4ïL,. 

But  tlic  first  equation  is  y(^  —A')  =  p{x  "f)  = 

— T^^ — :. .  *    . /  ^    .;  and,  consonucntlv, 

Uif  —  ir      aq  —  ^*      i^y '  —  /i*  '  '  -  ' 

•^       ^    aq-'^y*      aq^^p^      oq^—p' 
Now,   in  onler  to  remove  the  fraction«,  let  uh  make,   oj» 

before,  --^■-     .  =  m,  and  — p  —  =  n  ;  and  we  stiall  have 
iiq*'~'P^  aq^^p* 

^laq-  ,7*  I» -Hi       , 

m  4-  1  =  — r     j>  <"*"  ~~tf  ~    t  =  1i — i  theretore 

^     />(wi  -H  1  ) 


in  which  the  letters  m  and  n  nuist  be  »uch,  that,  a.s  liefore, 
«I*  =  /ifi*  -»-  1. 

W.  The  formula*  which  we  have  olitaiiKtl  for  x  and  y, 
are  »till  mixed  with  fraction!»,  stmi*  amne  of  their  tenus  con- 
tain the  letter  b  ;  for  which  reason  thev  do  not  answer  our 


CHAP.  VI. 


OF  ALGKBRA. 


349 


purpose.  Bill  if  from  those  values  we  pass  to  the  succeeding 
ones,  we  constantly  obtain  integer  numbers;  which,  indeed, 
we  should  have  obtained  much  more  easily  by  means  of  the. 
numbers  p  and  q  that  were  introduced  at  the  beginning. 
In  fact,  if  we  take  p  and  ç,  so  that  jr  rz  oö*  +  1,  we  shiui 
have  aq^  —  i>*=i  —  1,  and  the  fractions  will  disappear.  For 
then  xzi-'^pq  +  f{aq^  +jp*)  +  é^Sandyz:— g^öc«-fp«)^ 
-f  2qfpq  -h  apq  ;  but  as  in  the  known  case,  aj*  -^  bf'{-  c 
=  g^f  we  find  only  the  second  power  of  g,  it  is  of  no  conse- 
quence what  sign  we  ^ve  that  letter;  if,  therefore^  we 
write  —  g  instead  of  4-^,  we  shall  have  the  formulae 

X  =  2gpq  -{-/{aq^  +  />*)     -f  bq\  and 
y  =  ^(^9'^  +    />*)     +2a/5?9  +  ftp?, 

and   we  shall    thus   be    certain,   at   the  same  time,   that 

Let  it  be  required,  as  an  example,  to  find  the  hexagonal 
numbers  that  are  also  squares. 

We  must  have  2x*  —  or  =  y^,  or  a  =  2,  6  ==  —  1,  and 
c  =  0,  and  the  known  case  will  evidently  be  x  =y  =  1,  and 

2/  =  ^  =  1-. 

Farther,  in  order  that  we  may  have  p*^  =  2y^  4-  1,  we 

must  have  9  =  ^^  and  /i  =  3  ;  so  that  we  shall  have 
X  =  12or  -f  Y^f—  4,  and  y  =  IT^  +  24/^—  6  ;  whence  re- 
sult the  followmg  values  : 


ar=/=  1 

y  =  s:  =  1 


25 

35 


841 
1189,  &c. 


94.  Let  us  also  consider  our  first  formula,  in  which  the 
second  term  was  wanting,  and  examine  the  cases  which  make 
the  formula  ax^  -f  ô  a  square  in  integer  numbers. 

Let  ax'^  ^  b  =  y^^  and  it  will  be  required  to  fulfil  two 
conditions  : 

1.  We  must  know  a  case  in  which  this  equation  exists; 
and  we  shall  suppose  that  case  to  be  expressea  by  the  equa- 
tion qf^  -f  Ô  =  g*. 

2.  We  must  know  such  values  of  m  and  n,  that 
m*  =  an*  -f  1  ;  the  method  of  finding  which  will  be  taught 
in  the  next  chapter. 

From  that  results  a  new  case,  namely,  x  =^  ng  +  mj\ 
and  y  =  mg  -h  anf\  this,  also,  will  lead  us  to  other  similar 
cases,  which  we  shall  represent  in  the  following  manner  : 


A 
P 


in  which  A = 
and        P 


.=ng-fm/]B=np  + 

=:Wg  +  flw/]Q=sWP  + 


B 

a 

niA 

ariK 


c 

R 


D 

s 


E 

T,  &C. 


CsflQ  -fmB 

Rz=mQ-f  a;iB 


D=fiR  +mc 

S=rmR  +  (f|tC,&C. 


SM)  EUMEKT«  rART  IL 

and  tlieite  two  scries  of  numbers  may  be  easily  oontinucd  to 
any  length. 

95.  It  will  be  observed,  however,  that  here  we  can- 
not continue  the  upper  scries  for  x,  witiK>ut  having  the 
under  one  in  view;  but  it  is  easy  to  remove  this  inooo- 
venience,  and  to  give  a  rule,  not  only  for  finding  the  upper 
series,  without  knowing  the  other>  but  also  for  determiniDg 
the  latter  without  the  formen 

The  numbers  which  may  be  substituted  for  x  succeed 
each  other  in  a  certain  progression,  such  that  each  term  (as, 
fcr  ex«nple.  .),  «ay  ETSSmSed  by  th.  two  {»««dins 
terms  c  and  d,  without  having  recourse  to  the  terms  of  the 
second  series  a  and  s.     In  fact,  since  k  =  ns  4-  ^d  = 

n(ifiR  -h  anc)  +  fii(ftE  +  *nc)  = 

Smna  +  an*c  +  m*c,  and  na  =  d  —  mc, 

we  therefore  find 

E  =  SiiiD  —  mV  +  an*c,  or 

E  =  Sjhd  —  (m-  —  «»•)<:  ;  or  lastly, 

K  =  2/iiD  —  c,  because  m*  =  an^  +  K 

and  m*  *  an}  =  1  ;  from  which  it  is  evident,  how  each  term 
b  detennined  by  the  two  which  precede  it. 

It  is  the  same  with  respect  to  the  second  series  ;  for,  since 
T  =£  ms  -f  ann,  and  d  =  na  4-  «nc,  we  have 
T  =  «I«  +  an'B  4-  «mwc.  Farther,  s  =  i/ir  4-  aw<",  S4> 
that  mir,  =  J  —  ma  ;  and  if  we  subiititute  this  value  of  a/i« , 
we  have  t  =  Sms  —  r,  which  pnives  ihar  the  mtiwuI  pn»- 
gression  follows  the  same  law,  or  the  same  rule,  us  the  first. 

Let  it  be  required,  as  an  example,  to  find  all  tlie  integer 
numlK*rs,  x,  such,  that  2jr'  —  1  =  ^'. 

We  »hall  first  have /*=  1,  and  ^=  1 .  Then  m  ''  =  2;r  -f- 1 , 
if  fi  =2,  and  w  =  3  ;  therefore,  ^incc  A  ~  w/j  +  nif  =  5, 
the  firnt  two  terms  will  he  1  and  5  ;  and  all  the  succei-tling 
one?  will  bi*  found  by  tlie  formula  E  =-  6d  —  r  :  that  is  to 
say,  each  term  taken  six  times  and  diininishetl  liy  the  pre- 
adding  term,  gives  the  next.  So  that  the  numbers  x  which 
we  riHjuire,  will  form  tlie  following  series  : 

This  prtigresMon  we  may  continue  to  any  length  ;  and  if 
we  choose  to  admit  fractkmal  tenus  al«o,  wr  might  ÜihI  an 
infinite  numYK*r  of  them  by  the  method  which  has  l)ecn 
already  explained  ^. 

*  Svc  the  ap|>eniLx  to  thi»  eliaptcr  ut  Art.  7.  of  tiK-  aitcliiioii» 
by  Dc  ia  Grange. 


(HAP.  VII.  OF  ALGEBBA.  351 


CHAP.  VII. 

Of  a  particular  Method,  by  which  the  Formula  an»  -f  1 

becomes  a  Square  in  Integers. 

96.  That  which  has  been  tauffht  in  the  last  chapter,  can- 
not be  completely  performed,  unless  we  are  able  to  assign  for 
any  number  a,  a  number  n,  such,  that  an'  +  I  may  become 
a  square;  or  diat  we  may  have  m^  =  an'  -f  1. 

This  equation  would  oe  easy  to  resolve,  if  we  were  satis- 
fied with  fractional  numbers,  ânce  we  should  have  only  to 

np 
make  rw  =  1  H ;    for,   by  this  supposition,   we  have 

m^  =  I  -{■ 1 — ~-  =  an*  +  1  ;  in  which  equation,  we 

q  q 

may  expunge  1  from  both  sides,  and  divide  the  other  terms 
by  n  :  then  multiplying  hy  q%  we  obtain  2pq+np'  =^anq'  ; 

and  this  equation,  giving  n  =  — ^^ — j,  would  furnish  an 

infinite  number  of  values  for  n  :  but  as  n  must  be  an  integer 
number,  this  method  will  be  of  no  use,  and  therefore  very 
different  means  must  be  employed  in  order  to  accomplish 
our  object. 

97.  We  must  begin  with  observing,  that  if  we  wished 
to  have  an^  -h  1  a  square,  in  integer  numbers,  (whatever  be 
the  value  of  a),  the  thing  required  would  not  be  possible. 

For,  in  the  first  place,  it  is  necessary  to  exclude  all  the 
cases,  in  which  a  would  be  negative  ;  next,  we  must  exclude 
those  also,  in  which  a  would  be  itself  a  square  ;  because 
then  an'  would  be  a  square,  and  no  sqnare  can  become  a 
square,  in  integer  numbers,  by  being  increased  by  unity.  We 
are  obhged,  therefore,  to  restrict  our  formula  to  the  ccm- 
dition,  that  a  be  neitlier  negative,  nor  a  square;  but  when* 
ever  a  is  a  positive  number,  without  being  a  square,  it  is 
possible  to  assign  such  an  integer  value  of  n,  that  an'  +  1 
may  become  a  square  :  and  when  one  such  value  has  been 
found,  it  will  be  easy  to  deduce  from  it  an  infinite  number 
of  others,  as  was  taught  in  the  last  chapter  :  but  for  our 
purpose  it  is  sufficient  to  know  a  single  one,  even  the  least  ; 


sus  ELKMF.NTA  FART  II. 

and  this,  Pcll,  an  English  writer,  has  taught  us  to  find  liv 
an  ingenious  method,  whieh  we  riiall  here  explain. 

98.  Thi.4  method  is  not  sueh  as  may  be  employed  ge- 
nerally, for  any  number  a  whatever  ;  it  is  applicable  only  to 
each  particular  case. 

We  sliall  therefore  begin  with  the  easiest  cases,  and  shall 
first  seek  such  a  value  of  n,  that  2n'  +1  may  be  a  square, 
or  that  \^(2fi'  -f  1)  may  become  rational. 

We  immediately  see  that  this  square  root  becomes  greater 
than  n,  and  less  than  2n,  If,  therefore,  we  express  this  niot 
hy  n  4>  p»  it  b  obvious  that  p  must  be  less  than  n  ;  and  we 
snail  have  %^(2fi'  +  1)  =  n  +  p;  then,  by  squaring, 
8n'  +  1  =:  fi'  +  änp  +  p*  ;  therefore 

n'  =  ^p  +p'—  1,  andn  =  />-f  ^/(^'  -  1). 

The  whole  is  reduced,  therefore,  to  the  condition  of  Sp'  ^  1 
being  a  square;  now,  this  is  the  case  ifp  =  1,  which  gives 
ft  =  îi,  and  x^{2n'  +  1)  =  ÎJ. 

If  this  case  had  not  been  immediately  obvious,  we  shoultl 
have  gone  farther;  and  nnce  \^(2p*  —  1)  7  p*»  and,  coii- 
iequentlv«  n  7  9p,  wc  should  have  made  n  =  S/>  4  7  ;  and 
iJiould  thus  have  had 

%>  +  9  =  P  +\^(2p'  -  1),  orp  +  9  =  ^'(2/;-  -  1), 
and,  Mjuaring, /;'  -♦-  Spy  -f-  y'  =  2yi'  —  1,  whence 

which  would  have  given  y)  =  9  +  \^{^  -f  1);  so  that  it 
would  have  lieen  necessary  to  have  ^q'  -f  la  Mjunre;  and 
as  thiî*  is  the  case,  if  we  make  q  =  0,  we  shall  have  yi  =  I, 
and  ri  =  2,  as  before.  This  example  is  sufiicicut  to  give  an 
idea  of  the  method  ;  but  it  will  be  rendereil  nuire  cK-ar  and 
distinct  from  what  follows. 

9iK  iA*i  a  =  .i,  that  is  to  say,  lot  it  l)e  riHfuin^d  to  trans- 
form  the  formula  5fa'  -f-  1  into  a  s(|unn*.  Here  we  shall 
make   x'(î5fi'  4-  1)  =  n  -»-/i,  which  givi^s 

3fi-  +  1  =  w     i   *Jnp  4-  p\  and  tin'  =-  ^Inp  -h  y;    —  I  , 

wnemx»  we  obtam  n  = .     >ow,   Mnce 

^(Sp*  —  2)  exceeds  p^  and,  consetjuently,  tt   iü   greutiT 


*  Ulis  sign,  /,  pluced  hetwcen  two  tjuantilie»,  »ipnihtit  that 
the  former  in  greater  than  the  latter;  aiiicl  m  hen  the  lUiguUr 
point  III  tiinuMl  the  contrary  wn\.  ti^  .-  ,  it  Mgiiilii*^  that  ihi* 
former  i»  Ic»»  ttuin  the  latter. 


CHAP.  VII.  OF  ALGEBRA.  358 

than  -^,  or  than  /?,  let  us  suppose  n  =  p  -^  q^  and  we 

shall  have 

^  +  ^q=p  +  V(äp'  -2),  or 
p  +  »j=  ^{&p'  -2); 

then,   by  squaring  p^+  4pç  +4^'  =  3p'  —  2;    so  that 

gp*  =  4fpq  +  4j'  +  2,  or  p"=:  2pq  +  2j"  +  1,  and 
p    =    q  +^(3ç-+l). 

Now,  this  formula  being  similar  to  the  one  proposed,  we 
may  make  ç  =  0,  and  shall  thus  obtain  p  zzl^  and  n  =  1  ; 
whence  y/{3n'  +  1)  =  2. 

100.  Let  a  =  5,  that  we  may  have  to  make  a  sauare  of 
the  formula  071"+  1,  the  root  of  which  is  greater  tnan  8n. 
We  shall  therefore  suppose 

V{5n'+  1)  =  2n  +  p,  or  5n'+ 1  =  4n'+  4fi/^  -f  p»  ; 

whence  we  obtain 

n'  =  énp  +p'  -  1,  andn  =  2p  +v'(5p"—  1). 

Now,  v/(5p'  —  1)  7  2p  ;  whence  it  follows  that  ny  4p;  for 
which  reason,  we  shall  make  n  =  4p  +  q,  which  gives 
2p  +  9z=v/(5p'  — 1),  or4p»+4py  +  y'  =  op'  -  1,  and 
p'  =  ^;y  4-  y^ -|_  1  ;  so  that p  =  âg  +  V(5?'  +  1)  ;  and  as 
9  =  0  satisfies  the  terms  of  this  equadon,  we  shall  have 
p  =  1,  and  n  =  4;  therefore  y/{5n''\-  1)  =  9. 

101.  Let  us  now  suppose  a  =  6,  that  we  may  have  to 
consider  the  formula  ü9i'-|-  1»  whose  root  is  likewise  con- 
tained between  ^n  and  Sn.  We  shall,  therefore,  make 
>v/(6n'  -f  1)  =  2n  4"  P>  and  shall  have 

6n*+l  =  4n'+4iip+p%or2/i'=:  4np'\'p'-  1; 

A  .u                     ^  A/(6p--2)               2p+^/(6p'-2) 
and,  thence,  n  zzp  -{ ^ ,  orn  = -^^ ; 

so  that  n  7  2p. 

If,  therefoi:e,  we  make  n  =  2p  +  y,  we  shall  have 

+  «y  =  2|p  4-  V(6p'-  2),  or 

the  squares  of  which  are  4p'+  8pj  -f-  4j'  =  6p*  —  2  ;  so 
that  2p'  =:  SpflT  +  4y'  +  2,  and  p"  =  4pj  +  2jr'  -h  1.  Lastly^ 
p  =  25^  +  x/(oq*  +  1).  Now,  this  formula  resembling  the 
first,  we  have  g  =  0;  wherefore  p  =  1,  n  :r  2,  attd 
v^(6n'+  1)  =  Ô. 

102.  Let  us  proceed  farther,  and  take  a  =:  7,  ad 
7n*+  1  =  m'  ;  here  we  see  that  m  7  On;  let  us  therefore 
make  m  =  2n  -|-  p,  and  we  shall  have 

A  A 


4p 
2d 


S54  SLBIIXHTS  PABT  IL 

7if+l  s=4fi'+  4np4-p%or3fi'  =  4iip  +  P*  -  1? 
which  gives  »  =  -^ ^r- .  At  present,  since  n  7  4P> 

and,  consequently,  greater  than  p,  let  us  make  n  :=  p  +  7, 
and  we  shall  have  p  +  So  =  v^  (7p*  -  S)  ;  then,  squaring 
both  sides,  p^  +  6p9  +  89^  s^  7p'  -  3,  so  that 
^B^  +  Og^  +  S,  or  «p*  =  2pg  +  3y*  +  l;  whence 

we  get  p  s  2 1^ .    Now,  we  have  here  py-^-; 

and,  consequently,  pjq;  so  that  making  p  ^s  f  4^  r, 
diall  have  9  +  £r  =  \/(79^  -f  2)  ;  the  squares  of  whidi 
f*  +  4çr  +  4r*  =  7?»  +  «  ;  then  6y*  =  4yr  +  ir*  -  2, 

or  8y*  =  «?r  +  2r*  -  1  ;  and,  Usuy,ç=  I±.îlÇ!i:?). 

Since  now  f^r,  let  us  suppose  9  ==  r  +  #,  and  we  shall 
have 

^  -  «r   +  8#  =  ^^(7^^  —  3)  ;  then 

^^  4r*  +  12r#  +  9#*  =  7r»  -  3,  or 

/  8r*  =  12r*  +  9**  +3,  or 

^  r'  s    4rf  +  3#^  +  1,  and 

/  r  =    2#    +  ^(7#*  4-  1). 

Now,  this  formula  is  like  the  first  ;  so  that  making  #  =;  O, 
we   shall   obtain   r=:l,  9=1,   p=^   and   n  =  3,    or 

m  =a 

But   this  calculation   may  be  considerably  abridged  in 
the  following  uiaimer,  which  may  be  adopted  also  in  other 


Since  7»'  -|-  1  =  m',  it  follows  that  m  z  3«. 

If,  tlierefore,  we  8un|)u8e  m  s  3n  —  p,  w  e  !»hall  have 

7n*  +  1  =  9w*  -  6np  +  pS  or  t!ii*  =  (wp  -  p*  +  1  ; 

whence  we  otitain  n  =  -^ — — : —  ;  so  tlial  n^Sp;  for 

this  n^OMUi  we  sliall  write  n  =  3p  -  2y  ;  and,  sc]uanng,  we 
shall  have  {)p*  -  I2p7  f-  4^*  =  7p*  +  2  ;  or 

2p»  =  12/>9  —  49*  +  2,  and  p*  =  «/»V  -  2//»  +  1, 

whenci*  resultji  p  =  3y+V(79*4"  !>•  Hen»,  we  can  at 
oncx*  make  9  =  0,  which  give>  p  =  I,  ri  =  J,  and  m  =  8, 
as  l)efon*. 

IUI.  Lot  fl  =  K,   ft>  that  8«*  -f  1  =  »"*.  n»*l  •"  ^  *>"• 
Here,  we  must  make  tn  1^  3n  — >  p,  and  hliali  have 

811*  +  1  =  1)m*  ~  Cip  +  p\  or  fi*  =  Gnp  —  p»  +  1  ; 

whenoc  n  s  3p  4.^(1^^  +  IK  «»^  (1^>*  formula  being  aU 


CHAP.  VIT.  OF  ALO£BEA.  966 

ready  similar  to  the  one  proposed,  we  may  make  p  =  0, 
which  gives  n  =  1,  and  m  =  à. 

104.  We  may  proceed,  in  the  same  manner,  for  every 
other  number,  a,  provided  it  be  positive  and  not  a  square, 
and  we  shall  always  be  led,  at  last,  to  a  radical  quantity, 
such  as  ^/(at*  -f  1),  similar  to  the  first,  or  ^ven  formula» 
and  then  we  have  only  to  suppose  ^  =  0;  for  the  irra- 
tionality will  disappear,  and  by  tracing  back  the  steps,  wc 
shall  necessarily  find  such  a  value  of  n,  as  will  make  an''  -f  1 
a  square. 

Sometimes  we  quickly  obtain  our  end;  but,  freauently 
also,  we  are  obliged  to  go  through  a  great  number  of 
operations.  This  depends  on  the  nature  of  the  number 
a;  but  we  have  no  principles,  by  which  we  can  foresee 
the  number  of  operations  tnat  it  will  be  necessary  to  per- 
form. The  process  is  not  very  long  for  numbers  oelow  13, 
but  when  a  =  13,  the  calculation  becomes  much  more 
prolix  ;  and,  for  this  reason,  it  will  be  proper  here  to  resolve 
that  case. 

105.  Let  therefore  a  =  13,  and  let  it  be  required  to 
find  l3n*  +  1  =  m*.  Here,  as  w*  7  9w*,  and,  consequently, 
771  7  3»,  let  us  suppose  m  =  3n  -4-  p;  we  shall  then  have 
13n*  +  1  =  9n*  +  Gnp  +  p\  or  4fi*  =  6np  +  p»  -  1,  and 

3p+^/(13p*-4)      ^.  ^    ^ 
n  =  -J ,  which  shews  that  n  7  |^p,  and  there- 
fore much  greater  than  p.     If,  therefore,  wemaken=xp+y, 
wc  shall  have  p+4q=^  v(13p*— 4)  ;  and,  taking  the  squares, 

13p*  —  4  =  p*  +  8py  +  16^*  ; 
so  that  I2p\  =  8pq  +  16g*  +  4,  or  3p*  =  Äpg  +  4^*  +  1, 

and  p  =  2 .-2 .    Here,  P  7^-0- ,  or  p  7  j;  we 

shall  proceed,  therefore,  by  making  p  =:  q  -*-  r,  and  shall 
thus  obtain  2q  +  Sr  =  VilSq"^  +  3)  ;  then 

ISq*  +  3  =  V  +  1%  +  9r\  or 
9g*  =  I2qr  -f  9r»  -  S,  or 
39*  =    4^  +  3r*  —  1  ; 

...      .                2r+^(13r»-3) 
wnicii  gives  q  =z 0 . 

2r+3r 
Again,  since  q  7  — 0 — 9   or  q  7  r^   yre  shall   make 

y  =  ?•  +  5,  and  we  shall  thus  have  r  +  3*  =v^(18r*  —  S); 
or  I3r*  -  3  =  r*  +  6rtf  +  9^*,  or  12r*  =  6r5  +  9«*  +  3,  or 
4r*  =  ^rs  +  3^*  +  1  ;  whence  we  obtain 

A  a2 


S56  SLIM  CUTS  FAST  lU 

r  = £ .    But  here  r  7  — j^  or  r  7  «  ;  whcie- 

fore  let  r  s  «  4.  /,  and  wc  shall  have  Ss  +  4i:=:  v^(13«*+  4), 

and  13#^  +  4  s  g#'  +  24f<  +  1&'  ; 
»  that  4t*  s  24f<  +  16^»  ^  4v  and  «^  s  6(#  +  4#'  ---  1  ; 
therefore  «  s  3l  +  v'llS^^  -  1).    Here  we  have 

we  must  therefore  make  m  =s  6i  +  u;  whence 

81  +  ti  s  ^(ISi^  —  1),  and    ld<^  -  1  s  9^'  +  &m  +  «»; 

then  4^  s  &M  ^-  tf^  +  1  ;  and,  bstly, 

^      Stt  +  v'aSw»  +  4)       ^      61*       , 

f  = ^7 ,or<7  -T-,and  ju. 

It,  therefore,  we  make  f  =  ti  +  v,  we  shall  have 

tf  +  4r  =  ^/(lSH^+  4),  and  13«*+  4  =  •»•  +  811Ü  +  16c*  ; 

therefore  1«m*  =  Stfv  +  Ifo*  -  4,  or  3ti»=2ttr+4p*  —  1  ; 

lastly,  M  = J ,  or  n  7  -of  or  n  7  r. 

Let  us,  therefore,  make  ussv  -k-  x,  and  wc  sliall  have 

Sr   +  &r  =  ^/(I3r*  -  8),  and 
ISp»  —  8    =  4ü»  +  lÄrx  +  ftr*;  or 
9r*  =  12rx  +  gir*  -f  3,  or  Sv'  s  évx  +  är^"  +  1,  and 

ar+  ^/(13x»  +  8) 
V  Ä ^ ;  so  that  r  7  ^x,  and  7  x. 

Let  us  now  suppose  v  ^  x  +  y^  and  wc  sliall  liavc 

X    +  3y  =  v/(iar*  +  3),  and 
13ür*  +  3    =  x'  +  Ory  +  9y%  or 
lÄr»  =  Ory  +  9^*  -  3,  and 
4i«  =  iry  -h  3y»  —  1  ;  whence 

yW(13y^4) 

and,   aNisoquentlv,  x  7  y*      ^^'c  sliall,    thcrefons    make 
r  =  y  +  r,  which  give« 

3y   +  4::=:^/|13y^-4K  and 

13y*  -  4   =  V  +  2*-y  +  ^G=^  ««^ 
V  =  î^^'.y  +  16r^  +  4;  therefore 
y-  =    (lys  +    4::-  -r  1,  and 
y  =      3i  +  ,'(13s*+l). 

This  formula  lieing  at  length  similar  to  tlic  fir^t,  wc  may 
take  3  =  0,  and  go  Mck  as  folk>w«  : 


CHAP.  VIU  OF   ALGEBRA.  867 


z  =  0, 

J^  =  l, 

x^y  ^-z  =  1, 

t;  =  j:  +  y  =  2, 


?  =  r  +  *  =  71, 
/!=  y  +  r=109, 
w  =  /?  +  g  =  180, 
HI  =  8n  +  ^  =  649. 


w  =  »  +  j:  =    3, 
^   =  f «  4-  Z7  =    5, 

*  =ft +  11  =  33, 
r  =  *+  ^  =  38, 

So  that  180  b  the  least  number,  after  0,  whidi  we  can 
substitute  for  n,  in  order  that  13n'  +  1  may  become  a 
square. 

106.  This  example  sufficiently  shews  how  prolix  these 
calculations  may  be  in  particular  cases  ;  and  when  the  num- 
bers in  question  are  greater,  we  are  often  obliged  to  go 
through  ten  times  as  many  operations  as  we  had  to  perform 
for  the  number  13. 

As  we  cannot  foresee  the  numbers  that  will  require  such 
tedious  calculations,  we  may  with  propriety  avail  ourselves 
of  the  trouble  which  others  have  taken  ;  and^  for  this  pur- 
pose, a  Table  is  subjoined  to  the  present  chapter,  in  which 
the  values  of  m  and  n  are  calculated  for  all  numbers,  a,  be- 
tween â  and  100  ;  so  that  in  the  cases  which  present  them- 
selves, we  may  take  from  it  the  values  of  m  and  n,  which 
answer  to  the  pven  number  a. 

107.  It  is  proper,  however,  to  remark,  that,  for  certain 
numbers,  the  letters  m  and  n  may  be  determined  generally  ; 
this  is  the  case  when  a  is  greater,  or  less  than  a  square,  oy 
1  or  2  ;  it  will  be  proper,  therefore,  to  enter  into  a  particular 
analysis  of  these  cases. 

108.  In  order  to  this,  let  a  =  e*  -^  2  ;  and  ânce  we  must 
have  (f  —  2)w2  -|- 1  =  m*,  it  is  clear  that  mLen\  therefore 
we  shall  make  m  =  m  —  j:?,  from  which  we  have 

(e*  -  2)n*  +  1  =  ^«n*  -  9mp  +;?-,  or 
2;»2  =  ^^  -  2,«  ^  1  ;  therefore 

n  = £^ — Î ;  and  it  is  evident  that  if  wc 

At 

y 

makcj9  zi  1,  this  quantity  becomes  rational,  and  we  have 
n  =  e,  and  m  =  ^  —  1. 

For  example,  let  a  :r  £3,  so  that  e  :^  5;  we  shall  then 
have  23n^  +  1  =  ^\  if  n  =  5,  and  m  =  24.  •  The  reasoa 
of  which  is  evident  from  another  consideration  ;  for  if,  in 
the  case  of  a  :=  ^^  —  2,  we  make  n  zz  Cf  we  shall  have 
an''\-  1  =  ^  —  2e'  4-  1  ;  which  is  the  square  of  ^'  —  1. 

109.  Let  a  =  ^'  —  1,  or  less  than  a  square  by  unity. 
First,  we  must  have  («*  —  l)n*  +  1  =  m*  ;  then,  oecause^ 
as  before,  m  L  en,  we  shall  make  tti  n  ^n  —  p  ;  and  this 
being  done,  we  have 

(^'-l)«'^-l=«'M'— 2wy+;i%orn'=s2«çp-p*+l; 


8S8  SLSMSMTS  FABT  11. 

whercfiirc n=:g>  +  -s/C^'j^"— p*+  1).  Now,  the  irrationality 
diasppcarccl  by  suppoting  p  s  1  ;  so  that  n  =  2r,  aocl 
m  ^He'  —  1.  This  also  is  evident  ;  for,  since  a  :=  r'  —  1, 
and  n  =  8r,  we  find 

or  equal  to  the  Muare  of  &'  —  1.  For  example,  let  a=5H, 
or  tf  s  5,  we  shall  bave  n  s  10,  and 

24»-+  1  =2401  =(49)'*. 

110.  Lei  us  now  suppose  a  s  r'  +  1,  or  n  greater  tlian 
a  square  by  unity.     Here  we  must  have 

(e'  4  l)n'  +  1  =  m», 

and  m  will  evidently  be  greater  than  rn.  Let  us,  thercfbrcy 
write  m  =  r Ji  -f  p»  and  we  shall  liave 

(r*+  l)n'+l=  e'n'  +  Srnp-j-p',  orn»:r  2mp+p'—  I; 

whence  n  =  ^  +  ^{^'Pr  +  p'  —  1).  Now,  we  may  make 
p  =  1,  and  shall  then  have  n=:2t;  therefore  m'  =  2r'  4*  1  ; 
wUch  is  what  ought  to  be  the  result  fnim  the  consideration, 
that  a  =  r*  -h  I9  ^nd  n  =  & ,  which  gives 
«fi'4  1  =4<^  4.  4r'  +  1,  the  square  of  Sr'  f  1.  Fores- 
ample,  let  a  =  17,  so  that  r  =  4^  and  we  shall  have 
17ii'  -f  1  =  m'  ;  by  making  «  =  8,  and  m  =  8î5. 

111.  lastly,  let  a  =  r'  +  ^9  or  ga*ater  than  a  N)uare  by 
2»  Here,  \ic  have  {e'  -f  ^)n'  -f  1  =iir,  and,  as  licfore« 
m  7  ^n  ;  therefore  we  shall  suppose  m  =  <7t  +  p,  and  sJiall 
thus  have 

t'n'  +  2ii'  +  1  =  c'n'  +  2i7ip  -h  />',  or 
îin'  =  &^n  +  p'  —  1»  which  gives 

'^P^  %'(r'p'  +  2/)'-2) 


/I  = 


0 


Tx*t  p  =s  1,  we  shall  find  n  =  r,  and  m  =^  <*'  +  1  :  And,  in 
fact,  ^nce  «  =  r  '  +îi,  and  «  =  r,  we  have  an*  + 1  -  iH  ^•'  +  I  » 
which  is  the  «quart»  of  r"  +  1. 

F(»r  examplis  lot  a  =  II,  so  that  t-  --  *\\  we  sliall  fmd 
11«'  -f  1  =  m*,  by  making  n  =  îi,  ami  m  =  10.     If  we 

*  In  tili»  caiiC,  likcwiiM^  tlie  radical  hi^:i  \;t:)i^)ir*'.  ifiie  inaLo 
p  s  0  :  and  thi»  minposition  inronU>tulil\  u'i\  i  h  x\\v  lra«t  |Misf iliK* 
numbcn»  I'or  m  and  n,  namf*ly.  ■  =  I.  and  m  =  r  .  that  i««  to  >«iy, 
il>  =  .),  iJie  rorintila  *il^ft'4-  1  bvconuit  a  M]ii4ire  by  nuikin^ 
M  2  1  ,  and  the  root  uf  thii  i4|uare  «ill  be  m  -ss  <*  s  5.     F.  T. 


CHAP.  VU.  PF  AltGEBEA.  SSS 

supposed  a  =  83,  we  should  have  £  =  9,  and 

83n' +  1  =  m%  where  n  =  9,  and  I»  =  82*. 

« 
*  Our  author  might  have  added  here  another  very  obvious 

case,  which  is  when  a  is  of  the  form  e'  zt  — e  ;  for  then  by  mak- 

c  ^ 

ing  n  x:  c,  our  formula  an'  -f  1,  becomes  e*c*  ±  2ce  +  I  =s 
{ec  ±  \)\  I  was  led  to  the  consideration  of  the  above  form, 
from  having  observed  that  the  square  roots  of  all  numbers  in- 
cluded in  this  formula  are  readily  obtained  by  the  method  of 
continued  fractions,  the  quotient  figures,  from  which  the  fractions 
are  derived^  following  a  certain  determined  law,  of  two  terms, 
readily  observed,  and  that  whenever  this  is  the  case,  the  method 
which  is  given  above  is  also  applied  with  great  facility.  And  as 
a  great  many  numbers  are  included  in  the  above  form,  I  have 
been  induced  to  place  it  here,  as  a  means  of  abridging  the 
operations  in  those  particular  cases.  , 

The  reader  is  indebted  to  Mr.  P.  Barlow  of  the  Royal  Aca- 
demy, Woolwich,  for  the  above  note  -,  and  ako  for  a  rew  more 
in  this  Second  Part,  which  arc  distinguished  by  the  signature^  B. 


800 


BUMJINTS 


PAET  II. 


Tablb«  ihewing  for  eadi  value  of  a  the  least  numbers 
that  will  give  «•  «  mi*  +  1»;  or  that  will  render 
a  square. 


Manda. 


2 
3 


5 
6 

7 
8 


10 
11 
12 
18 
14 
15 


17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
28 
24 


26 

27 

28 

29 
30 
81 
82 
38 
81. 
35 


87 
88 

89 
40 
41 
42 
48 
41 
4'> 
Ui 
47 
4M_ 

50 
51 
52 


2 
1 


4 
2 
S 
1 


6 

8 

2 

180 

4 
1 


8 

4 

39 

2 

12 

42 

5 

1 


10 

5 

2* 

1820 
2 

278 
8 
4 
6 
1 


3 
2 


9 
5 
8 
3 


19 
10 

7 

649 

15 

4 


33 

17 

170 

9 

55 

197 

24 

5 


51 

26 

127 

9801 

11 
1520 

"I 

28   ! 
S5   \ 

6 


12 

78 

6 

87 

4 

25 

3 

19 

320 

2049 

2 

18 

581 

8482 

80 

199 

2^ 

161 

8.M< 

24885 

7 

48 

1 

•* 
1 

U 

99 

7 

50 

90 

649 

53 
54 
55 
56 
57 
58 
59 
60 
61 
62 
63 


9100 

66 

12 

2 

20 

2574 

69 

4 

226158980 

8 

1 


65 
66 
67 
68 
69 
70 
71 
72 
73 
74 
75 
76 

mmtm 

i  i 

78 
79 
80 

82 
88 

84; 

H5  , 

86  ! 

87  ' 
88 
89 
90 

91 

98 

9^  ! 
95  ' 
9e) 

97  ' 
98 

99 


16 

8 

5967 

4 

986 

30 

418 

2 

267000 

480 

3 

mm) 

H) 

f) 

9 

1 


9 

6 

8()9î« 

1122 

8 

'J  I 

53(¥)() 
<> 

I6.-> 

I*J() 

V^O 

221  «il 

4 

5 

68778.Î2 

10 

1 


66249 

485 

89 

15 

151 

19603 

530 

31 

1766319049 

63 

8 


18     I 


129 

65 

48842 

^33 

i  il 5 

251 

3480 

17 

2281249 

8699 

26 

577i*l* 

8'>1 

5^ 

yo 


9     I 


168 

82 

55 

2sr>7(i9 

10M)5 

2S 

197 

19 

1.>7I 

ll.'l 

12l.-,l 

21  I82<r> 

89 

4l> 

(Î2809638 

10 


•  iSee  Article  8  of  the 


by  IK*  la  Ciriuiv^c 


CHAP.  YIII.  OF  ALGKBEA.  S61 


CHAP.   VIII. 

Ofihe  Method  of  rendering  Üu  Irrational  Formula, 
V(o  +  &r  +  car*  +  dr*)  Rational. 

lis.  We  shall  now  proceed  to  a  formula,  in  which  x  rises 
to  the  third  power  ;  after  which  we  shall  consider  also  the 
fourth  power  of  x,  although  these  two  cases  are  treated  in 
tlie  same  manner. 

Let  it  be  required,  therefore,  to  transform  into  a  square 
the  formula  a  -f  &7  +  ror^  +  da^j  and  to  find  proper  values 
of  X  for  this  purpose,  expressed  in  rational  numbers.  As 
this  investigation  is  attended  with  much  greater  difficulties 
than  any  of  the  preceding  cases,  more  artmce  is  requiûte  to 
find  even  fractional  values  of  x  ;  and  with  such  we  must  be 
satisfied,  without  pretending  to  find  values  in  integer  num- 
bers. 

It  must  here  be  previously  remarked  also,  that  a  general 
solution  cannot  be  given,  as  in  the  preceding  cases;  and 
that,  instead  of  the  number  here  employed  fading  to  an 
infinite  number  of  solutions,  each  operation  will  exhu)it  but 
one  value  of  x, 

113.  As  in  considering  the  formula  a  -f  to  +  car*,  we 
observed  an  infinite  number  of  cases,  in  which  the  solution 
becomes  altogether  impossible,  we  mav  readily  imagine  that 
this  will  be  much  oftener  the  case  with  respect  to  the  present 
formula,  which,  besides,  constantly  requires  that  we  already 
know,  or  have  found,  a  solution.  So  that  here  we  can  only 
give  rules  for  those  cases,  in  which  we  set  out  from  one 
known  solution,  in  order  to  find  a  new  one  ;  by  means  of 
which,  we  may  then  find  a  third,  and  proceed,  succesttveiy 
in  the  same  manner,  to  others. 

It  does  not,  however,  always  happen,  that,  bv  means  of  a 
known  solution,  we  can  find  another;  on  tne  contraiTf 
there  are  many  cases,  in  which  only  one  solution  can  taae 
place  ;  and  this  circumstance  is  the  more  remarkable,  as  ill 
the  analyses  which  we  have  before  made,  a  single  solutkm 
led  to  an  infinite  number  of  other  new  ones. 

114.  We  just  now  observed,  that  in  order  to  render  the 
transformation  of  the  formula,  a  -f  6x  -f  en^  -h  dx^j  into  a 
square,  a  case  must  be  presupposed,  in  which  that  solutioD  is 
possible.    Now,  such  a  case  is  clearly  pmeiired,  when  the 


SM  ELEMENTS  PAST  IL 

fini  term  is  itself  a  square  already,  and  the  formula  may  be 
expressed  thus,  ^  -\-  bx  +cx*  +  dx^  ;  for  it  evidently  be- 
conies  a  sauare,  if  x  =  0. 

We  shall  therefore  enter  upon  the  subject,  by  considering 
this  formula;  and  shall  endeavour  to  see  bow,  by  setting 
out  from  the  known  case  x  =  0,  we  may  arrive  at  some 
other  value  of  x.  For  this  purposci  we  shall  employ  two 
différent  methods»  which  will  be  separately  explained:  in 
order  to  which,  it  will  be  proper  to  begin'  with  particular 


115.  Let,  therefore,  the  formula  l^-Sx-x^-fx^be 
proposed,  which  ought  to  become  a  square.  Here,  as  the 
first  term  is  a  square,  we  shall  adopt  for  the  root  required 
8i|ch  a  quantity  as  will  make  the  first  two  terms  vanish. 
For  which  purpose,  let  1  +  «r  l>e  the  root,  whose  scpiare  is 
to  be  equal  to  our  formula  ;  and  this  will  give  1  +  Sir  — 
jr*  +  X*  =  1  +  Si"  +  x',  of  which  equation  the  first  two 
terms  destroy  each  other  ;  so  that  we  have  x'  =  —  x^  +  x*, 
or  x'  =  är*,  which,  being  divided  by  x-,  gives  x  =  2  ;  so 
that  the  formula  becomes  1  +4-4  +  8-9. 

Likewise,  in  order  to  make  a  square  of  the  formula, 
4  +  6x  —  5x'  -f  3J^  we  shall  first  suppose  its  root  to  be 
8  +.  fix,  and  seek  such  a  value  of  n  as  will  make  the  first 
two  terms  disappear  ;  hence, 

4  +  6x  —  5x'  +  Sx'  =  4+4fix-f  n'x«; 

tlierefore  we  must  have  4/1  =  6,  and  ri  =  J  ;  whence  re- 
sults tlio  e(|uation  -  oj«  -I-  îîx*  =  nV  =  Jx«,  or  îJx*  =  Y  x*, 
which  iiwvs  X  =  *;  ^  ;  and  this  is  the  value  which  will  uiakc 
a  square  of  tlie  proposed  formula,  whose  root  will  be 

2  +  ix  =  V. 

1  Iß.  The  second  method  consists  in  giving  the  root  three 
terms,  asy*+  /ifx  +  '<i'f  su<:li,  tliat  the  first  three  tenus  in 
the  equation  may  vanish. 

lA*t  there  be  prupiKted,  fur  example,  the  formula  1  —  4x  i> 
(ix*  -  .ix',    the    rtM>t    of  ulnch    we   ^hall    sup{H}Ae    to   be 
1  —  ^i^x  -f  Ax*,  and  we  shall  thus  have 
1  -  4x  H-fii^  -  5x'  =  1  -  ki-  -f  4x»  -  4/ix'  -  Ä'x*  -r  *i/ixt. 

The  first  two  tcTins,  as  we  see,  are  iinmediau>ly  destroyed  on 
both  sides;  and,  in  order  to  remove  tlie  thinl,  we  nuLst  make 
2A  -f-  4  =:  6  ;  o»nsc<|uently,  A  =  1  ;  by  these  means  and 
traii»|M>sing  ii/ix*  =  5ix\  wc  obtain  -  .'ïx*  =  —  kr*  +  x\ 
or  -  5  :  -  —  4  +  .r,  so  that  x  =  —  I . 

117.  TheM»  two  nH*th<xls  therefore,  may  Ikî  eniploved« 
when  the  tirsi  tenn  a  in  a  square*.  'I  he  fir^t  i&  ftiuiHled  tMi 
ex|MV8siiig  the  nnK  by  two  teruis,  as  /*-f  /a,  in  whidiy*  i> 


I 
CHAP.  VIII.  OF  ALGEBRA.     .  •  86S 

the  square  root  of  the  first  term,  and  p  is  taken  such,  that 
the  second  term  must  likewise  disappear;  so  that  there  re- 
mains only  to  compare  p^x^  with  the  third  and  fourth  term 
of  the  formula,  namely  cr*  -f  djc^  ;  for  then  that  equation, 
being  divisible  by  j:*,  gives  a  new  value  of  or,  wnich  b 

In  the  second  method,  three  terms  are  given  to  the  root; 
that  is  to  say,  if  the  first  term  a  =yS  w-e  express  the  root 
byy  +  px  +  qx*  ;  after  which,  p  and  q  are  determined  such| 
tlmt  the  first  three  terms  of  the  formula  may  vanish,  which 
is  done  in  the  following  manner  :  since 

/*  -f  bx-i-cx^'+dx'^=f'+2pfx+^qx^+p'ix^+2pqx^+q*x*^ 

we  must  have  b=9fp  ;  and,  consequently,  p  =  g;7i;  farther, 

c  —  p^ 
c  =  2/^  +  J5'  ;  or  g  =  — 57^  ;  after  this,  there  remains  the 

equation  dx^  =  2pqx^  ■\-  q*a!*  ;  and,  as  it  is  divisible  by  x^y 

d'^9pq 
we  obtain  from  it  x  = r-^. 

Î 

118.  It  may  frequently  happen,  however,  even  when 
a  —^f^i  that  neither  of  these  methods  will  give  a  new  value 
of  j:;  as  will  appear,  by  considering  the  form  ula  y  * -|- cir', 
in  which  the  second  ana  third  terms  are  wanting. 

For  if,  according  to  the  first  method,  we  suppose  the  root 
to  bey-}-  px,  that  is,  • 

/«  -\- dx»  =f*  +  y-px + p*x^,- 

wc  shall  have  Qfp  =  0,  and  p  =  0  ;  so  that  dx^  =.  0  ;  and 
therefore  x  =  0,  which  is  not  a  new  value  of  a:. 

if,  according  to  the  second  method,  we  were  to  make  the 
rooty  +  px  +  qx^f  or 

/^  +  dx^  =/2  +  ^px  +  p^x^  +  ^fqx"^  -f  2pqx^  +  q^x^^ 

we  should  find  2fp  =  0,  p*  +  2fq  =  0,  and  g*  =  0  ;  whence 
dx^  =  0,  and  also  x  ==  0. 

119.  In  this  case,  wc  have  no  other  expedient,  than  to  en- 
deavour to  find  such  a  value  of  jr,  as  will  make  the  formula 
a  square  ;  if  we  succeed,  this  value  will  then  enable  us  to 
find  new  values,  bv  means  of  our  two  methods  :  and  this 
will  apply  even  to  the  cases  in  which  the  first  term  is  not  a 
square. 

If,  for  example,  the  formula  3  -j-  ^  must  Iiecome  a  square  ; 
as  this  takes  place  when  x  =  1,  let  jr  =:  1  +  y>  *nd  we  shaU 
thus  have  4  -{-  %  f  %*  -f  y,  the  first  i^—  ^  which  is  a 


864  ELEMENTS 


TA  ET  If. 


•quare.    If,  ihereTore,  we  suppose,  aooording  to  the  first 
method,  the  root  to  be  2  +  ;;ry,  we  shall  have 

4  +  8y  +  »y*+y*  =  4-h4yy  +  p^y\ 

In  order  that  the  second  term  may  disappear,  we  mint 
make  4p  s  S  ;  and,  consequently, />  =  |  ;  whence  S  +^  s  p^^ 

—89  — Ifil 

«dy  =  p*-  8  =  ^V  -  Tff  =  — g;  therefore  x  =  — y^ 

which  b  a  new  value  of  x. 

If,  again,  aooording  to  the  second  method,  we  represent 
the  root  by  S  +  f9^+  2^^*  ^^  shall  have 

4f%f+V+i^=*^*/»+%--^/'y+2/^H9!y\ 

from  which  the  second  term  will  be  removed,  by  «Ffi^ing 
4p  =  8,  or  p  =  1^  ;  and  the  fourth,  by  making  4^  -f-  p*  =£ 

8— p* 
or  y  =  —/—  =  YT  Î  *>  ^Ät  1  =  2pq  +  9*y  ;  whence  wc 

1— 2p<7 
obtain  y  =  — J?^^*  or  y  ^  t^/t  ;  and,  consequently, 

*  ^  TTïT» 

120.  In  general,  if  wc  have  the  formula 

a  +  6x  +  rx*  -h  dir*, 
and  know  also  that  it  becomes  a  square  when  x  ^J\  or  that 
Ä  -f  6/*  -h  cf^  "f  dp  =  fi^,  we  may  make  x  =y  +  y,  and 
shall  hence  obtain  the  foflowing  new  formula  : 

In  this  formula,  the  first  term  is  a  si)uare  ;  su  that  tlie 
two  methods  above  given  may  be  applied  with  succcm,  as 
they  will  furnish  new  values  of  y  y  and  consequently  tÄ  x 
also,  since  x  ^f  -f  v. 

121.  But  often,  alio,  it  is  of  no  avail  even  to  have  fiHind 
a  value  of  x.  This  is  the  case  with  the  formula  1  -i-  x^^ 
which  becomes  a  square  when  x  =  2.  For  if,  in  consequence 
of  this|  we  make  x  =  2  4-  Vt  we  shall  get  the  formula  9  \' 
\^  +  6y^  +  y**  which  ought  also  to  become  a  sciuare. 

N'ow,  by  the  first  rule,  let  the  root  be  ä-f-y^y«  and  we  shall 
have9+12y+%«+y*  =  9+ftiy  +  p*y*,  in  which  we  must 
have  6p  =  12,  and  ^  —  2  ;  therefore  6  4  ^  =  /;*  =  4,  ami 
y  =  —  2,  which,  since  we  made  x  ^  2  -f  .y»  this  give» 
X  =  0  ;  tlmt  is  to  say,  a  value  from  which  we  can  clerive 
nochiog  more. 


CHAP.  VIII.  OF  ALGEBRA.  865 

Let  us  also  try  the  second  method,  and  represent  the  root 
by  3  +py  4-  qy^;  this  gives 

9+12y+%H.y*=9+6iy+62j^+py+2pjyH9y, 
in  which  we  must  first  have  Gp  =:  12,  and  />  =:  S  ;  then 
6y  +  /?*  =  6y  +  4  =  6,  and  g  =  y  ;  farther, 

heîice  y  =  —  S,  and,  consequently,  j:  =  —  1,  and  1  +a;^=0  ; 
from  which  we  can  draw  no  further  conclusion,  because,  if 
we  wished  to  make  xzr.  — 1+2^,  we  should  find  the  formula, 
3z  —  3z^  -|-  z^,  the  first  term  of  which  vanishes  ;  so  that  we 
cannot  make  use  of  either  method. 

We  have  therefore  sufficient  grounds  to  suppose,  after 
what  has  been  attempted,  that  the  formula  1  -j-  ^  can  never 
become  a  square,  except  in  these  three  cases  ;  namely,  when 
I.  j;  =  0,  2.  J?  =  —  1,  and  3.  ^  =  S. 

But  of  this  we  may  satisfy  ourselves  from  other  reasons. 

122.  Let  us  consider,  for  the  sake  of  practice,  the  formula 
1  +  Qx^j  which  becomes  a  square  in  the  following  cases; 
when 

1.  X  =  0,  2.  ar  =  -  1,  9.  j:  =  2, 
and  let  us  see  whetlier  we  shall  arrive  at  other  âmilar 
values. 

Since  ^  =:  1  is  one  of  the  satisfactory  values,  let  us  sup- 
pose X  =  1  -|-^,  and  we  shall  thus  have 

l+3a:»  =  4  +  ^  +  V  +  3y'- 
Now,  let  the  root  of  this  new  formula  be  2  -{-jn/j  so  that 
4  +  9y  +  %^  +  %*  =  4  +  4Ky+  py.  We  must  have 
9  =  4/?,  ancT  p  =  |.,  and  the  other  terms  will  give  9  +  %  = 
P^  =  TT»  ^"^  y  =*  ""  TT  ;  consequently,  a?  =  —  -^jj  and 
l-|-3jr*  becomes  a  square,  namely,  —  HHj  the  root  of  which 
is  —  1^  or  +  44.  :  and,  if  we  chose  to  proceed,  by  making 
X  =  —  -iV  4~  ^9  ^^  should  not  fail  to  find  new  values. 
Let  us  also  apply  the  second  method  to  the  same  formula, 

and  suppose  theroot  tobe  2  4" i>y +  2^*9  which  supposition 
gives 

therefore,  we  must  have  4p  =  9,  orp  =  |^,  and  4y  +  j:?*  = 
9  =  4ç  +  »J,  or  g  =  U :  and  the  other  terms  will  give 
3  =  2pç  +  y^y  =  fî^  +  q%  or  567  +  12%^  ='384,  or 
1289*^  =  —  183  ;  that  is  to  say, 

128  X  (||)V=  -  188,or||V  =  -  183. 
So  that  y  =  —  tt4t»  a»^  ^  =  — -rrrrî  "^  *®8e  values 


866  XLKMBNTS  FAMT  IL 

will  furnish  new  ones,  by  folbwing  the  methods  which  have 
been  pointed  out. 

1ä5.  It  must  be  remarked,  however«  that  if  we  gave  our- 
selves the  trouble  of  deducing  new  values  from  the  two^ 
which  the  known  case  of  or  =:  1  has  furnished,  we  sliould 
arrive  at  fractions  extremely  prolix  ;  and  wc  have  reason  to 
be  sunirised  that  the  case,  x  =:  1,  has  not  rather  led  us  to 
the  other,  x  =  2,  which  is  no  less  evident.  This,  indeed, 
is  an  imperfection  of  the  present  method,  which  is  the  only 
mode  of  proceeding  hitherto  known. 

We  may,  in  the  same  manner,  set  out  from  the  cz9e 
X  =  S,  in  order  to  find  other  values.  I^t  us,  for  this  pur- 
pose, make  jr  =  S  -}-  jy»  And  it  will  Ix"  rc<|uired  to  make  a 
square  of  the  formula,  25  +  ^^  +  1%*  +  %^«  Here,  if 
we  suppose  iu»  root,  according  to  the  first  method,  to  be 
5  +  ly^  we  shall  have 

25  +  3(>y  +  18y*  -f  3y»  =  25  -f  lOpj/  -H  py  ; 

and,  consequently,  lOp  =  36,  or/>  =  *^  :  then  expunging 
the  terms  winch  destroy  each  other,  and  dividing  the  others 
by  y*,  there  results  18  +  3y  =:  />*  =:  V,*  ;  consttjuentlv, 
y  =  —  }^,  and  x  zz  ^j\  whence  it  follows,  that  1  +  3a^  is 
a  square,  whose  root  is  5  +  /^  n  —  !  Î  î»  ^r  -j-  [  J^. 

In  the  second  metliod,  it  would  l)e  necessarv  to  suppose 
the  root  zz  5  -^  pj/  +  qy^j  and  we  sliould  then  liave 

the  second  and  thirtl  terms  would  (Iisa|)|>car  l>v  making 
10/?  =  3(i,  orp  =  V,  and  KVy  +  /r  =  IS,  or 

lOry  ^  18  -  \'.*  —  \Y»  of  V  ~  '"»'î  '  ''"^'  ^'^*^"  ^^^^  **^'**''' 
tenus,  divided  by  y\  would  give  ii//^  -f  ry-y  =  3,  or 

y>  =  5  -  ilpq  =■-  m  ;  that  is,  ^  =  -^  l^i-;,  and 

l^-k  This  calculation  doi*s  not  i)ecome  less  tetlious  and 
difKi*ult,  even  in  the  cases  where,  setting  out  diHen*ntly,  we 
can  give  a  general  solution;  as  for  example,  \Ou'n  the 
formula  pn>|M>setl  is  1  —  x  —  x*  \  j*\  in  which  we  may 
make,  generally,  x  =  tr  —  1,  by  giving  any  value  uhatevt-r 
to  n:  for,  let  u  ^  2;  we  have  tiien  .r  =r  .'5, and  the  formula 
bccomc*s  1  —  î3  —  î>  +  27  Ä  1Ü.  Ix*t  n  =  3,  we  have  then 
X  =  8,  and  the  formula  becomes  1  -  8  —  64  +  51:i  =  iH, 
and  M>  on. 

Hut  it  .nhould  Ik*  oliMTvetl,  that  it  is  to  a  \erv  |Hiniliar 
circumstance  we  owe  a  solution  m>  easy,  and  this  eireuni- 
staiKv  in  n*a4iily  iK*nvivi-«i  by  analysing  our  forniula  int<» 
factors;    for    wv   imnaxliately   see,  that  it   is   divisible   by 


CHAF.  VIII.  OF  ALOEBBA.  867 

t 

1  —  X,  that  tbe  quotient  will  be  1  —  :r^,  that  this  quotient 
is  composed  of  the  factors  (1  +  x)  X  (1  —  x)  ;  and,  lastly, 
that  our  formula, 

]  _a:-^  +  a7'=(l-a:)  X  (l+o:)  x(l— x)=(1-j:)2x  (I+J). 
Now,  as  it  must  be  a  a  [sqttare],  and  as  a  D ,  when  divi«ble 
.by  a  D,  gives  a  D  for  the  quotient*,  we  must  also  have 
1  +  j:  =  a  ;  and,  conversely,  if  1  4-  j?  be  a  D ,  it  is  certain 
that(l  —  x)*  X  (1  +  a:)  will  be  a  square;  we  have  therefore 
only  to  make  1  +  j:  =  w*,  and  we  immediately  .  obtain 
X  =  w«  -  1. 

If  this  circumstance  had  escaped  us,  it  would  have  been 
difficult  even  to  have  determined  only  five  or  six  values  of 
X  by  the  preceding  methods; 

125.  Hence  we  conclude,  that  it  is  proper  to  resolve  every 
formula  proposed  into  factors,  when  it  can  be  done  ;  and  we 
have  already  shewn  how  this  is  to  be  done,  by  making  the  given 
formula  equal  to  0,  and  then  seeking  the  root  of  this  equa- 
tion ;  for  each  root,  as  x  =^  will  give  a  factory  —  x  ;  and 
this  inquiry  is  so  much  the  easier,  as  here  we  seek  only 
rational  roots,  which  are  always  divisors  of  the  known  term, 
or  the  term  which  does  not  contain  x. 

126.  This  circumstance  takes  place  also  in  our  general 
formula,  a  -f  fix  -f  ex*  +  dx^,  when  the  first  two  terms  dis- 
appear, and  it  is  consequently  the  qtiantity  ex*  -|-  dx*  that 
must  be  a  square  ;  for  it  is  evident,  m  this  case,  that  by  di- 
viding by  the  square  x',  we  must  also  have  c  +  dxa.  square  ; 
and  we  have  therefore  only  to  make  c  +  dx  =  n\  in  order 

to  have  x  =  — r-»  a  value  which  contains  an  infinite  num- 

d 

bcr  of  answers,  and  even  all  the  possible  answers. 

127.  In  the  application  of  the  first  of  the  two  preceding 
methods,  if  we  do  not  choose  to  determine  the  letter  o,  for 
the  sake  of  removing  the  second  term,  we  shall  arnve  at 
another  irrational  formula,  which  it  will  be  required  to  make 
rational. 

For  example,  let  J^  -j-  ftx  +  cx*^  +  da^  be  the  formula 

proposed,  ana  let  its  root  =y*+  P^«     Here  we  shall  have 

y-i  +  bx  +  cx^  -f  dx^  =/]*  -h  ifpx  +  p«jr«,  from  which  the 

first  terms  vanish  ;  dividing,   therefore  by  x,   we  obtain 

*  The  mathematical  student,  who  may  wish  to  acquire  an 
extensive  knowledge  of  the  many  curious  properties  of  num- 
bers, is  referred,  once  for  all,  to  the  second  edition  of  Legen- 
dre's  celebrated  Essai  sur  la  Theorie  des  Nombres  ;  or  to  Mr. 
Barlow's  Elementary  Investigation  of  the  same  subject. 


808  XLSMKim  FAST  tu 

&  4  er  -f  dLr*  =  ^  +  p^x*,  an  equation  of  the  second  de- 
gree^  which  gives 

'^'"  Sd 

So  that  the  question  is  now  reduced  to  finding  such  values 
of  p,  as  will  nuike  the  formula  p*  —  icf^  +  8^  +  c^-^4M 
become  a  square.    But  as  it  is  the  fourth  power  of  the  re* 

Îuircd  number  p  which  occurs  here,  this  case  bdongs  to  the 
lilowing  diapter. 


CHAP.  IX. 

Of  (Ar  Method  of  rendering  Rational  the  incomnumrnrable 
Formula  ^/(a  +  ox  +  rx«  +  clr*  +  r x*). 

1S8.  We  arc  now  come  to  formula?,  in  which  tlie  indeter- 
minate number,  x,  rises  to  tlic  fourth  power  ;  and  tliis  must 
be  the  limit  of*  our  researches  on  quantities  affected  by  tlie 
sign  of  the  square  root  ;  since  the  subject  han  not  yet  been  {>n>- 
secuted  far  enough  to  enable  us  to  transform  into  s(|uarcs 
anj  formulae,  in  which  higher  powers  of  x  are  found. 

Our  new  formula  furnishes  three  c«'uies:  the  first«  when 
the  first  term,  a,  is  a  square;  the  second,  when  the  last 
term,  rx*,  is  a  M|uare;  and  the  thinl,  when  both  the  first 
term  and  tlie  last  are  squares.  We  slioll  consider  cacli  of 
these  cases  separately. 

189.  1st.  Resolution  of  the  formula 

^'(y*  +  ÄX  ^-  rx*  +  ir^  +  ex% 

As  the  first  term  of  this  is  a  square,  we  might.  In*  the  firnt  me- 
thod, supixMC  the  root  to  Xxf+px^  and  detemnne  p  in  such  a 
manner,  that  the  first  two  terms  would  disap|)ear,  and  the 
others  be  divisible  by  x*;  but  we  should  not  fail  still  to  find 
j(*  in  the  equation,  and  the  detenninaticm  of  x  would  depend 
on  a  new  radical  sign.  We  sliall  therefore  have  recourse  to 
the  lecond  method  ;  and  represent  the  root  hyj'-k-pjr  +  qjr^  ; 
and  tlien  determine  p  and  9,  m>  ai»  ti>  remove  the  fir»t  three 
terms,  and  then  dividing  by  x\  we  shall  arrive  at  a  nimple 
equation  of  the  first  degree,  which  will  give  x  witliout  any 
radical  signs. 


CHAP.  IX.  OF    ALGEBRA.  S69 

ISO.  If,  thcrciorc,  the  root  heJ'-^-px  -U  qx^y  and  for  that 
reason 

y  ^  +  ftor  +  ex*  +  dx^  +  ex*  = 

the  first  terms  disappear  of  themselves  ;  with  regard  to  the 
second,   we  shall  remove  them  by   making  b  =  2fp^    or 

p  =  — .  ;  and,  for  the  third,  we  must  make  c  =  ^fq  +  p\ 

or  y  =  -377  .     This  being  done,  the  other  terms  will  be  di- 

visible  by  x^,  and  will  ^ve  the  equation  d-\'ex^  ^PQ'V9^^9 
from  which  we  find 

d-^^pq   ^^^_^pq-d 

X  =  — ,  or  J?  = T- . 

q^—e  ^"^9 

131.  Now,  it  is  easy  to  see  that  this  method  leads  to  no- 
tliing,  when  the  second  and  third  terms  are  wanting  in  our 
(bnnula;  that  is  to  say,  when  6  =  0,  and  c  =  0;  for  then 

.  =  0,  .„<.,  =  0 ,  cc„»,„™,„.  .=  - f  f^  which 

we  can  commonly  draw  no  conclusion,  because  this  case 
evidently  gives  dx^  -j-  ex*  =  0  ;  and,  therefore,  our  formula 
becomes  equal  to  the  square^**.  But  it  is  chiefly  with  re- 
sj)ect  to  such  formulae  as/"*  +  ex*,  that  this  method  is  of  no 
advantage,  since  in  this  case  we  have  (2  =  0,  which  gives 
.r  =  0,  and  this-  leads  no  farther.  It  is  the  same,  when 
^  :=  0,  and  ^  =  0  ;  that  is  to  say,  the  second  and  fourth 
terms  are  wanting,  in  which  case  the  formula  is 

c 

f^  -J-  rx-  -f-  ex^  ;  for,  then  /?  =  0,  and  q  =  -^^,  whence 

.r  =  0,  ÎIS  we  may  immediately  perceive,  from  which  no 
further  advantage  can  result. 

VS9..  2d.  Resolution  of  the  formula 

v/(a  4-  é^  +  cx^  -\'  dx^  +  g*ar^). 
We  might  reduce  this  formula  to  the  preceding  case,  by 

sup|Xising  X  :=.  —  ;  for,  as  the  formula 

b  C  d  jQ'2 

V      y-     y^      y' 

must  then  be  a  square,  and  remain  a  square  if  multiplied 
by  the  square  y*^  we  have  only  to«  perform  this  multiplica- 
tion, in  order  to  obtain  the  formula 

B  u 


910  SLBXBIITS  PAKT  11. 

«Sr*  +  *»•  +  «y  +  dy +ä". 

whidi  is  quite  âmilar  to  the  former,  only  ioTerted. 

But  it  18  not  necessary  to  go  through  this  process  ;  we 
have  only  to  suppose  the  root  to  be  m^  -^  pj^  -^  JfOr,  in- 
▼evsdiy,  9  +  j»x  +  gx\  and  we  shall  thus  hare 

9«  +  2pqx  +  igqx^  +  p  V  +  agpx^  +  g V. 

Now,  the  fifth  and  sixth  terms  destroying  each  other,  we 
shall  first  determine^  so^  that  tlie  fourth  terms  may  aho 
destroy  each  other  ;   which  happens  when  d  s  ^^ffPt  or 

p  s  —  ;  we  shall  then  likewise  determine  ;,  in  order  to  re- 
more  the  third  terms,  making  for  this  purpose 

whidi  done^  the  first  two  terms  will  furnish  the  cquaiioo 
«-^  6r  =:  f*  +  ipqjfl  whence  we  obtain 

ISS.  Here,  VÛn,  we  find  tlie  same  imperfection  that  was 
befive  remarked,  in  the  case  where  the  second  and  fourth 
tetms  are  wanting;  that  is  to  say,  6  ss  0,  and  d  =  0;  be- 

cause  we  then  find  />  =  0,  and    ç  =  -3—  ;  therefore 

S  s  — jr-^  :  now,  this  Talue  bring  infinite,  leads  no  farther 

than  the  value,  x  s=  0,  in  the  first  case  ;  whence  it  follows, 
that  this  method  cannot  be  at  all  eniployed  with  respect  to 
expressions  of  the  form  a  -)-  rx^  +  /*'*• 
lS4w  Sd.  Resolution  of  tlie  formula 

•(/■  -h  &r  -h  ex"  +  dir»  -h  g«j^). 

It  is  erident  that  we  may  employ  for  this  formula  lioth 
the  methods  that  have  been  made  use  of;  for,  in  the  firM 
pfaioe,  since  the  first  term  is  a  square,  we  may  assume 
y-t"  P^  '¥  9^*  for  the  root,  and  make  tlie  first  three  terms 
Tanish  ;  then,  as  the  last  term  is  likewine  a  square,  we  may 
also  make  the  root  ?  +  fur  +  f  x*,  and  remove  the  laut  thnze 
terms  ;  bv  which  means  we  shall  find  even  two  values  of  x. 

But  tnis  formuU  may  be  resolved  also  by  two  other 
methods,  which  are  peculiarly  adapted  to  it 

In  the  first,  we  suppose  the  root  to  bey*-*^  px  +  fT\waâ 


CUAF.  IX.  OF  ALOSBAA.  STL 

p  is  determined  such^  that  the  seoond  tenns  destroy  eadi 
other  ;  that  is  to  say, 

/«  +  6t  +  ex*  +  Jar' +g-^ar*  = 

Then,  making  b  =  9fp,  ^^  P  ^  'qT-'*  ^^^  ^uioe  by  theie 

means  both  the  second  terms,  and  the  first  and  last,  are 
destroyed,  we  may  divide  the  others,  by  x*,  and  shall  have 
the  equation  c  +  dx  =i  9fg  +  p^  +  %P^#  from  which  we 

obtain  X  =  —^z — ^— r->  or  ar  =  -3—^^ .  Here,  it  oumt 

to  be  particularly  observed,  that  as  ^  is  found  in  the 
formula  only  in  the  second  power,  the  root  of  this  square,  or 
gj  may  be  taken  negatively  as  well  as  positively  ;  and,  for 
this  reason,  we  may  obtain  also  another  value  of  x;  namdj, 

135.  There  is,  as  we  observed,  another  method  of  resolving 
this  formula  ;  which  consists  in  first  supposing  the  root,  as 
liefore,  to  bey-|- «x  +g*«^S  and  then  determining  jp  in  such 
a  manner,  that  tne  fourth  terms  may  destroy  each  other  ; 
which  is  done  by  supix)sing  in  the  nmdamental  equation, 

d 
d  =  S5§77,  or  p  =  T— ;  for,  since  the  first  and  thelasttenns 

disappear  likewise,  we  may  divide  the  other  by  j?,  and  there 
will  result  the  equation  6  -j-  c ar  =  ^/p  +  ^^x  +/i*jr,  which 

pves  X  =  jr?— - — 7 — .     We  may  farther  remark,  that  as 

the  square  y*^  is  found  alone  in  the  formula,  we  may  sup- 
pose its  root  to  be  -^  from  which  we  shall  have 

X  =  -; — 7^7 •     So  that  this  method  also  furnishes  two 

new  values  of  x  ;  and,  consequently,  the  methods  we  have 
employed  give,  in  all,  six  new  values. 

13a  But  here  again  the  inconvenient  circumstance  occurs, 
that,  when  the  second  and  the  fourth  terms  are  wanting,  or 
when  6  =  0,  and  d  =  0,  we  cannot  find  any  value  of  x 
which  answers  our  purpose;  so  that  we  are  unable  to  re- 
solve the  formula  /"*  -f-  e^-  -f-  gx*.     For,   if  6  n  0,  and 

bb2 


S7X  KUUIEMTS  rABT  II. 

d  SS  Oy  WC  hare,  by  both  method^y  />  s  0  ;  the  ibrmer 
giving  X  =  — ~^,  and  the  other  giving  x  =  0  ;  neither  of 

which  are  proper  for  furnishing  any  further  conclusions. 

187.  These  then  are  the  three  formulœ,  to  which  the 
methods  hitherto  explained  may  be  applied  ;  and,  if  in  the 
formuU  proposed  neither  term  be  a  square,  no  success  can 
be  expected,  until  we  have  found  one  such  value  of  x  as  will 
make  the  formula  a  square. 

Let  us  suppose,  therefore,  that  our  formula  becomes  a 
square  in  the  case  of  x  ==  A,  or  that 

if  we  make  x  =:  A  -•-  v»  we  shall  have  a  new  formula,  the 
first  term  of  which  wiU  be  k!^  ;  that  is  to  say,  a  square,  whîdi 
win,  consequently,  fall  under  the  first  case  :  and  we  may  also 
uee  this  transformation,  after  having  determined  by  the  pre- 
ceding methods  one  value  of  x,  for  instance,  x  =  A  ;  for 
we  have  then  only  to  make  x  =  A  -•-  y,  in  order  to  obuin  a 
new  equation,  with  which  we  may  proceed  in  the  same 
manner.  And  the  values  of  x,  that  may  be  found  in  this 
manner,  will  furnish  new  ones;  which  will  also  lead  to 
others,  and  soon. 

lS8w  But  it  is  to  be  particularly  remarked,  that  we  can  in 
no  way  hope  to  resolve  those  formul«  in  which  the  second  and 
fourth  terms  are  wanting,  until  we  have  found  one  solution  ; 
and,  with  regard  to  the  process  that  must  be  followed  after 
that,  we  shall  explain  it  by  applying  it  to  the  formula  a  -{■  cx% 
which  is  one  of  those  that  most  frequently  occur. 

Suppose,  therefore,  we  have  fouml  sucti  a  value  of  x  =  A, 
that  a  4-  eh^  =  A-'  ;  then  if  we  would  find,  from  this  othcrr 
values  of  x,  we  must  make  x  =  A  -f  y,  and  the  following 
formula,  a  +  eh^  +  4ch^  +  6eh*y*  +  4rAy*  f  ry*,  must 
be  a  square.  Now,  this  formula  being  reducible  to 
*»  +  4rA^  +  6thy  +  4rAy  +  rv*,  it  therefore  belong»  to 
the  first  of  our  three  cases  ;  so  tnat  we  shall  represent  its 
square  root  by  k  +  py  +  m*  ;  and,  consequently,  the 
formula  itself  will  be  e(|ual  to  the  square 

*«  +  9kf9  f  fiv  +  2Ar«y*  +  «/'yy  +  yy  ; 

from  which  we  must  first  remove  the  second  term  iiy  de- 
termining p,  and  consequently  q\  that  is  to  say,  by  making 

ÄA» 
•W  =  !ttp,  or  p  z:  — r-  ;  and  6rA*  =  iU*y  -|-  //*,  or 


or 


CHAF.  IX.  OF  ALGSBBA.  878 

^  '      2k      ^           k^  "•  fc»  ' 

,  lastly,  q  =  rg ^,  because  M*  n  i*  -  a;  after 

which,  the  remaining  terms,  4fehy^  +  e;y*,  being  divided  by 
y,    will  give  4teh  -f-  ey  =  gpy  -f-  g«y,   whence  we  find 

y  —  — 5 — ^-^  ;  and  the  numerator  of  this  fraction  may  be 

thrown  into  the  form r^ ^  j, 

or,  because  eÄ*  =:  Ä«  —  a,  into  this. 

With  regard  to  the  denominator  y*  —  e,  since 

ehHk^^2a) 
q  zz — — ,  and  cJt*  zz  k^  —  a^  it  becomes 

g(^^r/)x(A:«  +  2fl)^-gt^  _  e(Sak*^éa^)  _  ea(9k^  -  M") 
k^  "^         kfi  "  k^         ' 

so  that  the  value  sought  will  be 

iaeh(9a--k)  Ifi 

y  =  -ItTTi^  '  ^^»  consequently, 
^=y  +  A=        ^^^,       .or 

•^  -         4a«-8Ä:*       ' 


*  By  multiplying  6M'— p*  by  ^%and  substituting  for  ^'p*  its 
equal,  2eh\ 

f  For  since  k'  =  a  -^  tf^,  therefore  Sit'  —  2eh^  szSa-^eh^ 

,       ^ehk'     ,             eÄ«(it«-h2fl)        ,  2eh^ 

X  Here  4fÄ  =  — T-r-*  also  Ç  = a »  and p  =  —7—  j 

therefore  2p9  =  ^^ ^^  j  and,  consequently, 

ich  —  2p9  =  jr^ .     B. 


9T4  BLIMBMTS  »ABTtl. 

If,  therefbre,  we  substitute  thb  value  of  x  h  the  ibromki 
a  -f  ex^f  it  becomes  a  square  ;  and  its  root,  which  we  have 
supposed  tohek  -^  py  -i-  {y%  will  have  this  form, 

because,  as  we  hate  seen,  p  =  — ,  q  = -^ ^, 

y  =     8^_^t    »  «nd  ^Ä*  =  *"  -  fl  •. 

189.  Let  us  continue  the  investigation  of  the  fonnula 
a  -f  ex*  ;  and,  since  the  case  a  +  r A^  =  it*  is  known,  let 
us  consider  it  as  furnishing  two  different  cases;  becsuiae 
ar  =  -f  A,  and  x  =  —  A  ;  for  whicli  reason  we  may  trana^ 
ibrm  our  fonnula  into  another  of  the  third  class,  in  whidi 
the  first  term  and  the  last  arc  sqjuares.  This  trana- 
fijrmation  is  nuide  by  an  arUfice,  which  is  often  of  great 

utility,  and  which  consists  in  making  x  ^  -^ —  -  :  by  which 

means  the  formula  becomes 

(ÏZ^)« .  "  "^r 

Now,  let  us  suppose  the  root  of  this  formula,  acconling  to  the 

third  case,  to  be     n        i    ♦  ^  ^*^  ^^^  numerator  of  inir 
fbrmula  must  be  equal  to  the  square 

and,  removing  the  second  terms,  by  making 

4Jt*  —  8a  =z  5Up,  or  p  =  7 —  ;  and  dividing  the 

•Thus, 

2tk*     ^kk*{2a^')     Hek*k('2a^k')  _Hk(k*^a)  x(2n^k») 

^ek^jk^-^^la)     Vyk^k'{'2a-~k*)     \r,rk*k\k*  -^  2flU  (2 

\Sk(k^^ü)  »  (k'  -4-211)  X  V2a^k')'  ,        ,     .,     .        .        - 
= ^^*_^^sy M  «ubstituting  fk  =  *•-«. 

11. 


CHAP.  IX.  OF  ALGmtA»  $T6 

Other  terms  by  y\  we  shall  have  , 

at*  +  4y(k^  -  2a)  :z-.  2*«  +  p»  -  2*W,  or 
y(4*«-8a4-atp)=ip«- at«;  or 

p  =  — jj — ,  and  pk=zik^  —  éa;  so  that 
j^(8^  -  16a)  = -jp^ ,  and 

^^     Ä«(2^«-4a)     • 
If  wc  now  wish  to  find  x^  we  have,  first, 

^  ^  •"  -    ife2(a^i  -4a)   • 
and,  in  the  second  place, 

8^-4a« 
1  —  y  =  — ---  ;  so  that 

^      ^«(2^— 4a) 

1  +  v     it4_8a^«^4^« 

î^^"^      8iH-4a*      ^  *"^»  consequenUy, 

_  A(^-8tfy4-4g') 

but  this  is  just  the  same  value  that  we  found  before,  with 
regard  to  the  even  powers  o£x. 

140.  In  order  to  apply  thb  result  to  an  example,  let  it  be 
required  to  make  the  formula  ia^  -  1  a  square.  Here^ 
we  have  a  z=—  1,  and  ^  =  2;  and  the  known  case  when 
the  formula  becomes  a  square,  is  that  in  which  x  =  1  ;  so 
that  A  =  1,  and  if:'  =:  1  ;  that  is,  A?  =  1  ;  therefore,  we  ahail 

have  the  new  value,  a:  =  —3 — 7^  =:  —  18  ;  and  ânce  the 

fourth  power  of  x  is  found  alone,   we  may  also  write 
J?  =  +  13,  whence  2 jr*  -  1  =:  67121  =  (239)V 

If  we  now  coQfflder  this  as  the  known  case,  we  have 
h  =  13  and  k  =  239  ;  and  shall  obtain  a  neyir  value  of  jr, 
namely, 

18  X  (239*  +  8  X 239*44)  _  42422452969 

8x289*-4  ■"  9788425919* 

141.  We  shall  consider,  in  the  same  manner,  a  formula 
rather  more  general,  a  +  cx^  +  ^x^,  and  shall  take  for  the 
known  case,  m  which  it  becomes  a  square,  x  :::  h;  wo  that 
a  +  cJr  +  eh^  zz  h\ 

xVud,  iu  order  to  find  other  values  from  this,  let  us 


876  UBMBKTS  f  AAT  IS. 

» 

stippoM  X  =  A  4-  ^,  and  our  furmuU  will  atsume  the  fill- 
lowing  form  : 

a 


Tlie  first  term  lieiii^  a  square,  we  shall  siipix)se  the  roiH 
of  thU  formula  to  ixr  k  -{•  py  -^  q}f*\  and  the  formula  itst*lf 
will  necessarily  be  equal  to  the  &t|uarü 

then  determining  p  and  q^  in  order  to  expunge  the  scoind 
and  third  tenmi,  we  slioll  have  for  thi»  purpose» 

rA42ifA-'* 
2rA  -f"  •*<**'  n  9Jcp  ;  or  />  =  7^ ;  and 

^,      .                     r  +  GrA'--P- 
c  +  GrA«  =  9kq  +;;;  orq  =  -^ 

Now«  the  last  two  terms  of  the  general  equation  being 
divisible  by  y^^  they  ore  reduced  to 

4rA  +  ry  =  2pg  +  qhf . 
which  gives  ^  =  — -    ^^^  and,  consequently,  the  valtic  aho 

ofx^A-t^jy«  If  we  now  consider  this  new  case  as  the 
given  one,  we  shall  find  another  new  case,  and  may  proceed, 
m  the  same  manner,  as  far  as  we  please. 

14a.  I^t  us  illustrate  the  |)ri*eeding  article,  by  ap|Jying 
it  ti>  the  formuU  1  —  j-*  +  -^N  >"  which  a  =  1,  r  =  —  1, 
and  r  =  h  The  known  case  is  evidently  x  =  1  ;  and,  there- 
fore, A  sa  1,  and  k  =  1.  If  we  make  x  =r  1  +.v>  and 
the  square  root  of  our  formula  1  +  f!y  -{"  ^vS  ^'^  must  firyt 

rA+«rA'       ,        ,   ,  rf(îtA'-p- 

have  p  =  — T —   =  1,  and  then  y  =     -  -^ — ^  =3  X  =2. 

These  values  give  ^  =  0,  and  x  =  1.  Now,  tliis  is  the 
known  case,  aiul  we  have  not  arrive*«!  at  a  ih*w  one  ;  but  it 
b  because  we  may  prove,  friMn  other  considerations  dmt  the 
proposed  formula  can  never  become  a  scpiare,  except  in  the 
cases  of  X  =  0,  and  x  =  t    1 . 

143.  lA*t  there  i)e  given,  also,  for  ati  example,  the 
formula  «  -  :îx'  -f  2x»  ;  in  which  n  =:  M^  c  ^  --  .%  and 
r  s  Ü.  The  kiM>wn  caM*  in  readily  lound  ;  tlut  is«  x  =  1  ; 
so  tliat  A  =  1,  ami  Jl  -=  1  :  if,  therefons  we  make  x=:l-f^ 
and  tin*  riHit  =  1  -|-  /ly  |  ^y%  we  siiall  Imve  p  s  1,  oimI 


CHAF.  IX.  OF    ALGEBKA.  377 

^=4;  whence  j^  =  0,  and  07=1  ;  which,  as  before,  leads  to 
nothing  new. 

144.  Again,  let  the  formula  be  1  +  &r*  +  jt*  ;  in  which 
a  =  1,  c  =  8,  and  ^  =  1.  Here  a  slight  consideration  is 
sufficient  to  point  out  the  sadsfactory  case,  namely,  x  =  8  ; 
for,  by  supposing  A  =  2,  we  find  i  =  7  ;  so  that  making 
X  =  2  -f  y,  and  representing  the  root  by  7  +  py  +  gy*,  we 
shall  havep  =  y,  and  q  =  xtt;  whence 

»y  =r  —     5  8  80     «Tifl  ^  —  ^.      5  8       . 

and  we  may  omit  the  sign  minus  in  these  values.  But  we 
may  observe,  farther,  in  this  example,  that,  »nee  the  last 
term  is  already  a  square,  and  must  therefore  remain  a  square 
also  in  the  new  formula,  we  may  here  apply  the  method 
which  has  been  already  taught  for  cases  of  the  third  class. 
Therefore,  as  before,  let  .r  =  2  +  ^,  and  we  shall  have 

1 

32  +  3%  +  8î/ 

16  +  3%  +  âiy  +  Sy'  -h  y 

49  +  64y  -f  32/  -f  %'  +  y*, 

an  expression  which  we  may  now  transform  into  a  square  in 
several  ways.  For,  in  the  first  place,  we  may  suppose  the 
root  to  be  7  +  f^  +  y*  ;  and,  consequently,  the  formula 
equal  to  the  square 

49  +  Hpy  +  pY  +  IV  +  2/y  +y*; 

but  then,  after  destroying  %^  and  Sjp^,  by  suppoâng 
2p  =  8,  or  p  =  4,  dividing  the  other  terms  by  y,  and  de- 
riving from  the  equation 

64  +  3%  =  14p  +  14y  +  p^  =  56  +  3(ty, 

the  value  ofy  =—  4,  and  of  x  =  —  Ä,  or  x  jç  +  2,  we  come 
only  to  the  case  that  is  already  known* 

Farther,  if  we  seek  to  determine  such  a  value  for  p,  that 
the  second  terms  may  vanish,  we  shall  have  14p  =  64,  and 
p  =  ?^  ;  and  the  other  terms,  when  divided  by  y*,  form 
the  equation  14  +  p*  +  ^py  =  32  4-  %,  or 
'^o  +  %^  y  =zS2  -f  8y,  whence  we  find  y  = —  |j- ;  and, 
consequently,  x  =  —  4|-,  or  jr  =  +  {.J.  ;  and  this  .value  trans- 
forms our  formula  into  a  square,  whose  root  is  VW* 
Farther,  as  — y^  is  no  less  the  root  of  the  last  term  than 
+^^,  we  may  suppose  the  root  of  the  formula  to  be 
7  +  PM  —  y^,  or  the  formula  itself  equal  to 
49  -f  I4pj/  -f  py  —  14y'  —  2py^  -»-y**  And  here  we  shall 
destroy  the  last  terms  but  one,  by  making  —  2p  =:  8,  or 
/^=  —  4;  then,  dividing  the  other  terms  by.y»  we  shall  have 


STB  ELKMENTS  FAftT  11. 

which  gives  y  »  —  4  ;  that  is,  tlic  known  case  i^^n.  If 
we  chose  to  destroy  the  second  terms,  we  should  hare 
64  =  1 4|?,  «nd  ;»  s  y  ;  and,  consequently,  dividing  the 
olher  terms  by  y ',  we  should  obtain 

8«  +  8y  =  -  14  +  ;>■  -  Äpy,  or 
3«  +  8y  =  Vv  —  Wî  whence 
y  =-f;.,  andx=-  ÎI; 

that  is  to  say,  the  same  values  that  we  found  before. 

145.  We  may  proceed,  in  the  some  manner,  with  respect 
to  the  general  formulk 

a  ^-  Ax  +  ex"  -f-  dr*  +  ^x*, 

when  we  know  one  case,  as  t  =  A,  in  which  it  becomes  a 
square,  k\  The  constant  method  is  to  suppose  j-  a  A  «f-  y  : 
from  this,  we  ol>tain  a  f(>rmula  of  as  many  terms  as  tnc 
other,  the  first  of  them  being  k\  If,  after  that,  we  ex|ires8 
the  root  by  ir  +  p^  +  çy'  ;  And  determine  p  and  a  so,  that 
the  second  and  third  terms  may  disappear  ;  tlie  last  two, 
being  divisible  by  y^,  will  be  reciuced  to  a  simple  equation 
of  the  first  degree,  from  which  we  may  easily  obtain  the 
value  of  y,  and,  consequently,  that  of  x  also. 

Still,  liowever,  we  shall  be  obliged,  as  before,  to  exclude 
a  great  number  of  cases  in  the  application  of  tliis  method  ; 
those,  for  instance,  in  which  the  value  found  for  x  is  no 
other  than  x  =  A,  which  waâ  given,  and  in  which,  con- 
sequently, we  could  not  advance  one  step.  Such  ca^^es 
shew  either  that  the  formula  is  imposfdble  m  itself,  or  that 
we  have  yet  to  find  some  other  case  in  which  it  becomes 
a  8()uare. 

146.  And  tliis  is  the  utmost  length  to  which  nuthe- 
maticians  have  yet  advanced,  in  the  resolution  of  formula*, 
that  ar«  afii*cted  hy  the  sign  of  tlie  scjuare  nM>t.  No  dis- 
covery has  hitherto  Ixvn  made  for  ihosi*,  in  which  the  quan- 
tities under  tlie  sign  exceed  tlie  fourth  degree;  and 
when  formula*  occur  which  aiiitain  tlie  fifth,  or  a  higlier 
power  of  X,  tlie  artifii*es  which  we  have  explained  arc  not 
sufficient  to  resolve  them,  even  allliougli  a  caite  be  given. 

That  the  trutli  of  wlmt  is  now  said  may  be  more  evident, 
we  shall  consider  tlie  formula 

i'  +  Ax  +  ex'  +  cir'  -h  «♦  +/r^, 

the  first  term  of  which  is  already  a  stpiare.  If,  as  be- 
fore, we  supfxise  tlie  rtxit  of  this  fcNmuila  to  lie  i  -|- /u*  +  qr', 
and  detiTinine  p  aiui  y,  si>  as  to  make  the  !«ccoiid  and  tlitrd 
terms  disaftpear,  there  will  still  remain  three  terms,  which. 


CHAP.  X.  OF  ALPSBRA.  979 

when  divided  by  sfi,  form  an  equation  of  the  second  degree  ; 
and  X  evidently  cannot  be  expressed,  except  by  a  new  inrn- 
üonal  quantity.  But  if  we  were  to  suppose  the  root  to  be 
^  +  f'^  +  9^'  +  ^^>  ^^  square  would  rise  to  the  sixth 
power;  and,  consequently,  though  we  should  even  de- 
termine p,  g,  and  r,  so  as  to  remove  the  second,  third,  and 
fourth  terms,  there  would  still  remain  the  fourth,  the  fiilh, 
and  the  sixth  powers  ;  and,  dividing  by  x^,  we  should  again 
have  an  equation  of  the  second  degree,  which  we  could  not 
resolve  without  a  radical  sign.  This  seems  to  indicate  that 
we  have  really  exhausted  the  subject  of  transforming  formulse 
into  squares:  we  may  now,  therefore,  proceed  to  quantities 
affected  by  the  sign  of  the  cube  root« 


CHAP.  X. 


Of  the  Method  of  rendering  rational  the  irratiofml  Formula 

^{a  +  io;  +  ex*  H-  da:^). 

147.  It  is  here  required  to  find  such  values  of  a?,  that  the 
formula  a  +  bx  -}-  cx^  +  dx^  may  become  a  cube,  and  that 
we  may  be  able  to  extract  its  cube  root.  We  see  im- 
mediately that  no  such  solution  could  be  expected,  if  the 
formula  exceeded  the  third  degree  ;  and  we  shall  add,  that 
if  it  were  only  of  the  second  oegree^  that  is  to  say,  lî  Ûie 
term  dx^  disappeared,  the  soluUon  would  not  lie  easier. 
With  regard  to  the  case  in  which  the  last  two  terms  dis- 
appear, and  in  which  it  would  be  required  to  reduce  the 
formula  a  -{■  bx  to  a,  cube,  it  is  evidently  attended  with  no 
difficulty  ;  for  we  have  only  to  make  a  +  &r  =  j^^,  to  find 

at  once  x  =  * — r— . 

148.  Before  we  proceed  farther  on  this  subject,  we  must 
again  remark,  that  when  neither  the  first  nor  the  last  term 
is  a  cube,  we  must  not  think  of  resolving  the  formula, 
unless  we  already  know  a  case  in  which  it  becomes  a  cube, 
whether  that  case  readily  occurs,  or  whether  we  are  obliged 
to  find  it  out  by  trial. 

So  that  we  have  three  kinds  of  formulœ  to  condder. 
One  is,  when  the  first  term  is  a  cube;  and  as  then  the 
formula  is  expressed  by  y^  -+-  bx  -*■  car*  -»-  (fr*,  we  inune- 


S80  ELKlf£MTt  PAftT  îh 

diateij  perœÎTc  the  known  esse  to  be  that  of  x  s  0.  Hie 
•eoond  class  oomnrehends  the  formula  a  ^  ax  -^  cr*  -•>  g*^'^ 
that  is  to  say,  the  case  in  which  the  kst  term  is  a  cube. 
The  third  class  is  composed  of  the  two  former,  and  com- 
pruhends  the  cases  in  which  both  the  first  term  and  the  last 
are  ciilics. 

149.  Que  1.  Let/'  -f&r-f-rx«-f-dr^bethe  proposed 
formula,  which  is  to  tie  transformed  into  a  cube. 

Suppose  its  root  to  be/n-  pjr;  and,  consequently,  that 
the  formula  itself  is  equal  to  the  cube 

B»  the  first  terms  disappear  of  themselves,  we  shall  de- 
termine p,  so  as  to  make  the  second  terms  also  disappear  ; 

namely,  by  making  b  s  Sf*p^  or  p^s  ^^;  then  the  remain- 
ing  terms  being  divided  by  x*,  give  c  -^  dx  =i  Sfp^  -*-  p^x  ; 

If  the  last  term,  dx^^  had  not  been  in  the  formula,  we 
might  have  simply  supposed  the  cube  root  to  be^^  and 
siiould  have  then  nadj^  zsj^  -^  bx  ^  ex*,  or  6  -•-  ex  ss  O, 

and  X  =  •*  —  ;  but  this  value  would  not  ha%'c  served  to 

e 

find  others. 

150.  Coie  8.  If,  in  the  second  place»  tlie  propoaed 
expression  has  this  form,  a  +  Ax  +  rx*  +>?'•**»  *'^'  nwv 
represent  its  cube  root  by  p  -k-  gx^  the  cube  of  which  is 
p»  +  ^p^gx  -f  %y'V-  -h  g^x^  ;  m  thot  the  lost  terms  destroy 
each  other.  Ix^t  us  now  determine  /i,  so  that  the  last  terms 
but  one  may  likewise  disappear:   which  will  be  done  by 

supposing  c  ^  *^g^Pt  orp  =  ^  >  and  the  otficr  terms  will 

then  give  a  -f  &x  =  p'  4-  ^ffp'^  «  whence  we  find 

If  the  first  term,  a«  liod  Iwen  wanting,  we  should  hare 
conu*nUd  oiinclves  with  expressing  the  cul)e  root  by  ^x, 
and  should  liave  had 

U*x*  =  Aur   I   ex'  +  g^x\  or  A  I    ex  ==  0, 


CHAP.  X.  OF    ALUKBRA.  381 

whence  x  zz. ;  but  this  is  of  no  use  for  finding  other 

values. 

151.  Case  S,    Lastly,  let  the  formula  be 

y*'  -h  6j:  -h  cx^  -H  ^x\ 

in  which  the  first  and  the  last  terms  are  both  cubes.  It  is 
evident  that  we  may  consider  this  as  belonging  to  either  of 
the  two  preceding  cases;  and^  consequently,  that  we  may 
obtiun  two  values  of  x. 

])ut  beside  this,  we  may  also  represent  the  root  byyVgjr, 
and  then  make  the  formula  equal  to  the  cube 

f-^^rgx-^^f^x^'^g'x''. 

and  likewise,  as  the  first  and  last  terms  destroy  each  other, 
the  others  being  divisible  by  .r,  we  arrive  at  the  equation 
Ä  -f-  cj?  =  S/^'g  -♦-  ^fg*Xy  which  gives 

152.  ,0n  the  contrary,  when  the  given  formula  belongs 
not  to  any  of  the  above  three  cases,  we  have  no  other  re- 
source than  to  try  to  find  such  a  vsdue  for  x  as  will  change 
it  into  a  cube;  then,  having  found  such  a  value,  for  ex- 
ample, a:  =  A,  so  that  o  -♦-  M  h-  cä*  h-  dh^  =  l^y  we  sup- 
|)osc  X  =  h  -*-  y^  and  find,  by  substitution, 

a 

bh  +by 

ch^  +  Schy  +  cy^ 

dh^  +  SdhH^+  Mliy^  +  dy^ 


AT*  +  (ft  +  2cÄ  +  3rf7i*)y  +  (c  +  3dÄ)j^  +  dy\ 

This  new  formula  belonging  to  the  first  case,  we  know 
how  to  determine  y^  and  therefore  shall  find  a  new  value  (£ 
X,  which  may  then  be  employed  for  finding  other  values. 

153.  Let  us  endeavour  to  illustrate  this  method  by  some 
examples. 

Suppose  it  were  required  to  transform  into  a  cube  the 
formula  1  h-  a:  h-  or*,  which  belongs  to  the  first  case.  We 
might  at  once  make  the  cube  root  1,  and  should  find 
.T  -h  a:^  =  0,  that  is,  a:(l  h-  or)  =  0,  and,  consequently,  cither' 
X  =  0,  or  j:  =  —  1  ;  but  from  this  we  can  draw  no  con- 
clusion. Let  us  therefore  represent  the  cube  root  by 
1  -f-  />x  ;  and  as  its  cube  is  1  -♦-  3/?ar  -»-  3p^ar^  -»-  i>'d?*,  we 
shall  have  3p  =  1,  or  p  =  ■}■;  by  which  means  tne  other 


382  BLFMCXTft.  rABT  If. 

terme,  being  divided  by  x*,  give  ß/)»  +  /;^x  ==  1,  or 
X  = ^— .  Now,  /;  =:  ^,  so  that  Jc  zz  —  =  18,  and   our 

P  17 

formula  beeomes  1  -f  18  +  Sii  =  343,  and  the  culie  root 
1  +  nx  =  7.  If  now  we  proceed,  by  making  x  =  18  -f  y, 
our  formula  will  assume  the  form  ä-tö  +  37y  -f  y,  and  bj 
the  first  rule  we  must  suppose  its  cube  root  to  lie  7  +üy; 
comparing  it  then  with  the  cube 

343  +  Ulpjf  +  Z^py  +  py, 

k  is  evident  we  must  make  147p  =  87,  orp  =  -,Y^  ;  the 
other  terms  give  the  equation  Slji'  +  p^  =  1,  whence  we 
obtain  the  vaJue  of 

l-aiö«  147x(147'-21x3r)  ,     ._ 

pi  ^'p  ■"        To^rr  »  •  • 

which  may  lead,  in  the  same  manner,  to  new  values. 

154.  iJet  it  now  be  required  to  make  the  formub  2  -f  x* 
equal  to  a  cube.  Here,  as  we  easily  get  the  case  x  =  5,  ve 
shall  immediately  make  x  ~  «5  +  ^,  and  shall  have 

*7  +  lOy  +  y*  ;  supix>sing  now  its  cul)e  root  to  be  3  +  /y, 
•o  that  tne  formub  itself  may  be  27  +  27/^y  -•-  S^V  ~^  P^^ 
we  shall  have  to  make  ftjp  =  10,  or  p  =  {<^;  therefore 
1  =x9/i»  +  pyand 

\--9p'  27x(27--9xl0^) 

P\' 

X  =  iVVc  '  therefore  our  formula  iK-ctunes  î^-fx'  — {-^t*J*^, 
the  culx?  root  of  which  must  he  «J  -f  /^^  =  { *?. 

155.  Let  us  also  si^e  whether  the  formula,  1  +  x\  can 
become  a  cube  in  any  other  eases  lK*side  the  evident  oih^*  of 
X  =  0,  and  x  =  —  1.  We  may  here  remark  first,  that 
though  thin  formula  belongs  to  the  third  class,  yet  the  nx>t 
1  +  X  is  of  no  use  to  us,  l)ecause  its  cul)e,  1  +  3x  -f  3x*  -f  x\ 
beinç  equal  to  the  foniiula,  gives  3x  +  3x'=0,  or3x(l  -f-x)=0, 
that  IS,  again,  x  =  0,  or  x  =  —  1 . 

If  we  made  x  -- —  1  -f  y,  we  should  have  to  transform 
into  a  culic  the  fonnula  3y  —  *it/^  +  y\  which  lielongs  to 
the  second  case;  so  that,  sup[x*sing  its  culx^  root  to  be 
p  -l-y,  or  the  formula  itself  et|ual  to  the  culx^ 
P*  +  3p*y  -f  Stfy'  -f  v%  we  should  have  tip  =  —  3,  or 
p  =  —  I,  and  thence  the  eiiuation  îîy  -  /'*  +  ÎJ/?'V=  -  1  4  3v, 
which  givi*s  y  c=  *,  ur  infinitv  ;  so  that  ne  obtain  nothing 
more  frtmi  this  second  sup|iosition.  In  tact,  it  is  in  voin  to 
seek  for  other  values  of  i  ;  for  it  may  l>e  deinonst rated, 
thai  tlie  sum  of  two  cuIk*s,  as  i'  -f-  x',  can  never  Ixi^onie 


y  =  £-   — 1 1  =  ^  ♦*  •  ^     mnA 


CUAP.  X.  OF  ALGEBRA.  38S 

a  cube*;  so  that,  by  making  /  =  1,  it  follows  that  the 
formula^  x*  +  1,  can  never  l)ecome  a  cube,  except  in  the 
cases  already  mentioned. 

156.  In  the  same  manner,  we  shall  find  that  the  formula, 
x^  +  %  can  only  become  a  cube  in  the  case  of  or  =  —  1. 
This  formula  belongs  to  the  second  case  ;  but  the  rule  there 
given  cannot  be  applied  to  it,  because  the  middle  terms  are 
wanting.  It  is  by  supposing  a:  =  —  1  +  y>  which  ffives 
I  H~  %  *~  %^  ~i~  î/^f  ^^^^  ^he  formula  may  be  managed  ac- 
cording to  ail  the  three  cases,  and  that  the  truth  of  what  we 
have  advanced  may  be  demonstrated.  If,  in  the  first  case, 
we  make  the  root  =  1  -|-^,  whose  cube  is  14^~%*+y*> 
we  have  —  3w*  :r  3y^,  which  can  only  be  true  when  y  =  0  : 
and  if,  according  to  the  second  case,  the  root  be  —  1  +  ^> 
or  the  formula  equal  to  —  1  +  3y  —  Sy*  +  y*,  we  have 
1  +  3j/  =:  —  1  4-  3y,  and  y  zz  ^  or  an  infinite  value; 
lastly,  the  third  case  requires  us  to  suppose  the  root  to  be 
1  -h  t/f  which  has  already  been  done  for  the  first  case. 

157.  Let  the  formula  3x^  -f  3  be  also  required  to  be 
transformed  into  a  cube.  This  may  be  done,  in  the  first 
place,  if  a:  =  —  1,  but  from  that  we  can  conclude  nothing  : 
then  also,  when  x  =  â  ;  and  if,  in  this  second  case,  we  sup- 
pose â;  =  ä  +  ^,  wc  shall  have  the  formula  27  +  36y  4- 
18y^  +  3y^i  and  as  this  belongs  to  the  first  case,  we  shall 
represent  its  root  by  3  +  Pl/i  the  cube  of  ^hich  is 

27  +  27py  4-  9py  H-  p^y^  ;  then,  by  a)m[)arison,  we  find 
9!7p  =  36,  or  p  =  ^;  and  tlience  results  the  equation 

18  +  3y  =  9p'  +  pV  =  16  +  |^y, 
which  gives  y  =  — jtl,  and,  consequently,  x*=  — r^:  there- 
fore our  formula  3  -f  3x*  =  -  l^yy»  ^"^  its  cube  root 
3  4-  ^j|y  =  ^;  which  solution  would  furnish  new  values,  if 
we  chose  to  proceed. 

158.  Let  us  also  conrider  the  formula  4  +  a?*,  which  be- 
comes a  cube  in  two  cases  that  may  be  considered  as  known  ; 
namely,  x  =  2,  and  x  =  11.  If  now  we  first  make  x=:2+j/^ 
the  formula  8  +  ^  -f-  y*  will  be  required  to  lx?come  a  cube, 
having  for  its  root  2  4-  xV»  ®"^  ^^^^  cubed  being  8  +  4y  -|- 
yj/*  4-  tt3/^9  we  fiod  I  =  T  +  -ry^  »  therefore  y  =  9,  and 
X  =  11  ;  which  is  the  second  given  case. 

If  we  here  suppose  jr  =  11  +y,  we  shall  have 
125  4-  22y  +^f  which,  being  made  equal  to  the  cube  €£ 
5  -l-fiy,  or  to  125  4-  75pj/  +  l5pY  4-  ;îy>  P^^s  p  =  fj-  ;    ^ 

•  See  Article  217  of  this  ] 


384  ELEMENTS  TAKT  IS. 

anci  ihcncc  15//  +  p^y  n  1,  or  p^y  r=  1  -  15/;«  =  —  44c  ; 

OHwetiiioiitly,  //  =  -'  '.VAV»  a«»J  5  =  -  ..V/T*'! • 

And  since  x  may  cither  l)c  negative  or  positi%*e,  x*  beini^ 
found  nione  in  the  given  forniiilu,  let  us  8up{)ose 

X  =  ,; y  and  our  formula  will  become  -z *f^  which 

miuit  be  a  culx*  ;  let  us  therefore  multiply  IkhIi  terms  bj 
1  —  ^1  in  ortler  that  the  denominator  may  become  a  cube  ; 

and  this  will  give  .  ^   \3~        "    ^^^^    ^^  ^nXi  only 

haTC  the  numerator  8  —  %  +  8j/'  —  8y*,  or  if  we  divide  bj 
8,  only  the  formula  1  —  y  +  y*  —  V*,  to  transform  into  a 
eube  ;  which  formula  belongs  to  all  the  three  cases.  Let  mi, 
according  to  the  first,  take  for  the  root  1  —  yV  ;  the  cube  of 
whidi  is  1  —;/+{'/*—  »*/.(/';  90  that  we  nave  1  —  ys 
T  ""  iSy»  or  S7  --  27y  =  i>  —  y  ;  therefore^  =  ^\  ;  also, 
1  +  y  =  îy,  and  I  —  y  =  ^^  ;  whence  x  =  11,  as  before« 

We   should  have  exactly  the  same  result,   if  we   eon- 
âdered  the  formula  a^  coming  under  the  second  case. 

Lastly,  if  we  apply  the  third,  and  take  1  —  y  for  the  ronC, 

the  cube  of  whicn  is  1  —  «^  +  %*  —  y*»  ^'^  ^1*«^'  have 
—  l+y=— 3+  'Sy,  and  y  =  1  ;  so  that  x  =  ^ ,  or  in- 
finity ;  and»  consequently,  a  result  which  is  of  no  use. 

li9.  But  since  we  already  know  the  two  cases,  x  =  2,  and 

X  =:  11,    we    niav    also  make  a:  —  -, ;   lor,  by  thcf^f 

1  t}/ 

means  if  ^  =  ^\  ^^  have  x  =  2  ;  and  If  ^  —  oc,  or  infinity, 
we  liave  x  ^  11. 

Therefore,  let  x  —  —z ^,    anil  our    torniulu    IxxtMues» 

4  -»-  -V-'o-^- — ^-'  '»'•  -     /I      -r.-~'      Multiply  iMHh 

terms  by  1  -f  ^,  in  ordiT  that  the   denominator  may    be- 
come a  cube,  and  we  shall  cmly  have  the  nunurator 
8  -f  GOy  4-  177y*  -f-  li^55r\to  traiisfonn  into  a  rulic.     And 
if,  for  this  puqiosi\  wi*  Mip|»ose  the  nwl  t<>  l)e  M  4   %,  wc 
]ihall  iK>t  (Hily  liavc  the  ^I^^t  tiTiiis  di^ap|)ea^,  but  alM>  the 
last.      We  may,  tlu-refore,  refer  our  fonnula  l4)  the  set^Hui 
case,   taking  p  4  5y   lor   the  root,   the  cuIk»   of  which    in 
p^  -f  !•>/'•  V    -f-T'i/zy*    i    lid5i/\  so  that  uf  imisi  make 
73/>  =  177,  or  p  ^  \\  ;  und  I  lu  re   h  ill   result  H  ■{   (k)//    - 
//  4  l.Vv,or        VtVjy-    ;,:,:.aml^--   ,V/, ,', ,  u  lunc.' 
we  miglit  obtain  a  value  of  x. 


CHAP.  X.  OF  ALGEBRA.  385 

But  we  may  also  suppose  x  =  -^ ^  ;  and,  in  this  case, 

our  formula  becomes 

so  that  multiplying  both  terms  by  1  —  jy,  we  have  8-f  28y + 
89y*  —  125^  to  transform  into  a  cube.  If  we  therefore 
suppose,  according  to  the  first  case,  the  root  to  be  Ä  +  y^» 
the  cube  of  which  is  8  +  Ä8y  -f  y^«  +  Wy*»  ^®  '^^^^ 
89  -  I25y  =  V  -f  WJ^'  ö''  ^  it'J^  -  '4'  ;  and,  conse- 
quently,  y  =  rrî-J-  =  i,\  ;  whence  we  get  j;  =  11  ;  that  ia^ 
one  of  the  values  alreadv  known. 

But  let  us  rather  consider  our  fonnula  with  reference  to  the 
third  case,  and  suppose  its  root  to  be  2  —  5y  ;  the  cube  of 
this  binomial  being  8  -  6C^  -f  150/  —  125y,  we  shall 
have  28  +  89y  =  -  60  +  I5(h/;  thereforcy  =  J|,  whence 
we  get  x  =  —  '-|J°  ;  so  that  our  formula  becomes  '  'y4^'  *, 
or  the  cube  of  '|^*. 

160.  The  fore|çoing  are  the  methods  which  we  at  present 
know,  for  reducmg  such  formulae  as  we  have  considered, 
either  to  squares,  or  to  cubes,  provided  the  highest  power  of 
the  unknown  quantity  does  not  exceed  the  fourth  power  in 
tlie  former  case,  nor  the  third  in  the  latter. 

We  might  also  add  the  problem  ibr  transforming  a  given 
fonnulainto  a  biquadrate,  in  the  case  of  the  unknown  quantity 
not  exceeding  the  second  degree.  But  it  will  be  perceived, 
that,  if  such  a  formula  as  a  -f-  ftx  -f-  cjc^  were  proposed  to  be 
transformed  into  a  biquadrate,  it  must  in  the  first  place  be 
a  square  ;  after  which  it  will  only  remain  to  transform  the 
root  of  that  square  into  a  new  square,  by  the  rules  wliich  we 
have  given. 

If  x^  -f  7,  for  example,  is  to  be  made  a  biquadrate,  we 
first  make  it  a  square,  by  supposing 

X  =  -^3 — ^  ,  or  or  =  -  Q        ; 

the  formula  then  becomes  equal  to  the  s(}uare 

^-14gy-f4Sip^  _  g*-fl*g>*-h40/ 

the  root  of  which  -- — ^  must  likewise  be  transformed  into 

Spy 

a  square  ;  for  this  purpose,  let  us  multiply  the  two  terms  by 
2/}ç,  in  order  that  the  denominator  l)ecoming  a  square,  we 
may  have  only  to  consider  the  numerator  2pq{lp^  +  ?')• 
Now,  we  cannot  make  a  square  of  this  formula,  without 

c  c 


386  elkmkktn  fait  ii. 

having  previously  found  a  satisfactory  case;  so  that  ftU|>- 
poûng  q  -=-  pZf  m*e  must  have  the  formula 

and,  consequently,  if  we  divide  by  p\  the  formula  2;:(74  r^ 
must  become  a  suuare.  The  known  case  is  here  2  —  1,  for 
which  reason  we  snail  make  s  =  1  +  ^t  and  we  hhall  thus 

have 

(2  -h  %)  X  (8  -h  2y  +  y)  =  16  -h  SOy  +  %•  4%% 

the  root  of  which  we  shall  suppose  to  be  4  +  ^^  ;  then  Ms 
K|uare  will  be  16  -f-  20y  -f-  VV'»  ^bich,  being  made  equal 
to  the  formula,  gives  o  -f  ^y  =  V  «  therefore  y  ^  \^  and 

z  s=:  I  :  also,  ;s  =  —  ;  so  that  9  =  9»  and  />  =  8,  which 

makes  x  =  44J,  and  the  formula  7  -h  x*  =  ViVtV-  I*"  ^^ 
DOW  extract  the  square  root  of  this  fraction,  we  find  iHi 
and  taking  the  square  niot  of  this  also,  we  find  4i  \  coo» 
seauentlv»  the  given  formula  is  the  biquadrate  of  )4* 

16I.  Before  we  conclude  this  chapter,  we  must  obsenre, 
that  there  arc  some  formulae,  which  may  be  transformed  into 
cubes  in  a  general  manner;  for  example,  if  cjr-  must  be  a 
cube,  we  have  only  to  make  its  root  =1  pxj  and  we  6nd 

ex*  =  pl^x^^oT  c  =  /I'x,  that  is,  X  =  — ,  or  x  =  c^,  if  we 

write         instead  ot^  p. 
7 
The  reason  of  this  evidently  is,  that  the  formula  contains 
a  square,  on  which  account,  all  such  formula?,  as  a(b-\'Cxy, 
or  ab''  +  %ibcx  -f  nc'j-,  may  very  easily  be  transformed 
into  cubes.     In    fact,  if  we   supix)se  its  cube  root  to  be 

A-f  ex                                                                         (b  -f  cry 
,  we  shall  have  the  equation  a(b  -t-  cs)*  = ^ —  « 

which,  divided  by  (b  4-  r«")*,  gives  a  =■ ,  whence  we 

get  X  z. ,  a  value  in  which  y  is  arbitrary. 

'Iliis  shews  how  useful  it  is  to  n*solve  the  given  fommlx 
into  their  fjurtnrs,  whenever  it  is  possible:  on  this  subject« 
therefurts  we  think  it  will  1)e  proper  to  dwell  nt  some  length 
iu  tlie  following  chapter. 


CHAP.  XI.  OF  ALGEBRA.  387 


CHAP.  XI. 

Of  the  Resolution  of  the  Formula  aar  +  bay  +  of  into  its 

Factors. 


I6â.  l%e  letters  x  and  v  shall,  in  the  present  formula, 
present  only  integer  numbers;  for  it  has  been  sufficiently 
seen,  from  what  has  been  already  said,  that,  even  when  we  were 
confined  to  fractional  results,  the  question  may  always  be 
reduced  to  integer  numbers.     For.  example,  if  the  number 

sought,  ;r,  be  a  fraction,  w£  hav«  only  to  make  x  =  --,  and 

may  always  assign  ^and  u  in  integer  joumbers;  and  as  Ùi» 
fraction  may  be  reduced  to  its  lowest  terms,  we  shall  con- 
sider the  numbers  t  and  u  as  having  no  common  divisor. 

Let  us  suppose,  therefore,  in  the  present  formula,  that  x 
and  y  arc  only  integer  numbers,  and  endeavour  to  detehnine 
what  values  must  be  given  to  these  letters,  in  order  that  the 
formula  may  have  two  or  more  factors.  This  preliminary 
inquiry  is  very  necessary,  before  we  can  shew  how  to  trans- 
form this  formula  into  a  square,  a  cube,  or  any  higher 
power. 

163.  There  are  three  cases  to  be  considered  here.  The 
first,  when  the  formula  is  really  decomposed  into  two  rational 
factors  ;  which  happens,  as  we  have  already  seen,  when 
b^  —  4tac  becomes  a  sqyare. 

The  second  case  is, that ^  which  those  two  factors  ure 
equal  ;  and  in  which,  consequently,  the  formula  is  a  square. 

The  third  case  is,  when  the  mrmula  has  only  irrational 
factors,  whether  they  be  simply  irrational,  or  at  the  same 
time  imaginary.  They  will  be  simply  irrational,  wbqn 
b^  —  4kic  is  a  positive  number  without  being  a  square  ;  and 
they  will  be  imaginary,  if  6*  —  4ac  be  negative. 

if)4.  If,  in  order  to  begin  with  the  first  case,  we  suppose 
that  the  formula  is  resolvible  into  two  rational  factors,  we 
may  give  it  this  form,  {Jj^+g'/)  X  (hx  4-  Xrj/),  which  already 
contams  two  factors.  If  we  then  wish  it  to  contain,  in  a  ge- 
neral manner,  a  greater  number  of  factors,  we  have  only  to 
make^  -f  ^^  =  pq^  and  hx  -{•  kjf  =^  rs  ;  our  formula  will 
then  become  equal  to  the  product  pifrs  ;  and  will  thue  oeoea 
sarily  contain  four  £Eictors,^nd  we  may  increase  this  number 

(•  c  2 


S88  KI.F.MT.XTft  FAIT  II. 

ftt  pIcMHurc.     Now,  fruiii  ilicëc  two  equations  wc  oblaîii  a 
double  value  for  .r,  namely,  x  ^-  ^-—^t  and  x  ~  — r —  » 
whieli  gives  hj^  —  hgy  ^frs  —  fky  ;  eonsequentlvy 
w  =*^, — r-^,  and  x  —  -^ — ~—  :  but  if  we  chouse  to  hare 

X  and  tf  cxpreitted  in  integer  numbens  we  must  give  «ich 

Clues  to  the  letters  p^  q^  r,  and  #,  that  the  numerator  vamj 
really  divisible  by  the  denominator;  which  happens 
cither  when  p  and  r,  or  q  and  9^  are  divisible  by  that  d^ 
nominator. 

165.  To  render  all  this  more  clear,  let  there  be  given  the 
formula  jr^  -*y%  which  is  composed  of  the  factors  («r  -f  ^)  X 
{x  "  y)*  Now,  if  this  formula  must  be  resolved  into  a 
greater  numlier  of  factors,  we  may  make  x  +  ^  =  pq%  and 

jT  —  y  r=  r,f  ;  we  shall  then  have  x  =  -^^^t  »nd 

y  =  -^-^ —  ;  but,  ill  order  tlial  these  values  may  liecome  in. 

teger  numbers,  the  two  products,  pq  and  rj,  must  be  either 
both  even,  or  both  odd. 

For  example,  let  yi  =  7,  ç  —  6,  r  =  3,  and  #  =r  1,  we 
shall  liave  pq  -=  35,  and  rn  —  3;  thereibre,  x  =  19,  and 
jf  =  1(5;  and  thence  x'  —  y'^  —  105,  which  is  composed  ot' 
the  factor»  7  x  5  x  3  x  1  ;  m>  that  this  case  is  attended 
with  no  difficulty. 

166.  Tlie  second  is  attended  with  still  less  ;  namely,  that 
in  which  the  fonnula,  omtaining  two  enual  factors^  may  be 
repre>enled  thus  :  (^/.'r  +  /jy)\  that  is,  l)y  a  sq^iian*,  whidi 
can  have  no  other  factor»  than  those  which  anse  from  the 
root^^  -h  ffy  ;  for  if  we  make  /x  +  {sy  .  yi^r,  the  fonnula 
bGOi>mes/>'*Y'f '*»  and  may  conseil iiently  have  as  many  factors  as 
we  choose.  We  must  farther  renjark,  that  one  only  of  the 
two  numlM*rs  x  and  y  is  determined,  and  the  other  may  be 

tor  —  "y 
taken  at  [Neasure;  fi»r  x  :r         r       "    ^"*'  **    **   "**-^    ^'^ 

%f 
give  y  such  a  \ahie  va  will  renune  the  ft  action. 

The  eas':e:«t  fonnula  to  manage  of  this  kind,  is  x*  ;  if  wr 
make  X  >.-.  r>çr,  the  M|uare  x-  will  «mtain  threi*  M|uare  fac- 
tors, nmne[y/i\  ly',  ami  r\ 

167.  Se\'eral  diffictdties  occur  in  amnidcring  the  third 
case,  which  is  that  in  which  our  formula  cannot  oe  resolvod 
into  two  rational  fartf»rs;  and  here  partictdar  artifices  are 


CHAP.  XI.  OF  ALüEBttA.  389 

necessary,  in  order  to  find  such  values  for  x  and  y,  that  thf 
formula  may  contain  two,  or  more  factors. 

We  shall,  however,  render  this  inquiry  less  difficult  by 
observing,  that  our  formula  may  be  easily  transformed  into 
another,  m  which  the  middle  term  is  wanting  ;  for,  in  fact, 

we  have  only  to  suppose  a*=  " ,  in  order  to  have  the  fol- 
lowing formula  : 

neglecting  the  middle  term,  we  shall  consider  xhe  formula 
ax'^  +  cjfi  and  shall  seek  what  values  tvre  must  give  to  x  and 
yy  in  order  that  this  formula  may  be  resolved  into  factors. 
Here  it  will  be  easily  perceived,  that  this  depends  on  the  na- 
ture of  the  numbers  a  and  c  ;  so  that  we  shall  begin  with 
&ome  determinate  formulae  of  this  kind. 

168.  Let  us,  therefore,  first  propose  the  formula  ar*  +y% 
which  comprehends  all  the  numbers  Üiat  are  the  sum  of  two 
squares,  the  least  of  which  we  shall  set  down  ;  namely,  those 
between  1  and  50: 

1,  2,  4,  5,  8,  9,  10,  13, 16,  17, 18,  20,26,  26,  29,  32, 
34,  36,  37,  40,  41,  45,  49,  50. 

Among  these  numbers  there  are  evidently  some  prime 
numl)ers  which  have  no  divisors,  namely,  tlie  following: 
2t  5,  13,  17,  29,  37,  41  :  but  the  rest  have  divisors,  aiid  il- 
lustrate this  question,  namely,  '  What  values  are  we  to 
adopt  for  or.  and  y,  in  order  that  the  formula  or*  +y-  may 
have  divisors,  or  factors,  and  that  it  may  have  any  number 
of  factors  ?*  We  shall  observe,  farther,  that  we  may  neg- 
lect the  cases  in  which  x  and  y  have  a  common  divisor,  be- 
cause then  jr^  +  y'^  would  be  divisible  by  the  same  divisor, 
and  even  by  its  square.  For  example,  if  jr  =  7/>  and 
y  =  7y,  the  sum  of  tne  squares,  or 

49p*  +  49?-  =  49(/)'-  -f  q% 

will  be  divisible  not  only  by  7,  but  also  by  49  :  for  which 
reason,  we  sliall  extend  the  question  no  farther  than  the 
formulae,  in  which  x  ax\ày  are  prime  to  each  other. 

We  now  easily  see  where  the  difficulty  lies  :  for  though  it 
is  evident,  when  the  two  numbers  x  andi  ^  are  odd,  that  the 
formula  x^  -f  .y^  becomes  an  even  number,  and,  consequently, 
divisible  by  2  ;  yet  it  is  often  difficult  to  discover  whether 
the  formula  have  divisors  or  not,  when  one  ofthe  numbers  is 
even  and  the  other  odd,  because  the  formula  itself  in  that  case 
is  also  odd.     We  do  not  mention  the  case  in  which  x  and  y 


SBO  ILEMENTS  fAftT  U. 

trt  both  even«  becnuse  we  have  already  said,  that  these  noB- 
ben  must  not  have  a  omnmon  di visor. 

169.  The  two  numbers  x  and  y  must  therefore  be  prime 
to  each  other,  and  yet  the  formula  x'  +  y*  must  contain 
two  or  more  factors.  The  preceding  methoä  does  not  apply 
here,  because  the  formula  is  not  res4)lvible  into  two  rational 
fiMlors;  but  the  irrational  factors,  which  compose  the  formula, 
and  which  may  be  represented  by  the  product 

(jr  +J^>^-1)  X  (x -j^v/- 1), 
will  answer  the  same  purpose.  In  fact,  we  are  certain,  if  the 
formula  x*  -^-j/^  have  real  factors,  that  these  irrational  factors 
must  be  composed  of  other  factors  ;  because,  if  they  had  not 
divisors,  their  product  could  not  have  any.  Now,  as  these 
factors  arc  not  only  irrational,  but  imaginary  ;  and  farther» 
as  the  numbers  x  and  y  have  no  common  divisor,  and  ther^ 
fore  cannot  contain  rational  factors;  the  factors  of  these 
quantities  must  also  be  irrational,  and  even  imaginary. 
,  170.  If,  therefore,  we  wish  the  formula  x*  -h^  to  have 
two  rational  factors,  we  must  resolve  each  of  the  two  irra- 
tional factors  into  two  other  factors  ;  for  which  reason,  let  us 
first  suppose 

X  -h^V'-  1  =  CP  4  9^^- 1)  X  fr  -I-*  v^— 1); 

and  since  s^ —  1  may  be  taken  m\nuê^  as  well  as  jAut^  wc 
shall  also  have 

X  -  v,/- 1  =  (/>  -  y^/-  1)  X  (r  — *  x^-  1). 

Let  us  now  take  the  product  of  these  two  quantities,  and  we 
shall  find  our  formula  x*  -f  J^*  =  (/?*  -f  7*)  x  (r*  -f  #')  ; 
that  is,  it  contains  the  two  rational  factors  p'  +  9%  and 
r-  -f  *•. 

It  remains,  therefore,  to  determine  the  values  of  x  and  f, 
which  must  likewise  be  rational.  Now,  tlie  supposition  we 
have  made,  gives 

X  -f  y  ^-^  -  1  =  ;>r  —  7#  4-  /«  \^  -  1  +  yr  ^'  -  1,  and 
X  -  ^  ^^  —  1  =  />r  —  y*  —  /w  %'  —  1  -  7r  v^  -  1 . 

If  we  add  these  formula?  tcïgcther,  we  shall  have  x  =  />r  —  lyi  ; 
if  we  subtract  them  from  each  other,  we  find 

Hence  it  follows,  if  we  make  x  =  />r — yt,  and  v  — /^  4-yr, 
tliat  our  fonnula  x'  -f  y'  nui^t  have  two  factors,  smce  we 
find  X»  -i-j/'  =  (^-  4  V)  X  (r'-'  -|-  *•).  If,  after  this  a 
greater  number  of  factors  Ik*  reciuin^l,  we  have  only  to  m9^ 
sign,  in  tlie  same  manner,  such  valutas  to  p  and  //,  that 
p-  4-  y*  may  have  two  factors;  we  sliall  then   ha%e   thrct» 


CHAP.  XI.  oy  ALT.BBRA»  3B1 

I 

factors  in  all,  and  the  ntimbo:  might  be  augmented  bj  this 
method  to  aiiy  length. 

171.  As  in  this  solution  we  have  found  onlj  the  second 

?owers  o(p,  q,  r,  and  *,  we  may  also  take  these  letters  minus, 
f  Çf  for  example,  be  negative,  we  shall  have  x  ^pr  •{•  qs^ 
and  y  ^  ps  —  qr;  but  tne  bum  of  the  squares  wiU  be  tlie 
same  as  before  ;  which  she  ws,  that  when  a  number  is  equal 
to  a  product,  such  as  (p*  -|-  jr«)  x  (r*  -f  ^'X  we  may  resolve 
it  into  two  squares  in  two  ways;  for  we  have  first  found 
X  zzpr  --  qsy  and  y  zi  ps  ^  qr^  and  then  also 

X  :=ipr  •\'  jr.t,  and  y  ::z  ps  -^  qr. 

For  example,  let  ^  =  8,  y  =  2,  r  =  2,  and  *  =  1  :  then 
we  shall  have  the  product  IS  x  5  =  65  =  j?'  +  V*;  in 
which  a:  =  4,  and  y  =  7  ;  or  jr  =  8,  and  ^  =  1  ;  since  io 
both  cases  x*  +  y*  =  65.  If  we  multiply  several  numbers 
of  this  class,  we  shall  also  have  a  product,  which  may  be  the 
sum  of  two  squares  in  a  greater  number  of  ways.  For  ex- 
ample, if  we  multiply  together  2*  +  1*  =  5,  3^  +  2*  =  13, 
and  4-  +  1*  =  17,  we  shall  find  1105,  which  may  be  re^ 
solved  into  two  squares  in  four  ways,  as  follows  : 

1.  33*  +    4',     2.  32*  -f    9*, 
3.  31«  +  U\    4.  24«  +  23«. 

172;  So  that  among  the  numbers  that  are  contained  in 
the  formula  a?*  -f  ^,  are  found,  in  the  first  place,  those 
which  arc,  by  multiplication,  the  product  of  two  or  more 
numbers,  prime  to  each  other;  and,, secondly,  those  of  a 
different  class.  We  shall  call  the  latter  shnplejactors  of  the 
formula  j?^  +^S  and  the  former  compound  Jactors s  th^ 
the  simple  factots  will  be  such  numbers  as  the  following: 

1,  2,  5,  9,  18,  17,  29,  87,  41,  49,  «cc. 
and  in  this  series  we  shall  distinguish  two  kinds  of  numbers  ; 
one  are  prime  numbers,  as  2,  5,  13,  17,  29,  87,  41,  which 
have  no  divisor,  and  are  all  (except  the  number  2),  such, 
that  if  we  subtract  1  from  them,  tne  remainder  will  be  di^ 
visible  by  4  ;  so  that  all  these  numbers  are  contained  in  the 
expression  4n  +  1.  The  second  kind  comprehends  tlie 
square  numbers  9,  49,  &c.  and  it  may  be  observed,  that  the 
roots  of  these  squares,  namely,  3,  7,  &c.  are  not  found  in  the 
series,  and  that  their  roots  are  contained  in  the  forroulœ 
4^1—1.  It  is  also  evident,  that  no  number  of  the  form 
4n  —  1  can  be  the  sum  of  two  squares  ;  for  since  all  num- 
bers of  this  form  are  odd,  one  of  the  two  squares  must  be 
even,  and  the  other  odd.  Now,  we  have  already  seen,  that 
all  even  squares  are  divi^blc  by  4,  and  that  the  odd  squares 
are  conlainctl  in  the  formula  4ai  +  1  :  if  we  therefore  add 


8BX  KLLMfiNTS  PAKT  II. 

tugether  an  even  l^ld  an  odd  equare,  the  tum  will  alw^a 
have  the  form  of  4n  -h  1,  and  never  of  4n  —  1.  Farthert 
every  prime  number,  which  belongs  to  the  formuU  4i»  +  1 , 
is  die  sum  of  two  squares  ;  this  is  undoubtedly  true,  buttt 
is  not  easy  to  demonstrate  it  *• 

173.  Let  us  proceed  farther,  and  consider  the  formula 
sfi  +  S{y%  that  we  may  see  what  values  we  must  give  to  x 
aod  y^  m  order  that  it  may  have  factors.  As  this  formula 
b  expressed  by  the  imaginxu^  factors  (x  +  jf  v^  --  S)  x 
(x  —  .y  N^  —  2),  it  is  evident,  as  before,  that,  if  it  luive  di- 
visors, these  imaginary  factors  must  likewise  have  divisors. 
Suppose,  therefore, 

whence  it  immediately  follows,  that 

X  -  y  ,/—  2  =  (p  •  yi/-  2)  X  (r  -  *  ^^ -  2), 
aod  we  shall  have 

X»  H-  2/  =  (p*  +  2g*)  X  (r*  -h  2#«)  ; 
so  that  this  formula  has  two  factors,  both  of  which  have  the 
same  form-     But  it  remains  to  determine  the  values  of  x  and 
y^  which  produce  this  transformation.    For  this  purpose,  we 
shall  consider  that,  since 

X  +^^-  2  =/;r  -  2yi  +  ^^/~  2  +;Vv/  — 2,  and 
X  —  yv'-  2  =  pr  —  271—  yr  /—  2  —  p9^  —  2, 

we  have   the  sum   2x  =  2pr  —  \q9\    and,  conâcquentlj» 
X  "=>  pr  —  2qê  :  also  the  difference 

2y  ^/-  2  =  2yr,'-  2  -f  2pi  ^   -  2; 

so  that  y  =  qr  -^pi»  When,  therefore,  our  formula  x*  4-  2y* 
has  factors,  they  will  always  be  numbers  of  the  j^nie  kiml 
as  the  formula;  that  is  to  luiy,  one  will  have  the  fonn 
p*  -f-  2y  %  and  the  otlier  the  fumi  r^  +  2v^  ;  and,  in  order  that 
this  may  be  the  case,  x  and  y  may  aliO  Ik*  detenuined  in  two 
different  ways,  because  tf  may  Ik*  either  positive  or  m^n^tive  ; 
for  we  shall  first  have  x  -^  pr  —  Si^jr,  and  y  =.  ps  +  yr  ; 
and,  in  t)i«?  second  ulaci*,  x  ^  pr  -k-  2aê,  and  y  ^  m  —  qr. 

174.  This  formula  X*  -f  2y*  comprehend»  tlien*lore  all  tlic 
numbers  which  result  from  addin^ç  together  a  M|uare  and 
twice  another  square.  The  following  is  an  eimnieration  of 
these  numbers  as  far  as  50  ; 

1,  2,  a,  4,  6,  8,  9,  lit  12,  16,  17,  18,  19,  22,  2K  2->, 
27,  32,  33,  34,  J6,  38,  41,  43,  44,  49,  50. 

*  The  ciirtous  resdiM  iniv  acc  it  clL'iiioiiJttrateil  h>  (iauv«,  m 

m  m 

ht»**  l)i»quisi  lionet  Aiitliiiictiia*  .*   ,Xi\i\  by  De  ia(»i.in;;r.  m  the 
Meniiiin»  of  IKtÜii,  17*»*^. 


CUAP.  XI.  OK  ALGEBRA.  39S 

We  shall  divide  these  numbers,  as  before,  into  eimfde 
and  compound  ;  tlie  simple,  or  those  which  are  not  com- . 
})ounded  of  the  preceding  numbers,  are  tliese:  1,  2,  3,  11, 
17,  19,  ^y  41,  48,  49,  all  which,  except  the  squares  25 
and  49,  are  prime  numbers  ;  and  we  may  rpmarlc,  in  ge- 
neral, that,  if  a  number  is  prime,  and  is  not  found  in  thia 
series,  we  are  sure  to  find  its  square  in  it.  It  may  be  ob- 
served, also,  that  all  priine  numbers  contmned  in  our 
formula,  either  belong  to  the  expression  8n  +  1,  or  8n  +  ^  ; 
while  all  the  other  prime  numbers,  namely,  those  which  are 
contained  in  the  expressions  8n  -j-  6,  and  8n  -}"  '7,  can  never 
form  the  sum  of  a  square  and  twice  a  square  :  it  is  farther 
certain,  that  all  the  prime  numbers  which  are  contained  in 
one  of  the  other  formula?,  8»  +  1  >  ^^^  ^^  +  ^f  are  always 
resolvible  into  a  square  added  to  twice  a  square. 

175.  Let  us  proceed  to  the  examination  of  die  general 
formula  x^  -f  cy*,  and  consider  by  what  values  of  x  and^ 
we  may  transform  it  into  a  product  of  factors.' 

We  shall  proceed  as  before;  that  is,  we  shall  represent 
the  formula  by  the  product 

(x  4-  1/  s'  -  e)  X  (or  —  J/  ^/— c), 

and  shall  likewise  express  each  of  these  factors  by  two  fac* 
tors  of  the- same  kind  ;  that  is,  we  shall  make 

^  -f  y  x^— -  c  =  (p  -{-q  /  —  c)  X  (r  -{•  8  s/"  c)y  and 
X  -  jy^/  —  c   -  (/?  —q  /—  c)  X  (r  —  «  \/—  c)  ;  whence 
x^'Vcj'  =  (p*  +  cq)  X  (r«  -f  cs"). 

We  see,  therefore,  that  the  factors  are  again  of  the  same 
kind  with  the  formula.  With  regard  to  the  values  of  4rand 
y,  we  shall  readily  find  x  =  pr  -f  cqs^  and  y  ^  qr  —  p#;  or 
X  =  pr  —  cqsy  and  y  =^  ps  +  çr  ;  and  it  is  easy  to  perceive 
how  the  formula  may  be  resolved  into  a  greater  number  of 
factors. 

176.  It  will  not  now  be  difficult  to  obtain  factors  for 
the  formula  x^  —  cy*\  for,  in  the  first  place,  we  have  only 
to  write  — c,  instead  of  +'*;  but,  farther,  we  may  find 
them  immediately  in  the  following  manner.  As  our  for- 
mula is  equal  to  the  product 

(x  -irys'c)  X  {x  -y  v^O, 

let  us  make  or  +  ^  a/c  =  (p  +  ?  \^c)  x  {r\  -f^A/c),  and 

a;  —  .y  x/c  =  (p  —  Ç  \^c)  x  (r  — Sy/c\  and  we 
shall  immediately  have  j:*  —  cy^  =  (p*  —  eg*)  x  (r^  —  c#')  ; 
so  that  this  formula,  as  well  as  the  preceding,  is  equal  to  a 
product  whose  factors  resemble  it  in  form.     With  regard  to 


394  KllMKNT»  FAB«  lU 


thft  TaliMS  of  X  and  ^»  they  will  bkeirifie  be  found  to  be 
double;  tbmt  ii  to  tay,  we  shall  baTe 

jr  =  pr  +  r^«,  and  y  ^  qr  -k-  pê\  we  hhall  also  hare 
X  ^  pr  ^  cqjf^  and  y  si  p$  ^  qr.    If  we  choee  to  make 
trial,  and  we  whether  we  obtain  from  these  ▼allies  the  pro* 
duel  already  found,  we  should  have,  by  trying  the  firsts 

X«  =  pV  -f  ftcpqn  +  t^ff\  and 
y«  =  p«#*  -h  ipqrs    +  g  r*,  or 
cy«  =:  qjP^«  4-  Scpqrs  -I-  rjf*i^  ;  so  that 
J*  —  nr*  :s  jAr-  —    cp«*«   -h  c^q^s*  —  ryV-,  which  is  just 
the  ^üduct  already  found,  (p*  —  rj*)  X  (r*  —  «•). 

177.  Hitherto  we  have  considered  the  first  term  as  with» 
out  a  coefRdent  ;  but  we  shall  now  suppose  that  term  to  be 
multiplied  also  by  another  letter,  and  snail  seek  what  factors 
thé  formula  ax*  +  ry*  may  amtain. 

Here  it  is  evident  that  our  formula  is  equal  to  the  product 
(x^/fl  +y  %''—  0  X  (x  s^a  —  jf  N^—  c\  and,  consequently» 
that  it  is  required  to  give  factors  also  to  these  two  factor». 
Now,  in  this  a  difficulty  occurs;  for  if,  according  to  tlie 
second  method,  we  make 

Xy/a  +  ifs^'-  c  =  {ps^a  +  q^-  c)  X  (r  s'a  +  ê  x' -  f)- 

mpr  —  cqs  -f  p#%/  ^  ac  ^  qr  x^  ^  aCj  and 

jT^a  — y\/-  c=(/iv^a  — 7^/  -  r)  x  (r\/ii  —  #v^  — r)=r 

apr  -^  cqs  -^  pss^  '-  ac  -  qr^^  —  or,  we  sliall  have 

ix  s^a  zz,  fUiifr  -  Slcqs^  and 

Sjr  %^—  r  =.  ^)s  x'—  ÜC  +  üqr  x—  cr;  that  is  to   Niiy.    Wf 

have  found  lx)th  for  x  ami  for  y  irrational  valuo,  which 

eannot  here  be  admitte<l. 

178.  But  this  difficulty  may  1k'  removed  thus:  let  u^ 
make 

^  y^a  \-  tfy/^c  -  {p  X  il  +  q  \^  -  c)  X  {r  ^  ê  ^-^ac)  =: 
pr  x^a  —  cqsx  ''  +  V\  '  —  ''  "h  f'P^^  ~  ^  And 
x^'«  -  ^v/—  r  --  (/»x  (/  —  V\^  ^0  ^  (r  -  1  v-  or)  - 
pr  s  a  —  cq.^v'a  —  r/r  .,  —  r  —  ///>*  x'  —  c.  This  su|)|MMitioti 
will  give  the  folloviingvahic!»  lor  i  andy;  namely,  j*  zipr  —  rç^, 
and  jf  =  qr  +  aint  ;  and  our  formula,  ax^  -f  cy%  will  liavc 
the  factors  (ap-  -r  ry')  x  (r^  +  "cj*),  one  of  which  only 
is  of  the  same  form  uith  the  fonnula,  the  other  Ikmii;^ 
different. 

179.  Thrre  is  still,  howc%er,  a  ^reat  affinity  Utwitn 
tlii>e  two  loriDulfT,  <ir  fiictorH;  Miice  ail  the  nuinlup»  loo- 
taiiKnl  in  the  tir^t,  if  nniltiplunl  hy  a  numlxr  oMitnimxl  in 
tlie  secoml,  re\cTt  again  t«>  the  first.  We  luive  alnndv 
seen,  lh:il  two  numlHT*»  of  the  bei^»ntl  fc»mi  x^  +  flrv\  whirh 


CUA^P.  XI.  OF   ALOKBBA. 

returns  to  the  formula  x^  4-  cjA^  and  which  we  have  ahready 
considered,  if  multiplied  togeUier,  will  produce  a  number  of 
the  same  form. 

It  only  femaitts,  therefore,  to  examine  to  what  formula  we 
are  to  refer  the  product  of  two  numbers  of  the  first  kind,  or 
of  the  form  ax'^  +  cy*. 

For  this  purpose,  let  us  multiply  the  two  formuks 
(ap^  4-  cy*)  X  (ar^  +  «*),  which  are  of  tile  first  kind«  It 
is  easy  to  see  that  this  product  may  be  represented  in  the 
following  manner  :  (apr  +  cqsY  +  ac(ps  —  qry.  If,  there- 
fore, we  suppose 

apr  +  cqs  =  a*,  and  ps  •--  qr  =  y, 
we  shall  have  the  formula  x^  +  fJtci/\  which  is  of  the  last 
kind.  Whence  it  follows,  that  if  two  numbers  of  the  first 
kind,  ax*  +  cy%  be  multiplied  together,  the  product  will  be 
a  number  of  the  second  kmd.  If  we  represent  the  numbers 
of  the  first  kind  by  I,  and  those  of  the  second  by  11^  we 
may  represent  the  conclusion  to  which  we  have  been  led, 
abridged  as  follows  : 

I  X  1  gives  II  ;  i  X  n  gives  i;  ti  x  li  ^ves  n. 

And  this  shews  much  better  what  the  result  ought  to 
be,  if  we  multiply  together  more  than  two  of  these  num- 
bers; namely,  that  i  x  i  X  i  gives  i;  that  i  x  t  x  ii 
gives  II  ;  that  i  x  ii  x  ii  gives  i  ;  and  lastly,  that  ii  x  ii  x  ii 
gives  II. 

180.  In  order  to  illustrate  the  preceding  Article,  let 
tf  =  S,  and  c  =  3  ;  there  will  result  two  kinds  of  numbers, 
one  contmned  in  the  formula  2x^  -f"  %^>  ^^^  other  œntained 
in  the  formula  x^ + 6y*.  Now,  the  numbers  of  the  first  kind, 
as  far  as  50,  are 

1st,    2,    3,    5,    8,  11,  12,  14,  18,  «0,  21,  27, 
29,  SO,  32,  35,  44s  45,  48,  50; 
and  the  numbers  of  the  second  kind,  as  far  as  50,  are 

2cl,  1,  4,  6,  7,  9,  10,  15,  16,  22,  24,  25, 
28,  31,  33,  36,  40,  42,  49. 
If,  therefore,  we  multiply  a  number  of  the  first  kind,  for 
example,  35,  by  a  number  of  the  second,  suppose  31,  the 
product  1085  will  undoubtedly  be  contained  in  the  formula 
2x^  +  3y^;  that  is,  we  may  find  such  a  number  fory,  that 
1085  —  3/y^  may  be  the  double  of  a  scjuare,  or  =  2j"^  :  now, 
this  happens,  first,  when  y  =  3,  in  which  case  or  =  23  ;  in 
the  second  place,  when  y  =  11,  so  that  a?  =  19;  in  the 
third  place,  when  y  =  13,  which  gives  x  =  17;  and,  in  the 
fourth  place,  when  y  =  19,  whence  x  =  1. 

We  may  divide  these  two  kinds  of  numbers,  like  the 
others,  into  simple  and  conijyoHnd  numbers  :  we  shall  apply 


äB6  ELEMENTS  fAMT  IK 

Chb  latter  term  to  such  as  are  compoued  of  two  or  moie  of 
the  funallest  num()ers  of  cither  kiiut  ;  so  that  the  simple 
Dumber»  of  the  first  kind  will  be  S,  3,  5,  11,  89;  and  the 
oomp>und  numbers  of  the  same  class  will  be  8,  12, 14,  18, 
SO,  S7,  SO,  9^  S5,  40,  45,  48,  50,  &c. 

The  simple  numlK*rs  of  the  second  class  will  be  1,  7,  81  ; 
and  all  the  reit  of  this  class  will  l)e  compound  numbers  ; 
namely,  4,  6,  9,  10,  15,  16,  2S,  34,  25,  i»,  83,  86,  40, 
44,  40. 


CHAR  XII. 

(^  the  Transformation   of  the  Formula   ax*  -k-  cy^   Mtio 

Squares,  and  higlur  Powers, 

181.  We  have  seen  that  it  is  frequently  im|ios»ible  to  re- 
duce numl)ers  of  the  form  ax*-  -f~  ^y^  to  sc{uarcs;  but  when- 
ever it  is  possible,  wc  may  transform  this  formula  into  an- 
other, in  which  a  =  1. 

For  example,  the  formula  2p^—  9^  may  become  a  square; 
fbr,  as  it  may  be  represented  by 

{}ip  +  qY  -  2(y)  -r  qV, 
we  have  only  to  make  )lp  f  ^  =  t,  and  p  \  9  ^  ^«  and  we 
sliall  ^'t  the  formula  x-  —  ^y-,  in  which  #i  —  1,  and  r  -=  2. 
A  similar  transtbrmation  always  takes  pbce,  whenever  such 
fonnula*  can  Ik*  made  5c|uares.  Thus  uhcn  it  is  rec|uired 
to  transfonn  the  formula  ax'  -^  cy^^  into  a  s<|nare,  or  mto  a 
higher  |x>wer,  (pro^idi^d  it  l)e  even)  we  may«  without 
hesitation,  suppose  a  ^  1,  and  consider  the  other  eases  as 
imposable. 

i85L  lA»t,  therefore,  the  formula  x*  -♦-  ry*  Ik»  i;n)|Mi8ed, 
and  let  it  be  required  to  make  it  a  M|uan*.     As  it  in  com- 

K\\  of  the  fcclors  (r  +  y  %  —  r)  x  (x  —  y  ^^  —  r),  thi-i^? 
irii  nm^t  either  (k  Miuares,  or  stiuares  multiplied  hv  tlur 
lame  nunilKT.  For,  it  the  prtnluct  ol  two  numbi*rs  for 
example,  i>^,  niu*t  Ik»  a  Mpiure,  we  nui-^t  liavr  p  =  r-,  and 
q  -'  «^;  tnat  is  to  ^ay,  each  factor  \s  of  itself  a  M|u:in*,  nr 
p  Ü.  mr*'^  and  q  —  fiw*  ;  and  therefore  these  faelor^  are 
square^  multiplied  lioth  by  the  same  number.  For  uhieh 
n^aMHi,  letusnmkex  -k-  y\  —  r  =  m{p  f  gv^  — f/;  it  hiII 
folloH  tluit  .r  —  y  v'—  r  =  m(v  —  Oy/  —  f)\      and 

ue  î*li.tll  liu\e  J  •  4-  O  *  *•*(/'*  +  ''?)*»  ••Wh  15  a  M|uare. 


CHAP.  XII^  OF    ALGF.BHA.  397 

Farther,  in  order  to  determine  x  and  y^  we  have  tlie  equa- 
tions X  4-  y  v^  —  c  =  mp^  -{-  9,mpq  v/—  c  —  wiey\  and 

X  "  ys/  "  c  =^  mp'  —  S^mpq  s/ —  c  —  mcq'^'^  in  which 
X  is  necessarily  equal  to  the  rational  part,  and  y  -/  —  c  to 
the  irrational  part  ;  so  that  x  =  mp^  —  tncy*,  and 
y  v^  —  c  =  2mpq  v^  —  c,  or  y  =:  S/r/pQ'  ;  and  these  are  the 
values  of  x  and  j/  that  will  transform  the  expression 
X*  4"  ^^*  îïï^o  a  square,  m\p^  +  ^")%  the  root  of  which  is 
mp'  4-  mcq\ 

183.  If  the  numbers  x  and  ^  have  not  a  common  divisor, 
we  must  make  m  =  1.     Then,  in  order  that  x^  +  cy*  may 
become  a  square,  it  will  be  sufficient  to  make  a;  =  j»*  —  cor',  * 
and  tf  =  2pqj  which  will  render  the  formula  equal  to  the 
square  (;;*  +  cq^Y. 

Or,  instead  of  making  x  =  ;/'  —  egr%  we  may  also  sup- 
pose X  =  c^^  -*  p%  since  the  square  j?^  is  still  left  the  same. 

Besides,  the  same  formulée  having  been  already  found 
by  methods  altogether  different,  there  can  be  no  doubt 
with  regard  to  thé  accuracy  of  the  method  which  we  have 
now  employed.  In  fact,  if  we  wish  to  make  x^  +  cy 
a  square,  we  suppose,  by  the  former  method,  the  root  to  be 

x-f^,andfind.^-fc/=a:^  +  ^e^+-^. 

Expunge  the  ar*,  divide  the  other  terms  by  y,  multiply  by 
q-,  and  we  shall  have 

cq^j/  =  2pqx  +  p^y  ;  or  cq^y  —  pV  =  ^PÇ-^' 
Lastly,  dividing  by  2pqy  and  also  by  t/,  there  results 

—  =   \^       ,     Now,  as  X  and  v,  as  well  as  p  and  a,  are  to 
7/  ^pq  -^  .^         ^' 

have  no  common  divisor,  we  must  majke  x  equal  to  the 
numerator,  and  y  equal  to  the  denominator,  and,  hence  we 
shall  obtain  the  same  results  as  we  have  already  found, 
namely,  x  =  ^  —  /)%  and  y  =  2pq. 

184.  This  solution  will  hold  good,  whether  the  number  c 
be  positive  or  negative  ;  but,  mrther,  if  this  number  itself 
had  factors,  as,  for  instance,  the  formula  x^  -{-  aty\  we 
should  not  only  have  the  preceding  solution,  which 
gives  X  =  acq*  —  p*,  and  y  =  2pq^  but  this  also,  namely, 
x  =  cy*  —  np\  and  y  =.  2pq  ;  for,  in  this  last  case,  we  have» 
as  in  the  other, 

x^  +  acf  =  cq^  +  9Mp^q^  +  </>*  =  (cy«  +  a/>')"; 

which  takes  place  also  when  we  make  x  =  ap^  —  cy*,  be- 
cause the  square  x-  remains  the  same. 


SOB  CLKMRNT8  PABT  II. 

This  new  nolutioii  is  also  obCâtned  from  the  last  methcMlY 
in  the  following  manner  : 

If  we  Biake  x  +  yy/  — «c  =  (p  /a  -f  q  v^—  cf,  and 

*  ^ff^  —  ae  =  (p  ^/fl  —  q  ^f^  cf,      wc 
shall  have  ar*  -f  ae^«  =  (ap«  +  ry-)«, 

and,  consequently,  equal  to  a  square.     Farther,  because 
X  +  jf  v^  —  œ  =:  ap'^  +  2py  ^^  —  «r  —  cq\  and 
jp  —  j^^  —  ae  =  «/>■  —  2pç  v^—  ae  —  ry*, 
we  find  X  :=:ap^  —  rj-,  and  y  =  2pq. 

It  is  farther  evident,  that  if  the  number  ae  be  reaoiviUe 
into  two  factors,  in  a  greater  number  of  ways,  we  may  also 
find  a  greater  number  of  solutions. 

186.  Let  us  illustrate  this  by  means  of  some  determinate 
formula;  ;  and,  first,  if  the  formula  x^  +  ^  roust  bcooiii«  a 

auare,  wehavear  =s  1  ;  so  thatx  »  p*  —  ^^andjf  =  ^^P9; 
^nce  it  follows  that  x*  +  v-  =*  (p*  +  fV- 
If  we  woukl  have  x*  — y   ^  a  ;  we  have  «r  e  —  1  ;  «o 
that  we  shall  take  x  =  p*  +  9^,  and  jf  s  S//f ,  and  there  will 

result  X*  — y  =  (p*  -  T*)*  =  D- 

If  we  would  have  the  formula  x*  +  2/^  s  n,  we  have 
«e  as  S;  let  us  therefore  take  x  =  p«  —  5!y',  or  x=2p*— y*, 
and  y  ^  Spg,  and  we  shall  have 

x*  +  %•  =  (P*+  ?•)  ,  or  X«  +  2y'  =  («p*  +  y')'. 

If,  in  the  fourth  place,  we  would  have  x'  —  2y'  =:  a , 
in  which  ar  =  —  î^,  we  ^hall  have  x  =  p'  4- ^7',  ami 
y  =  <e/,y  ;  tliercforc  x'  -  iiy'  =  (p'  -  2^'). 

l4iMtly,  let  us  make  x'  +  6y  '  =  c; .  Here  wc  shall  have 
HC  =  6  ;'  and,  con}ief|uently,  either  a  =  1 ,  and  r  =  6,  or 
CI  =  2,  and  c  ^  à.  In  the  first  cor*,  x  :=  p'  -*  6y',  and 
y  =  itpqi  so  that  x'  f  6y'  =  (p'  +  67')'  ;  in  the  second, 
X  =i  îip'  —  %',  and  y  —  Sy/y;  whence 

x'  +6y'  =  (2p'  -l-Sy')  . 

186.  But  Wt  tlie  formula  ax'  -^  cy'  l>e  proposed  to  be 
tranhftinnetl  into  a  M{iiare.  We  know  lieforcliand,  that  this 
cannot  be  done,  except  we  already  know  a  c*ast%  in  which 
this  formula  really  liecomes  a  M{uare;  but  i»e  »ludl  find 
this  given  cam?  to  be,  wlu^n  x  --  /J  and  v  =:/r;  «>  that 
of'  -f  cff'  =  A  ;  and  we  mav  obsene,  that  tim  formula 
can  1m*  tran^tonned  into  another  of  the  fonn  /'  -f  acu  « 
by  making 

afx4r^f/       ,         a:x-:/V    ^    .^ 

/i  A 


CHAP.  Xlf.  or  AXGEBEA.  390 

„.  ^  €X=!tea,  we  have 
V  -T  acu^  ?=  — "— ,  j'  ■■  = 

also,  since  a/**  +  e^*  =  A*,  we  have  t^  +  ocu*  =  aa:*+cy*« 

Thus,  we  have  given  easy  rules  for  transforming  the  expression 
^^  +  O'f^^^  into  a  «quare,  to  which  we  have  now  reduced  the 
formula  proposed,  ojr*  +  cy*. 

187.  Let  us  proceed  farther,  and  see  how  the  formula 
ax*  +  cy*,  in  wnich  x  and  y  are  supposed  to  have  no  com- 
mon divisor,  may  be  reduced  to  a  cube.  The  rules  already 
given  are  by  no  means  sufficient  for  this;  but  the  method 
which  we  have  last  explained  applies  here  with  the  greatest 
success  :  and  what  is  parücularly  worthy  of  observation,  is, 
that  the  formula  may  be  transformed  into  a  cube,  whatever 
numbers  a  and  c  are;  which  could  not  take  place  with 
regard  to  squares,  unless  we  already  knew  a  case,  and  whûch 
docs  not  talce  place  with  regard  to  any  of  the  other  evap 
powers;  but,  on  the  contrary,  tlie  solution  is  always  pos- 
sible for  the  odd  powers,  such  as  the  third,  the  filthy  th^ 
seventh,  6lc. 

188.  Whenever,  dierefore,  it  is  required  to  reduce  the 
formula  cue*  -f-  cif*  to  a  cube,  we  may  suppose,  according  to 
the  niediod  which  we  have  already  employed,  that 

xVa  +  y^/  —  <?  =  (j?  Vu  +  y^—  cYi  and 

the  product  (ap*  +  cjr*)%  which  is  a  cube,  will  be  equal  to 
the  formula  ax*  •{-  cj^*.  But  it  is  required,  also,  to  deter- 
mine rational  v'alucs  for  x  and  y,  and  fortunately  we  sue* 
coed.  If  we  actually  take  the  two  cubes  that  have  been 
pointed  out,  we  have  the  two  equations 

x^fl-l-y^— c=a/?J/a  +  3ap"y\/— c— 3<?^^/i— cf^— c,  and 

from  which  it  evidently  follows,  that 

X  =  ap^  —  3c/?gr*,  and  y  =  Sap-q  —  cq\ 

For  example,  let  two  squares  jr^,  and  y'^,  be  required, 
whose  sum,  x^  +  ^'^,  may  make  a  cube.  Here,  since  a  s  1^ 
and  r  =  I,  we  shall  have  j:  =  p^  —  ^P9'9  andy  =  3p*y-^53, 
which  gives  j:«  +  y«  =  (p*  +  q*)\  Now,  if  p  :=  2,  and 
7  =  1,  we  find  a:  =  2,  and  y  =  11  ;  whecelbte 

.r»+j^''=125  =  5'. 


400 


KLEMEXTft 


FA  BT  II. 


189.  L^  us  also  consider  the  formula  x^  +  dy\  for  the 
purpcwe  of  making  it  equal  to  a  cube.  As  we  have,  id  thb 
case,  à  =  I9  and  e  =  3,  we  find 

X  =  p*  —  9pq\  and  y  =  8p*y  —  8f  \ 

whence  x"  +  3y*  =  (/*•  +  Sq^y*  This  ibrniula  occurs  rery 
frequently  ;  for  which  leason  we  shall  here  give  a  Table  of 
the  easiest  co^es. 


1  p 

1  i  ' 

1   8 

9 

X'  -r  V 

1 

0 

64=  4> 

s 

1   10 

9 

348=  7' 

1 

s  35 

18 

2197  =  13  i 

3 

1   0 

24  nus  =  1»"  ': 

1 

8  80 

72  .  Sld62  =  28* 

a 

S  81 

30  :  9261  =  UV 

s 

3  154 

45  .  29791  =  3P 

190.  If  the  question  were  not  restricted  to  the  oooditioo, 
that  the  numbers  x  and  y  must  have  no  common  divisor,  it 


would  not  be  attended  with  any  difficulty  ;  for  if  ifi»  -f  ey^ 
were  required  to  be  a  cube,  we  should  only  have  to  make 
ar  s  /:,  and  y  =  r<z,  and  the  formula  would  become 
ai^z^  -f  eu^z*  ;  which  we  might  make  equal   to  tlie  cube 

'-Tf  and  should  immediately  find  z  —  r"(«/*  -"-  rw*)      Coci- 

sequcntly,   the  values   sought   of  x  and    ij   would    l)e 
X  zi  /r'(a<*  -f  cu%  a:u\  t/  =  uv\'ii-  +  ^w*)»  which,  lK*side 
the  cube  i*\  have  olîw  the  quantiiy  '//*  -^    rti^  for  a  commcui 
divisor;  m)  that  t!iis  solution  immediately  p^^^*^ 

öx*+ry*r  iVM  ri/*)*X(a/»+rw«)z:i^(/7/*-[  ri/*)», 
which  is  evidently  the  cuIh?  of  :•*(«/*  -|-  ^"*) 

191*  This  la^t  nu'tiuKl,  which  we  have  made  use  of,  is  aii 
much  the  more  remarkable,  as  we  are  hn>ught  to  solutions 
which  alMolutely  n^|uire(l  numlx^rs  rational  ami  integer,  by 
meann  of  irrational,  and  even  imaginary  (juantities  ;  and, 
what  is  still  more  worthy  of  attention,  our  iiiethcKl  cannot  Ik» 
applied  to  thoüe  case«,  in  which  the  irrationality  ^anintiei«. 
For  example,  when  the  fonnula  x^  -f  r/^  muüt  lK*i>Nne  a 
cube,  we  can  cmlv  infer  from  it,  that  its  two  irratioiuil 
factors,  X  +  V  >'—  r,  and  x  —  y  %'— r,  must  hkewi^»  |jc 
cubi*s;  and  since  x  and  t/  have  no  ccmimon  divi<;or,  the^* 
factors  laiuuit  have  any.  liut  if  the  radicals  wen*  to  difu 
appi*ar,  as  in  the  caM*  ofr  =  -  I,  thin  principle  Hould  nti 


CHAP.  Xn.  OF  ALGEBRA.  401 

longer  exist  ;  because  the  two  factors,  which  would  then  be 
jc  H-  .V9  and  x  — ^,  might  have  common  divisors»  even  when 
X  and  y  had  none  ;  as  would  be  the  case,  for  example,  if 
both  these  letters  expressed  odd  nunibers. 

Thus,  when  x*  —  y*  must  become' a  cube,  it  is  not  neces» 
sary  that  both  x  +  i/f  and  J?  —  ^,  should  of  themselves  be 
cubes;  but  we  may  suppose  or  -["y  =  ^\  ^^  a?  — y=4y'; 
and  the  formula  x*  —  ^^  will  undoubtedly  become  a  cube, 
since  we  shall  find  it  to  be  Sp^q^j  the  cube  root  of  which  is 
2pq.  We  shall  farther  have  x  =p^  \-  ^\  and  y  =:^*— äy*. 
On  the  contrary,  when  the  formula  a^  *  -{"  ^  i*  ^^^  '^^ 
solvible  into  two  rational  factors,  we  cannot  find  any  other 
solutions  beside  those  which  have  been  already  given. 

19^.  We  shall  illustrate  the  preceding  investigations  by 
some  curious  examples. 

Question  1.  Required  a  square,  x\  in  integer  numbers, 
and  such,  that,  by  adding  4  to  it,  the  sum  may  be  a  cube. 
The  condition  is  answered  when  x^  =  121  ;  but  we  wish  to 
know  if  there  are  other  similar  cases. 

As  4  is  a  sc^uare,  we  shall  first  seek  the  cases  in  which 
x'^  4-  y^  becomes  a  cube.  Now,  we  have  found  one  case» 
namely,  if  a:  =  p^  —  Spj^,  and  y  =  Sp^q  —  ç^  :  therefore, 
since  y^  =  4,  we  have  y  =  ±  2,  and,  consequently,  either 
Qp'^q  -  ^'  =  +  2,  or  Sp^y  -  g»  ==  —  2.  In  the  first  case, 
we  have  q(Sp^  —  q')  =  2,  so  that  q  is  a  divisor  of  2. 

This  being  laid  down,  let  us  first  suppose  (7  =  1)  and  we 
shall  have  3//^'  —1  =  2;  therefore  p  m  1  ;  whence  a:  =  2, 
and  x^  =  4. 

If,  in  the  second  place,  we  suppose  7  =  2,  we  have 
6y>*  —  8  =  +  2;  admitting  the  sign  +,  we  find  (ip^  =  10, 
and  0^  =  4-  9  whence  we  should  get  an  irrational  value  of  p, 
whicn  could  not  apply  here  ;  but  if  we  consider  the  sign  — , 
we  have  6p^  =  6,  and  ^  =  1  ;  therefore  x  ==  11  :  and  these 
are  the  only  possible  cases;  so  that  4,  and  121,  are  the  only 
two  squares,  which,  added  to  4,  ^ve  cubes. 

193.  Question  2.  Required,  m  inte^r  numbers,  other 
squares,  beside  25,  which,  added,  to  2,  give  cubes. 

Since  x^  -|-  2  must  become  a  cube,  and  since  2  is  the 
double  of  a  square,  let  us  first  determine  the  cases  in  which 
**  +  2^*  becomes  a  cube  ;  for  which  purpose  we  have,  by 
Article  188,  in  which  /i  =  1,  and  c  =  2,  a:  =  ^  —  6p9*, 
and  y  =  3p*y  —  S^'  ;  therefore,  since  y  =  ±  1»  we  must 
have  3p-y  —  q^^  or  q(^p^  —  9q^)  =  ±  1  ;  and,  consequently, 
q  must  be  a  divisor  of  1. 

Therefore  let  7  =  1,  and  we  shall  have  Sp'  —  2  =s  ±1. 

D  D 


40ä  ELEMENTS  rAWLT  IL 

ir  WC  take  tlic  upper  ngn,  wc  find  Sp'  =r  3,  mul  p  =r  1  ; 
whence  j*  =  5  :  aiul  if  we  adopt  the  other  «gn,  we  get  • 
value  otpf  which  being  irrational,  is  of  no  use;  it  foww^ 
tlK*retore,  that  there  is  no  sciuore,  except  S5,  which  has  the 
|)it)|XTty  required. 

194.  QtieMtion  3.  Required  squares,  which,  multiplied 
by  5,  and  added  to  7«  may  produce  cubes;  or  it  is  requinsd 
that  5x^*  +  7  should  be  a'cube. 

I^t  UH  first  seek  the  cases  in  which  5x^  +  7^*  becomes  s 
cube.  By  Article  188,  a  being  equal  to  5,  and  e  ci]ual  7» 
wc  shall  find  that  we  must  have  x  =  5//  —  Sl/>9'9  and 
y  =  I5p^q  —  7y';  so  that  in  our  example  v  iK-in«»  =  -^  I, 
we  have  \5p*q  -  7^'  ^  y(lô/>*  —  7(7'  )  =  V  1  ;  therefore  7 
must  be  a  divisor  o2*  1  ;  tlrnt  is  to  say,  q  "zz  -  1  :  conse- 
quently, we  shall  have  15/)*  —  7  =  *:  1  ;  from  which,  in 
both  caM^s,  we  ^et  irrational  valuer  for/>:  but  fnim  whicit 
we  must  not,  ilowe^i'r,  conclude  that  tiie  question  is  im* 
possible,  since />  and  q  nullit  be  such  tractir)n.s  that^  =  1, 
and  that  x  would  l)eix>ine  an  intei^^T;  and  thi4  is  wliat 
really  luipjxms;  for  if  /)  =  !,  and  y  =  î,  we  find  y  =r  1, 
and  J-  =:  1^  ;  but  there  are  no  other  fractions  which  render 
the  soludon  possible. 

\9ô.  Question  4.  Re<^uired  sciuares  in  integer  numbers, 
the  double  of  which,  dinunishinl  oy  5,  may  be  a  cube  :  or 
it  is  rwjuipwl  that  îir-  —  5  may  \\e'n  cul>e. 

If  wo  lK»;nn  by  seeking  the  -ali'jfartï^rv  ra«es  for  tin* 
formula  ilr*  -  %%  we  liavi*,  in  the  ISNlh  Article,  a  =  5Î, 
andr  —  5;  whence  j*  =  -//*  -f  I'V'V'»  ami // -f5/^-Vy  \  ^ut^: 
so  that,  in  this  case,  we  niU'^l  have  v  -     -4    1  ;  consequently, 

iip^i  +  J></'  1=  y  fiy>*  S  •'î^'  "    ■  1  ; 

and  as  this  cannot  Ik*,  i-ither  in  intogiT  nutnluTs  or  even  in 
fractions,  the  case  beainics  very  remarkable,  iKrau-H^  there 
is,  n«)twithHtanding.  a  satisfactory  value  of  x  ;  nainclv, 
X  =  4;  which  gives  2x*  —  . *  =:  27,  or  equal  to  the  cu(>e 
of  3.  It  will  Ik*  of  in)|X)rtancc  to  inventigute  the  cause  «yf 
this  |)eculiarity. 

196.  It  is  not  only  | Miscible,  nkn  we  si^e,  for  \\w  formuU 
Sx*  -*  5y^  to  Ik?  a  culie  ;  but,  u  hat  i**  more,  the  nKit  of*  this 
cube  has  the  form  :i//^— iS»-,  a«  we  may  |K*rct*ive  by  making 
X  =  4,  y  =:  I,  />  =2,  and  9  =  1  ;  h>  that  we  know  n  cose 
in  which  ir**  -  ^v'  =r  (îi/i*  — .>y  )',  allhouj»h  tlie  two  factors 
of  îdu-'  -  oy\  namely,  x  ^'iî  -f-^  x  ô,  and  xv'ä— ly  ^  5, 
which,  according  to  our  iiu*tliod,  ought  to  Ik*  the  cubes  ot* 
p  \'2  +  7%'' A,  and  of  py/*Z  —  q  x  •>*  are  not  cubi*s;  for,  in 
our  casi*,  j  ^  îi  ^-  1/  ^  5  =:  4  x'if  +  v  5 ;  when*a> 


CÎHAr.  Xtl.  OF  ALOEmrA.  408 

which  is  by  no  means  the  same  as  4  ^2  -|-  \/5. 

But  it  must  be  remarked,  that  the  formula  r*  —  10^'  may 
become  1,  or  —  1,  in  an  infinite  number  of  cases;  for  ex-, 
ample,  if  r  =  3,  and  jt  =  1,  or  if  r  =  19»  and  «  =  6  :  and 
this  formula,  multiplied  by  2p'  —  Sq*^  reproduces  a  number 
of  this  last  form. 

Therefore,  lety*  —  10g*=  1;  and,  instead  of  supposing, 
as  we  have  hitherto  done,  2j:*  -  5y'  =  (2p'  -  Bq^f^  we 
may  suppose,  in  a  more  general  manner, 

2a:'  -  5y*  =  (/*  -  10^)  x  (2p*  -  Sq'Y; 
so  that,  taking  the  factors,  we  shall  have 

JPx^2  ±yx/5=^{f±gVlO)  X  (pv/2  ±  qs/5)\ 

Now,  ipy2±q  v/5)^=(2o3+  15;?y')  ^2±(6p'q  +Bq^)y/5  ; 
and  if,  in  order  to  abrioge,  we  write  a  v2  -|~  b  ^/5  instead 
of  this  quantity,  and  multiply  by  y  +  5"  a/10,  we  shall 
have  a/V2  +  Bfv5  -^^AgvS  +  5b j;^ 2  to  make  equal 
to  x^/Z  -^  yV5;  whence  results  x  =  a/*  4-  5Bg,  and 
y  =  B^-l-  ^Aff'  Now,  since  we  must  have  y  =  et  1,  it  is 
not  absolutely  necessary  that  6p'j  -f  5q^  =  1  ;  on  the  con» 
trary,  it  is  sufficient  that  the  formula  Bf+  2a^,  that  is  to 
say,  Xhalfl^6p'q  +  5q^)  -h  %(2/?*4"15/??')  becomes  =  ±  1  ; 
so  thaty*and  g  may  have  several  values.  For  example,  let 
/=3,  and  ^=1,  the  formula  18p'q  +  löj'  +  4p»+  ^9* 
must  become  +  1  ;  that  is, 

4p^  +  ISp'q  +  SOpq*  +15fz=z±  1. 

197.  The  difficulty,  however,  of  determining  all  the  pos- 
sible cases  of  this  kind,  exists  only  in  the  formula  ax'  +c^% 
when  the  number  c  is  negative  ;  and  the  reason  is,  that  this 
formula,  namelj,  a:'— ac;y'y  which  depends  on  it,  may  then 
become  1  ;  which  never  happens  when  c  is  a  positive  num- 
ber, because,  x'  +  cy*,  or  x*  +  ocy*9  always  gives  greater 
numbers,  the  greater  the  values  we  assi^  to  x  and^.  For 
which  reason,  the  method  we  have  explained  cannot  be  suc- 
cessfully employed,  except  in  those  cases  in  which  the  two 
numbers  a  and  e  have  positive  values. 

198.  Let  us  now  proceed  to  the  fourth  degree.  Here 
we  shall  begin  by  observing^  that  if  the  formula  ax*  +  cy*  là 
to  be  changed  into  a  biquadrate,  we  must  have  a  =  1  ;  for 
it  would  not  be  possible  even  to  transform  the  formula  into 
a  square  (Art.  181);  and,  if  this  Were  possible,  we  might 
also  give  it  the  form  t'  -f  acu'  ;  for  which  reason  we  sËbII 
extend  the  question  only  to  this  last  formula»  whirk  may  be 
reduced  to  the  former,  x*  +  cy*y  by  supponi  '• 


404  ELfiMfiXTS  i'aRT  IU 

being  laid  down,  wc  hayc  to  considcnr  what  must  be  the 
nature  of  the  values  of  x  and  v»  in  order  lliat  the  tbrniula 
X*  -|~  ^*  ^^y  become  a  biquadrate.  Now,  it  is  compoted 
of  the  two  factors  (x  +  y  v^—  c)  x  (x  —  y  ^/  —  c)  ;  ana  eadi 
'of  these  factors  must  also  be  a  l)ic|uadrate  of  the  same  kind  ; 
therefore  we  must  make  I'+^^z— c  =  (p+  a  ^^  —  c)\  and 
jr  —  y\^—  c=  (p  —  y\/—  c)*,  whence  it  follows,  that  the 
formula  proposed  becomes  equal  to  the  biquadrate  (p^-^eq^)** 
With  rrà[ard  to  the  values  of  x  and  ^,  they  are  easily  de- 
termined by  the  following  analysis  : 

«+^\/  —  c^p^  +  4/>*y  %/  — £•— fty'y*  +  c*q*^'iqi)q^  \^  —  r, 
X— ^  \/  —£r=/i*— 4/1*7  ^/  — r— Crp*ç*  +r*9^-r  4r/i7'  >''— r, 
whence,  x=p*^6cp*q*  -\-c*q*;  and^=4/;'7— 4<7>y\ 

199.  So  that  when  -r*  +  ^*  is  a  biquadrate,  because 
c  =:  1,  we  have 

X  -np^  —  6/1*9*  +  7*;  and^  n  4/i'9  —  4p9*; 

•o  that  X*  -f^*  =  (/>*  +  9*V. 

Suppose,  for  example,  p  ■=%  and  7  =  1  ;  we  sliall  then 
find  jr  =  7.  and^  =  524;  whence  x*  +y  ^  6ä5  =  5«. 

If  o  =  8,  and  ç  =  S,  we  obtain  x  =  119,  and^  =s  ISQ, 
which  gives  x*  -|- w*  =  13*. 

5800.  Whatever  De  the  even  power  into  which  it  is  fe> 
quired  to  transform  the  formula  ox*  -{-  cy^^xin  absolute! j 
necessary  that  this  formula  be  always  reducible  to  a  square; 
and  for  this  purpose,  it  is  sufficient  tluit  we  already  know 
one  case  in  whicti  it  iiapix'ns;  for  we  may  tlien  transform 
the  fonnula,  as  has  beiMi  secn^  into  a  (|uantity  cf  the  fomi 
I*  +  acu^j  in  which  the  first  lenn  /*  is  niuhii>liul  ouly  by 
1  ;  so  that  we  may  consider  it  as  containtnl  in  tne  expn*9i&i<in 
X*  -f  ry*  ;  and  in  a  similar  manner,  we  may  always  give  to 
this  last  expression  the  funn  of  a  sixth  |x>wer,  or  of  any 
higher  even  |x>wer. 

5101.  This  condition  is  not  requisite  for  the  odd  |x>wcrs; 
and  whatever  numlxTs  a  and  r  Iks  we  may  always  tramibmi 
the  formula  ax^    f  ry-  into  any  cnld  piwer.     Let  the  fifth, 
for  instance,  bi*  demaiuletl  ;  we  have  only  to  make 
X  K^a  -k-  y  s'  "  c  -z:  (p  s'a  -*   7  %^—  c)\  and 
Xv'^a  — ^  %'—  r  =  (py/a  -  y  x'—  r)\ 
and  we  shall  evidently  obtain  ax^  \  <•//*  =  (/i/;«   f  ry->*. 
Fartlier,  as  the  fifth  jW)wer  of  py/a-^  qV — r  is  =a^p^\^a  ^ 
Sa^p^fjy,/--  r  "   \Ojcp^q^^/a  -  1(W;;V/V  -  r  +  ôr'/iy* 
V'a  +  c*7*^—  r,  we  shall,  with  the  same  facility,  find 

X  =    a*p''    —  lOur/^y*    *  5r*/*y*,  and 
^  ::=  3ti*]t*q  —  10ar/i*y'  -t-  r*9^. 
If  it  is  required,  therefore,  that  the  sum  of  two  squares. 


aHAP.XIII.  OK  ALi^EBlLà.  406 

such  as  x^  -{-  y^f  niay  be  also  a  fifth  power,  we  shall  have 
a  =  1,  and  c  =  1  ;  therefore,  a:  =  p^  —  lOp^q^  +  ^pç/^l 
and  y  =  5/i^y  —  lOp^q^  +  çr*  ;  and,  farther,  making  p  ^  2, 
and  7  =:  1,  we  shall  find  x  =  38,  and  q=41;  consequently, 

or*  +  y»  =  8125  =  6». 


CHAP.  XIII. 


Ofsonie  Expressions  of  the  Form  ojr*  -f  6y*,  u^/iicA  are  no^ 

reducible  to  Squares. 

202.  Much  labor  has  been  formerly  employed  by  some 
mathematicians  to  find  two  biquadrates,  whose  sum  or  dif* 
ference  might  be  a  square,  but  m  vain  ;  and  at  length  it  has 
been  demonstrated,  that  neither  the  formula  o:^  +  y*,  nor 
the  formula  x^  —  y^,  can  become  a  square,  except  in  these 
evident  cases;  first,  when  x  =  0,  or  y  =  0,  and,  secondlvf 
when  y  =  X.  This  circumstance  is  the  more  remarkable, 
because  it  has  been  seen,  that  we  can  find  an  infinite 
number  of  answers,  when  the  question  involves  only  simple 
squares. 

i^OS.  We  sliall  give  the  demonstration  to  which  we  have 
just  alluded  ;  and,  in  order  to  proceed  regularly,  we  shall 
previously  observe,  that  the  two  iiumbers  x  andf  y  may  be 
considerea  as  prime  to  each  other  :  for,  if  these  numbers  had 
a  common  divisor,  so  that  we  could  make  x  =  dp^  and 
y  =  dq^  our  formula?  would  become  d*pi^  -f  d*çr%  and 
É?^*  -  c/*y*:  which  formula?,  if  they  were  squares,  would 
remûn  squares  after  being  divided  hyd}\  therefore,  the 
formulœ  p^  +  g*,  and  p^  —  ^*,  also,  in  which  ^  and  q  have 
no  longer  any  common  divisor,  would  be  squares;  con- 
sequently, it  will  be  sufficient  to  prove,  that  our  formulas 
cannot  become  squares  in  the  case  of  x  and  y  being  prime 
to  each  other,  and  our  demonstration  will,  consequently, 
extend  to  all  the  cases,  in  which  x  and  y  have  common 
divisors. 

204.  We  shall  begin,  therefore,  with  the  sum  of  two 
biquadrates  ;  that  is,  with  the  formula  x^  -|~.y^,  considering 
X  and  y  as  numbers  that  are  prime  to  each  other  :  and  we 
have  to  prove,  tliat  this  formula  becomes  a  square  only  in 
the  cases  above-mentioned  ;  in  oi-der  to  which^  we  shall  enter 


406  KL  EM  EXT»  r*aT  IL 

«poo  the  analyû  and  deductions  irhich  tbi*  demonrtntin 
reouiret. 

If  any  one  dciued  the  proposition^  it  would  be  meinfii»- 
ing  that  there  may  be  such  values  of  x  and  Vy  as  will  inak# 
jp*  -f"  y*  A  square,  in  great  numbers,  notwitnstanding  tbert 
•re  none  in  small  numbers. 

But  it  will  be  seen,  that  if  jr  and^  had  satisfactory  Taloci^ 
we  should  be  able,  however  great  those  values  mignt  be^  to 
deduce  from  them  less  values  equally  satisfactory,  and  finooi 
these^  others  still  less,  and  so  on.  Since,  therctore,  we  are 
acqtuunted  with  no  value  in  small  numbers,  except  the  two 
cases  already  mentioned,  which  do  not  carry  us  any  farther» 
we  may  conclude,  with  certainty,  from  tne  fcJIowing  de» 
monstratkxi,  that  there  are  no  such  values  €S  x  «ndv  aa  wo 
require,  not  even  among  the  greatest  numbers«  The  pio» 
position  shall  afterwards  be  demonstrated,  with  respect  to 
the  düTvrenoe  of  two  Uquadrates,  2^  —  y^,  on  the  aasse 
principle. 

80S.  The  following  consideration,  however,  must  be  at- 
tended to  at  present,  in  order  to  be  oon^-inccd  that  jr*  -f- jf* 
can  only  become  a  square  in  the  self  evident  cases  wUdi  haive 
been  mentioned. 

'  1.  Since  we  suppose  x  and  y  prime  to  each  other,  thai  ia» 
having  no  common  divisor,  they  must  either  both  be  odd» 
or  one  must  be  even,  and  the  otner  odd. 

2.  But  thoy  cannot  both  Ik*  odd,  because  the  sum  of  two 
odd  8C|uarcs  can  never  be  a  Mjiuirc;  for  an  odd  square  is 
always  contained  in  the  formula  4ft  +  1  ;  and,  consequently  « 
the  sum  of  two  cxid  M|uares  will  Iiave  the  form  4fi  -|-  52^ 
which  being  divisible  by  ^  but  not  by  4,  cannot  Ik*  a  square. 
Now,  this  must  be  unticrbtood  also  of  two  odd  biquadlWte 
numbers. 

S.  If,  therefore,  x'  -¥  y*  must  Ik>  a  RC|uare,  one  of  the 
terms  must  be  even  and  the  other  odd  ;  and  we  have  already 
seen,  that,  in  order  to  Imve  the  huni  of  two  8C|uares  a  square, 
the  root  of  one  must  Ite  expressible  by  p*  »  ^*,  and  that  ùt 
the  otiier  by  ^pq  ;  therefore,  x*  z:  />■  —  q\  and  y*  =1  ^tpq  ; 
and  wc  should  have  x*  -f-.y*  =  (P*^  -r  9')'. 

4.  Consequently,  y  would  be  even,  and  .r  oAd  ;  but  since 
X*  ^  p*  -^  f  S  the  nuni)H*rs/>  and  //  must  alw  Ik'  the  one  even, 
and  the  other  odd.  Now,  the  first,  />,  cannot  Ik*  e\'en  ;  for 
if  it  were,  //'  «•  q'  wciuld  Ik*  a  uuimIkt  of  the  form  4^—1, 
or  4tf  -I-  d,  and  could  not  lieooine  a  scjuare  :  then^fore  p 
must  be  €k1<I,  and  q  even,  in  which  case  it  is  evident,  that 
these  numbers  will  be  prime  to  each  otiier. 

5f  III  order  that  p^  —  q^  may   beouuie  a  square,    or 


CHAP.  XIII.  OF   ALüKIUiA.  407 

p*  "  q^  zz  x^y  we  must  have,  as  we  have  already  seen, 
p  =  !■«  -|-  Ä«,  and  q  =  2r*  ;  for  then  x*  =  (r*  —  j-)-,  and 
a:  =  r*  —  **. 

6.  Now,  ^"^  must  likewise  be  a  square  ;  and  since  we  had 
y-  =  ^pq^  we  shall  now  have y^  =  ii*(r*  +  **)  ;  so  that  this 
formula  must  be  a  square;  therefore  rs{r^  +  s^)  must  also 
be  a  square  :  and  let  it  be  observed,  that  r  and  s  are  num- 
I)ei*s  prime  to  each  other  ;  so  that  the  three  factors  of  this 
formula,  namely,  r,  a,  and  H  +  **,  have  no  common  divisor. 

7.  Again,  when  a  product  of  several  factors,  tliat  have  no 
common  divisor,  must  be  a  square,  cacli  factor  must  itself  be 
a  square.;  so  that  making  r  -^  t',  and  s  zz  u^,  we  must  have 

If,  therefore,  a*  +  y^  were  a  D ,  our  formula  t*  +  «*, 

^      which  is,  in  like  manner,  the  sum  of  two  biquadrates,  would 

,  also  be  a  D .    And  it  is  proper  to  observe  here,  that  since 

.   •Cj^=  t^  —  u\  and  jf"*  ==^  ^t  u  (t^  -k-  u^)  the  numbers  t  and  u 

'J     ^'ill  evidently  be  much  smaller  than  x  and  y,  since  x  and  y 

'/        are  even  determined  by  the  fourth  powers  of  i  and  u^  and 

must  therefore  become  much  greater  than  these  numbers. 

8.  It  follows,  therefore,  tjiat  if  we  could  assign,  in  num- 
i  y'     bers  however  great,  two  biquadrates,  such  as  x^  and  y% 

whose  sum  might  be  a  square,  we  could  deduce  from  it  a 
number,  formed  by  the  sum  of  two  much  less  biquadrates^ 
which  would  also  be  a  square  ;  and  this  new  sum  would  en- 
^J^  able  us  to  find  another  of  the  same  nature,  still  less,  and  so 
on,  till  we  arrived  at  very  small  numbers.  Now,  such  a  sum 
not  l)eing  ]X)ssibIe  in  very  small  numl)ers,  it  evidently  fol- 
lows, that  there  is  not  one  which,  we  can  express  by  very 
great  numbers. 

9*  It  might  indeed  be  objected,  that  such  a  sum  does 
exist  in  very  small  numbers  ;  namely,  in  the  case-  which  we 
•have  mentioned,  when  one  of  the  two  biquadrates  becomes 
nothing  :  but  we  answer,  that  we  shall  never  arrive  at  tliis 
case,  by  coming  back  from  very  great  numbers  to  the  least, 
according  to  the  method  which  has  been  explained;  for  if  in 
the  small  sum,  or  the  reduced  sum,  i^  —  w^,  we  had  ^  =  0, 
or  M  =  0,  we  should  necessarily  have  y^  =  0  in  the  great 
sum  ;  but  tliis  is  a  case  which  does  not  here  enter  into  con* 
sideration. 

206.  Let  us  proceed  to  the  second  proposition,  and  prove 
also  that  the  difference  of  two  biquadrates,  or  x"  —  ^*,  can 
never  become  a  s(|uare,  except  in~  the  cases  of  ^  =  0,  and 
y  zz  av 

1.  We  may  consider  the  numbers  x  and  y  as  prime  to 
each  other,  and  consequently,  as  being  cither  both  odd,  or 


408  KLCSIICNTS  PAMT  II. 

theone  even  and  the  other  odd  :  and  as  in  both  caacs  the  di& 
fierence  of  two  squares  may  become  a  iquarey  we  must  ooo» 
aider  these  two  caitcs  separately. 

S.  Let  us,  therefore,  first  begin  by  supposing  both  the 
numbers  x  and  y  odd,  and  that  x  =  p  +  9,  and  y  2  p  -*  a  ; 
then  one  of  tHe  two  numbers  p  and  q  must  necessarily  be 
even,  and  the  other  odd.  We  have  also  a*^  ^  y*  zz  ^pq^  and 
M-  +  ^«  =  5!/i*  +  29'-  ;  therefore  our  formula  x*  — A^  =» 
ip^p^  +  Sy^)  ;  and  as  this  must  he  a  sciuare,  its  rourth 
part,  pfj(2p'^  -f  iiq')  =  i^pqij**  +  9'),  must  alM>  be  a  square* 
Also,  silice  the  factors  of  tliiH  formula  have  no  common  di» 
visor  (because  if  y/  is  even,  q  nuiHt  be  (xld),  each  of  these  tac^ 
tors,  ilp^  9,  and  p'  -{-  9^,  must  l)e  a  sijuure.  In  order,  there- 
fore, tliut  tlie  (irst  two  may  become  sc|iiareis  let  us  su|)pu«e 
9p  =  ^r^  or  p  ^  2r%  and  q  zz  s^;  in  which  s  must  be  odd, 
and  the  third  factor,  4r^  -I-  s\  must  likewise  lie  a  square. 

a.  Now,  since  s^  4~  ^  i<^  ^^^  *^^^  ®^  ^^^  squares,  the 
first  of  which,  «^  is  odd,  and  the  other,  4f^,  is  even,  let  ua 
make  the  root  of  the  first  s^  =  I'  —  k-,  in  which  let  i  be  odd, 
and  u  even  ;  and  the  root  of  the  second,  Sr*  =  Sla,  or 
r*  sz  tu  J  where  i  and  u  are  prime  to  each  otlier. 

4.  ^^iiice  I«  s  r*  must  be  a  square,  lioih  /  uiid  u  must  be     \^ 
aqnares  also.     If,  therefore,  we  suppose  i  =  m',  and  u  =  m\    '  ^ 
(leprcsentinff  an  odd  number  by  m,  and  an  even  number  bjr    *  ^  ^  « 
fi),  we  shall  have  ^  =  m^  —  a^  ;  so  that  here»  also,  it  is  re-  ^  ^"^  il 
quired  to  make  tlie  difference  of  two  biciuadrates,  namely,  *  * 
m*  ^  n\  a  square.     Now,  it  is  obvious  tlint  thc*^e  numbers  <  I'  f^  * 
would  be  much  less  than  x  and  ^,  sim*e  they  are  less  than  "*     ^ 
r  and  .f,  which  are  themselves  evidently  less  than  x  and  ^-    '   ^  * 
If  a  solutiim,  thereibre,  ^ert*  possible  in  ^reai  nunilHTs,  and 

4f*  —  ^*  were  a  M|uare,  there  nu^^t  uIm)  lie  one  |x)ssible  for  '" 
numlK'rs  much  less:  and  this  la^l  would  lead  us  to  another    «* 
aolutioii  for  numbers  still  less,  and  so  on.  ^  ' 

5.  Now,  the  least  numbers  for  which  such  a  square  can  be 
found,  are  in  the  case  where  one  of  the  biquadrates  is  0,  or 
where  it  is  equal  to  the  other  biquadrate.  In  the  first  case* 
wc  must  luive  n  =  0  ;  therefore  u  =  0,  and  alM)  r  —  0, 
/I  —  0,  and,  lastly,  x*  —  v*  =  0,  or  x*  =  y*  ;  w  hich  is  a  case 
that  does  not  lielong  to  tin*  |>nnM.*nt  questKtn  ;  if  n  s  m,  we 
sliall  find  /  =  II,  then  #  ~  0,  9  =  0,  and,  lastly,  aim  jt  =z  y, 
which  does  m>t  hi-rt*  enter  into  miiMcleration. 

SUT.  It  niiglit  Ih*  ohjeeted,  that  since  m  is  cxlil,  and  m 
even,  the  last  diflen*nce  is  no  longer  similar  t4>  the  first  ;  and 
tliat,  theri'lore,  wc  can  tbrni  no  analogous  mincluMniis  I'rom 
it  with  n*s|teel  to  smaller  nuni tiers.  But  it  is  sufficient  that 
the  fir^t  difference  has  led  us  lo  the  seiond  ;  and  we  shall 


1 


I 


CHAP.  XIII.  OF   ALCSKJBKA.  409 

shew,  that  jr*  —  ^  can  no  longer  become  a  square^  when  one 
of  the  hiquadrates  is  even,  and  the  other  odd. 

1.  We  may  observe,  if  the  first  term,  or*,  were  even,  and 
y^  odd,  the  impossibiUty'of  the  thing  would  be  self^vident, 

since  we  should  have  a  number  of  the  form  4n  +  3  ;  which      ;.  2  \ 
cannot  be  a  square:  therefore^Jêt  4?.i)ß-.Qddi^  And  .^jit.eyen^^^  (X.  / 
then  x*  =  p*  +  ^%  and/^J^  lljpq  ;  whence  or*  —  y**=  ^  ^ 
^p^q^  +  ?*  =  (p'  —  ç^)*r^here  one  of  the  two  numbers  p 
and  q  must  be  even,  and  the  other  odd. 

2.  Now,  as/?*  4-  J*  =  a:*  must  be  a  square,  we  have 
p  =  r^  ^  s%  and  q  =  2rs  ;  whence  j?  =  r*  +  **  :  but  from 
that  results  j/2.  =  ^(r^  -  s^)  x  2rSy  or  y*  =  4irs  x  (r*  —  **), 
and  as  this  must  be  a  square,  its  fourth  part,  rê{7^  —  ê*)y 
whose  factors  are  prime  to  each  other,  must  likewise  be 
square.  ^^^  ^ 

3.  Let  us,  therefore,  make  r  =  t%  and  s  =  u\  and  we  »î»  *  -*' 
shall  have  the  third  factor  r*  —  a*  =  ^  —  «:*,  which  must  $  t**^ 
also  be  a  square.  Now,  as  this  factor  is  equal  to  the  dif-  ^  j^,  ^ 
ference  of  two  hiquadrates,  which  are  much  less  than  the 

first,  the  precedinir  demonstration  is  fully  confirmed;  and  it    ^  f 
is  evident,  that,  if  the  difierence  of  two  hiquadrates  could    <  f 
become  equal  to  the  square  of  a  number  (however  great  we   ^  p% 
may  suppose  it),  we  could,  by  means  of  this  known  case,    *^ 
arrive  at  differences  less  and  less,  which  would  also  be  re-         ^\ 
ducible  to  squares,  without  our  being  led  back  to  the  two  -  ^  ^ 
evident  cases  mentioned  at  first.     It  is  impossible,  therefore,  *     .  -i 
for  the  thing  to  take  place  even  with  respect  to  the  greatest    '       J 
numbers.  -^  c^**«!  ' 

2()8.    The  first  part   of  the    preceding  demonstration}  r^  fy 
namelv«  where  x  and  v  are  si 


as 

,2 


the  one  of  which  is  even  and  the. other  odd;'  and  by  these  V  r  y 

means  we  should  obtain  xy^  =  p*  —  ^♦;  and,  consequently, 

p*  — ^  y*  must  be  a  square.     Now,  this  is  a  diiFerence  of  two  '^>  ly  ^ 

hiquadrates,  the  one  of  which  is  even  and  the  other  odd  ;  and 

it  has  been  proved,  in  the  second  part  of  the  demonstration, 

that  such  a  aifierence  cannot  become  a  square. 

SQ9.  We  have  therefore  proved  these  two  principal  pro- 
positions ;  that  neither  the  sum,  nor  the  difference,  of  two 
oiquadrates,  can  become  a  square  number,  except  in  a  very 
few  self-evident  cases. 

Whatever  formulae,  therefore,  we  wish  to  transform  into 
squares,  if  those  formula  require  us  to  reduce  the  sum,  or  the 
difference  of  two  biçiuadrates  to  a  square,  it  may  be  pro- 
nounced that  the  giyen  fbnnuls  are  likewise  impomUe^ 


410  ELKMSNTS  rAKT  IK 

which  happens  witli  regard  to  tho0c  that  wc  shall  now  poiaC 
out 

1.  It  is  not  posnblc  for  the  formula  j^  «f  4y^  to  become 
a  square  ;  for  bince  this  formula  is  the  sum  of  two  squom, 
we  must  have  j«  —  /?«  —  y%  and  9,f^  =  2m,  or  .y*  =  fq\ 
oow  p  and  a  being  numlieni  prime  to  eacti  other,  each  of 
them  must  oe  a  G.  If  we  therefore  make  p  =  r%  aiid 
f  =  #%  we  shall  h|ive  jr'  sr  r*  »  i'  ;  that  is  to  say,  the  dif^ 
lerence  of  two  biquadrates  must  be  a  bquare,  which  is  im» 
possible. 

S.  Nor  is  it  possible  for  the  formula  x^  —  4^  to  become 
s  square;  for  in  this  ca«.>  we  must  make  i*  s  p'  -^  q\  and 
Jtjf*  =  2py,  that  we  may  have  ar*  —  4y*  =  (p»  -  ç*)' ;  but, 
io  order  that  y*  =  pq^  both  p  and  9  must  be  squares  :  and 
if  wc  therefore  make/i  =  f%  and  y  =  *«,  we  have  j*=r*+^; 
that  is  to  say,  the  sum  of  two  biquadrates  must  be  reducible 
to  a  square,  which  \%  impossible. 

8.  It  is  im|io»ible  also  for  the  fomuila  4x*  —  v'  to  be^ 
oome  a  scjuan*,  Ix^cause  in  this  case^  mu^t  necessarily  be  an 
eren  number.  Now,  if  we  make  y  =-  *Jz,  we  omclude  that 
41**  —  16«*,  and  consequently,  also,  its  fourth  |)art,  a^  -  Ir*, 
roust  lie  reducible  to  a  square;  which  we  have  just  seen  is 
impossible. 

4.  The  formula  Sx*  +  Sty*  canmH  be  transformed  into  • 
•quare;  for  Mtice  thut  square  would  m*cessarily  lie  e^-en,  and 
ooosetiucntly,  2j^+iîy*  --4r',  wc  should  have  j-'-f  y*  >-  är\ 
or  äs'  +  5ir  t/^  -  J-*  -f  iir'y*  4-  ?/♦  =  .  ;  or,  in  like  man- 
ner, 2:-  -  iî.r-v-  ^  .!•  -  *ir y  V  y*  :^  -  .  So  that,  em. 
both  Ä:-  +  -■''V/N  **"•'  ^'  ""  ^•'■'v  »  would  heroine  M|uares, 
their  priKlucl,  42*  — 4a"*^\  as  well  as  the  fourth  of  tiiat  pro- 
duct, or  ::*  —  J^.A  mn^t  In.»  a  M|uari*.  Hui  ilii?*  la^t  is  tlie 
diffen*nce  oftuo  Imjiiadratics  ;  uiul  is  tlu^ntorc  im|)i»Mhie. 

5.  Lu>tlv,  I  !^v  also  that  llie  foruuiia  liw*  —  *Jy*  4*aniioi 
be  a  Mjuan*  ;  for  the  two  numhiT'«  s  aiul  1/  cannot  Uith  Ik 
even,  bintv,  if  thev  wvn\  tliov  would  have  a  »nnmiHi  di- 
visor;  nor  can  tlirv  lu*  the  one  even  and  the  other  odd,  Inv 
cause  then  one  part  ol  the  formula  would  he  (IixImI  le  by  4, 
ami  the  other  only  hv  S;  and  tlui>  the  wh<»!e  formula  would 
only  t)e  divisible  by  fi  ;  therefon*  tlu^M*  nuinlnTs  x  and  y  must 
both  Ik»  Olid.  Now,  if  we  make  x  -  y'+y,  and  //  p  —  Ç*  00c 
of  the  numlK^rs  p  and  //  will  Ih*  even  ami  the  other  will  In- 
odd;  ami,  rixicv  xLr»  —  i.*y*  =  i2(y-  +  y)  x  {jr  —  y),  and 
jr«  -f  y*  =  x'//'  +  :,*//'  =  Ùip'  +  0*),nnd  J*-  — //*  -  4/;y,  our 
formula  will  lie  exprensixl  hy  \bjMf{p'  4.  r/M,  the  MXtix-nth 

Kof  which,  or  /*y(/'*  -!■  y),  v*"'*^  likei^iM»  lie  a  !M|uan\ 
these  factors  are  prime  to  each  otiier,  so  that  each  v( 


CHAP.  XIII.  or  ALOCBftA.  411' 

them  must  be  a  square.  Let  us,  therefore,  make  the  first 
two  p  =:  r*,  and  q  ^  à^,  and  the  third  will  become  r^  +  ^> 
which  cannot  be  a  square,  therefore  the  given  formula  can« 
not  become  a  square. 

810.  We  may  likewise  demonstrate,  that  the  formula 
JT*  4-  ^*  can  never  become  a  square:  the  rationale  of  this 
demonstration  being  as  follows  : 

1.  The  number  x  cannot  be  even,  because  in  that  case  y 
must  be  odd  ;  and  the  formula  would  only  be  divisible  by 
2,  and  not  by  4  ;  so  that  x  must  be  odd. 

S.  If,  therefore,  we  suppose  the  square  root  of  our  formula 

have  x^  4-  2v*  =  «*  +  ^^^   +^7^  >  ^  which  the  terms 

^  9  9 

x^are  destroyed  ;  so  that  if  we  divide  the  other  terms  by  y, 

and  multiply  by  q\  we  find  4pyx*  +  4py  =  2gy,  or 
4pqx^  =  2yy  —  ^^y%  whence   we  obtain  -v=    q    ^  \ 

that  is,  x^  =  o*  —  2p%  and  y«  =  2py*,  which  are  the  same 
formulae  that  nave  been  already  given. 

3.  So  that  q"'  —  2p''  must  be  a  square,  which  cannot  hap- 

Cn,  unless  we  make  q  ^  r^  •\-  ^\  and  p  =  2rj,  in  order  to 
ve  X*  =  (r*  -  &*)*  ;  now,  this  will  give  us  ^s'\j^ + 2*^)  =y*  ; 
and  its  fourth  part,  r8{r*  +  2^)  must  also  be  a  square  :  con- 
sequently  r  and  8  must  respectively  be  each  a  square.  If^ 
therefore,  we  suppose  r  =  /^,  and  s  =  m*,  we  shall  find  the 
third  factor  r^  +  2**  =  <^  +  2m*,  which  ought  to  be  a 
square. 

4.  Consequently,  if  x^  4-  2y*  were  a  square,  /*  +  aw* 
must  also  be  a  square  ;  and  as  the  numbers  t  and  u  would 
be  much  less  than  x  and  ^,  we  should  always  come,  in  the 
same  manner,  to  numbers  successively  less  :  out  as  it  is  easy 
from  trials  to  be  convinced,  that  the  given  formula  is  not  a 
square  in  any  small  number;  it  cannot  therefore  be  the 
square  of  a  very  great  number. 

211.  On  the  contrary,  with  r^ard  to  the  formula  x*—2y*, 
it  is  imposable  to  prove  that  it  cannot  become  a  square.; 
and,  by  a  process  or  reasoning  similar  to  the  foregoing,  we 
even  find  that  Üiere  are  an  infinite  number  of  cases  in  which 
this  formula  really  becomes  a  square. 

In  fact,  if  or*  —  2y  must  become  a  square^  we  shall  see 

*  Because  jr  andy  are  prime  to  each  other. 


412  KLKMKNTt  rABT  IL 

that,  bj  making  jr^  =  p*  +  2q\  and  ^  s  jijpç,  we  find 
x*  —  Sy  =  (p*  -  2y*)*.  Now,  p»  +  2ç*  muat  in  thai  caat 
evidently  become  a  square  ;  and  this  happens  when 
p  ss  r^  —  Hs^^  and  g  =■  tirs  ;  since  we  have,  in  thia  case, 
x^  ts  (r^  ^  fis^y  ;  and  farther,  it  is  to  be  observed,  that, 
for  the  same  purpose,  we  may  take  p=Stf*— r^,  and  fsSrs« 
We  shall  tlierefore  consider  each  case  separately. 

L  First,  let  p  =  r^  -*  S»%  and  q  s  tirs;  we  shall  then 
liatvt  X  =  r^  +  S#*  ;  and,  since  y*  =:  Spq^  we  shall  thus  have 
j^  =  4rs(r^  —  2a^)  ;  so  that  r  and  s  must  be  souam  : 
making,  therefore,  r  =  <^,  and  ê  =•  «%  we  shall  fina  y*  :r 
4f*ii»(r— 2f/^).  So  thai  y :=2iu  ^/(<•-2w♦),  and  j=/'+2ii*; 
therefore,  when  /^  —  2ii(^  is  a  square,  we  shall  also  find 
ar*  —  2^  =  a  ;  but  although  /  and  u  are  numbers  less  than 
9  aody,  we  cauoot  conclude  that  it  is  impossible  for  j^— Sy* 
to  become  a  square,  from  our  arriving  at  a  similar  formula 
in  smaller  numbers  ;  since  x*  ~  ^y  *  may  become  a  aquarp« 
without  our  tieing  brought  to  the  formula  i^  —  ^j^,  as  will 
be  seen  by  considering  the  second  case. 

a,  For  this  purpose,  let  p  s  Sjt*  —  r\  and  q  s  2rê.  Herc^ 
indeed,  as  l>efore,  we  shall  have  x  =.  r*  +  2**  ;  but  then  wc 
shall  find  v'  =  2/  7  =  4r#(2#'  --  r*)  :  and  if  we  suppose 
r  =  /•,  and  s  =  m-,  we  obtain  y-  =  41V (2v*  —  /*);  cmw 
aequently,  y  =  2/m  ^^(2m*  -/♦),  and  x  =  /^  h  2«*,  by  which 
means  it  is  evident  tliat  our  foniuiln  x*  —  ^ff*  may  also  be- 
come a  M|unrt%  when  the  fonmila  ilu*  —  /*  lx*c<>mes  a  square. 
Now,  this  is  eviiloiitly  the  ca<4%  wlu*n  /  =  1,  nnd  •«  =  I  ; 
and  we  from  that  obtain  x  =  •'),  y  =.  ii,  and,  lastly, 

X*  -  2y*  n  81  —  («  X  IG)  =  M). 

ÎÎ.  Wc  lM\f  also  ««ei'n.  Art.  Ik),  that  iiw'  —  /*  iKxromes  a 
muan\  uiu»n  f/-l:J, and/  -1;  siiuv  then  N^(Üii*— /*)~ä.i9. 
It  wi*  Hijl*sti*iiite  thcM*  values  instead  of  t  ami  1/,  ^e  find  a 
new  CU.M*  for  otir  foriinila  ;  nanu*lv,  x—  1  4-lix  lii^^^oTlSä, 

4.  Farther,  ««iiKV  wo  have  ft)uml  values  of  x  and  //,  we 
may  sulMitute  thom  for  /  and  u  in  tin*  forc^Miin«;  fonuula*, 
•anci  ^hall  olit:iin  by  xheM.*  ineanfi  new  valut-s  ot'x  and  r/. 

Now,  we  have  just  found  x  -•.-  «>,  and  1/  =  Sf  ;  let  Uîs, 
therefon*,  in  the  formulir,  (No.  l.)n:ake  /  =  J,  and  i/  =  2; 
io  that  v/(/^  —  *'^'<M  -  7,  and  uo  hliall  have*  tin*  following 
new  vului-s;  X  =  81  +  ii!  X  1(5)  =  ll:J,  and  v  =  Ü  x  J  x 
«  X  7  -  HI;  M>  that  x*  =  127«*,  and  x*  =  1 6:5047 JGL 
Farther,  y^  =  7(K>(»,  ami  !/•  =  497871:36;  therefore 
jr*  —  itf^^  zs.  6iU7*K>8i)  :  the  M|uan*  nMit  of  which  numlnT  is 
7967,  and  it  agrees  perfectly  with  the  formula  whidi  was 


CHAP.  XIV. 


OF  ALGBBRA. 


413 


adopted  at  first,  p* —  2^^  ;  for  since  ^  s=  8,  and  u  s  2,  we 
have  r  =  9)  and  5  a  4  ;  wherefore/?  =  81  —  82  =  49,  and 
y  =  72;  whence/?*  -  2«'  =  2401  -  10868  =-  7967. 


CHAP.  XIV. 


Solution  of  some  Questions  that  belong  to  this  part  qf 

Algebra. 

212.  We  have  hitherto  explained  such  artifices  as  occur 
in  this  part  of  Algebra,  and  such  as  are  necessary  for  re- 
solving any  question  belonging  to  it:  it  remains  to  make 
them  still  more  clear,  by  adding  here  some  of  those  questions 
with  their  solutions. 

213.  Questioîi  1.  To  find  such  a  number,  that  if  we  add 
unity  to  it,  or  subtract  unity  from  it,  we  may  obtain  in  both 
cases  a  square  number. 

Let  the  number  sought  be  x  ;  then  both  x  +  1,  and  jr  —  1 
must  be  sauares.  Let  us  suppose  for  the  first  case  a:  -f  1  =/>% 
we  shall  have  x  =  /?'  —  1,  and  ar  —  1  =  p*  —  2,  which 
must  likewise  be  a  square.  Let  its  root,  therefore,  be  re- 
presented by  p  —  q\    and  we  shall  have  /?-  —  2  =  p^  — 

Ö-  4-  2 
2pg  +  j^  ;  consequently,  p  = 


X  = 


?♦+  4 


^ 


Hence  we  obtain 


,  in  which  we  may  give  q  any  value  whatever. 


4j2 

even  a  fractional  one. 

r  r^-|-4^ 

If  we  therefore  make  g  =  — ,  so  that  x^    .  ^  ,  ,we  shall 

*        s  ér  s' 

have  the  following  values  for  some,  small  numbers  : 

Ifr=  1, 

and  ^  =  1, 

we  have  a:  =  ^, 

214.  Question  2.  To  find  such  a  number  x^  that  if,  we 
add  to  it  any  two  numbers,  for  example,  4  and  7,  we  obtain 
in  both  cases  a  square. 

According  to  this  enunciation,  the  two  formula?,  x  +  î 
and  a:  -f  7,  must  become  squares.  Let  us  therefore  suppose 
the  first  X  +  4i  ^  p^,  whicn  pves  us  or  =  p*  —  4,  and  the 


2, 

1, 

3, 

4, 

1, 

2, 

1, 

1, 

5 

6  S 

85 

6  S 

T> 

1(5» 

TK^ 

iZ* 

414  BLRMBVTt  PASriSi 

«Bond  win  become  j*  +  7  ^  p*  +  8;  and,  «•  thk  last 
formula  must  also  be  a  s(|uare,  let  its  root  be  repreaentcd  bjr 
p  +  9,  and  we  shall  have />'' -f"  8  =  Z'*  +  *W  +  ?*♦  whence 

we  obtain  p  =  "ÔT"»  *™*»  consequently,  x  = j-^ • 

aild  if  we  also  take  a  fraction  —  for  q.  we  find 

*  = t;71 »  m  which  we  may  subttitute  for  r  wma 

9  aor  integer  numbers  whatever. 

If  we  make  r  =  1,  and  ^  =  1,  we  find  x  =  -  3;  tberew 
fore  X  +  4  =  1,  and  x  +  7  =  4. 

If  X  were  required  to  be  a  positive  nurolx^r,  we  might 
make  ^  =  2,  and  r  =  1  ;  we  should  then  have  x  s  W^ 

whence  x  +  4  =  'iV»  and  x  +  7  =  •*/• 

If  we  make  «  =  3,  and  r  =  I,  wc  have  x  s  '  ^'  ;  whence 
x-f  4=  'J%andx  |   7=  'J*. 

In  order  that  the  last  term  of  the  formula,  which  ex- 
presses Xy  may  exceinl  the  middle  term,  let  uh  make  r  =s  5, 
and  «ss  1,  and  we  shall  have  x=  \  \  ;  conseijuently,  x  -j-  4»  ',y  , 
and  X  +  7  -  y/. 

SI 5.  QiuHum  3.  Required  such  a  fractional  value  of  x, 
that  if  added  to  1,  or  subtracted  from  1,  it  may  give  in  both 
cases  a  square. 

SiiK*e  the  two  fomuihe  1  +  «ï*»  aiwl  1  —  x,  must  become 
squares,  let  us  «upiiose  the  first  1  -f-  •<*  =  P'»  and  we  tihall 
have  X  =  />*  —  I  ;  als4),  the  sirond  fi)rinufa  will  then  be 
1  —  r  =1  2  —  »-.  A«  this  last  formula  nuiNt  liecome  a 
square,  and  neither  the  fin»t  nor  the  last  term  is  a  s<|uare^ 
we  must  endeavour  to  find  a  case,  in  \ihicli  the  formula  does 
become  a  ü,  and  we  soon  |)erceive  one,  n:mielv,  when  ;>  :=1. 
If  we  therefore  make  ^  =  1  —  y,  so  that  x  ==  y*  —  iJy,  we 
have  2—  p'  =  l  -f2y  —  7';  and  supiiosun^  its  root  to  Iw? 
1  —  yr,  we  sliall  liave  l+iJy  —  y'ssl  -  *iqr  f  yV  ;  so 

2r4-2 
that  2  —  Ç  S3  —  2r  +  qr\  and  q  =  -r — ^  ;  whence  results 

'        r   +1 

4r— 4r'  / 

X  =  7-:: — rr.  ;  and  since  r  is  a  fraction,  if  we  make  r  =  —  • 

we  shaU  have  x  =  ^^ri^j^^ryr  =  -^^.  +  „ -yr»  '*'^«"-'  >t  is  evi- 

dent  that  u  must  be  greater  tlian  /. 

Let  thctefuie  ti  s  2,  and  I  »1,  and  we  shall  find  x  s  J  |. 


CHAP.  XIV.  OF  ALOEBRA.  415 

Lett^  =  8,  and  t  ^  2;  we  shall  then  have  j:  =:  4^7?  and 
the  formulœ  1  +  a;  =  ^S^»  and  1  —  x  =z  ^^  will  both  be 
squares. 

^16.  Question  4.  To  find  such  numbers  x,  that  whether 
they  be  added  to  10,  or  subtracted  from  10,  the  sum  and 
the  difTerence  may  be  sauares. 

It  is  required  tlieretore,  to  transform  into  squares  the 
formulœ  10  +  a:,  and  10  —  x^  which  mi^ht  be  done  by  the 
method  that  has  just  been  employed  ;  -but  let  us  explain 
another  mode  of  proceeding.  It  will  be  immediately  per- 
ceived, that  the  product  of  these  two  formulie,  or  100  —  jr% 
must  likewise  become  a  square.  Now,  its  first  term  being 
already  a  square,  we  may  suppose  its  root  to  be  10  —  px^ 
by  which  means  we  shall  have  100— ^-=^100— -20y?x-|-/>*x'; 

therefore  p'x  ^x  =  20/?,  and  x  =    'l  ^,  ;  now,  from  this  it 

is  only  the  product  of  the  two  formula?  which  becomes  a 
square,  and  not  each  of  them  separately.  But  provided  one 
becomes  a  square,  the  other  will  necessarily  be  also  a  sc^uare. 

p'  f  1  p^+\ 

since  p*  +  2p  +  1  is  already  a  square,  the  whole  is  reduced 

to  makmcr  tlie  fraction  -^ — r,  or  —/  .,  .  ,vo  ,  a  square  also. 

For  this  puipose  we  have  only  to  make  10/?^  +  10  a  square, 
and  here  it  is  necesiary  to  find  a  case  in  which  that  takes 

})Iace.  It  will  be  perceived  that  /^  =  S  is  such  a  case; 
or  which  reason  v.e  shall  make  /;  =  3  -j-  y,  and . shall  have 
100  +  60g'  +  10<7*.  Let  the  root  of  this  be  10  +  qty  and 
we  shall  have  the  final  equation, 

100  +  %  +  \0(f  =  100  +  9IQqt  +  y«^, 
which  gives  q  =  —^ — rrr,  by  which  means  we  shall  deter- 

Let  ^  =  S,  we  shall  then  find  y  =  0,  and/?  =  3;  there- 
fore jr  =  6,  and  our  formulœ  10  -|-  j:  ss  16,  and  10  —  ar  =4. 

But  if  <  =:  1,  we  have  y  —  —  y,  and  j?  =  —  V ,  so  that 
J?  =:  —  *-^  ;  now  it  is  of  no  consequence  if  we  also  make 
X  =+  Vt  \  therefore  \0-\-xzz  V/,  and  10  -  or  =  44, 
which  quantities  are  both  squares. 

217.  Remark.    If  we  wished  to  generaliie  this  question. 


416  KLEMENTI  WAMT  II. 

by  dananding  nidi  numben,  x^  fbr  any  number,  a»  that 
both  a  +  •!*,  and  a  —  j-  may  be  squares,  the  aolution  waald 
frequently  become  impossible  ;  namely,  in  all  cases  in  which 
a  was  not  the  sum  of  two  squares.  Now,  we  have  alrvady 
seen,  that,  between  1  and  50^  there  are  only  the  following 
numl)ers  that  are  tlie  sums  of  two  squares,  or  that  arc  ooo* 
taincd  in  the  formula  x^  -^y*: 

h  2,  4,  5,  8,  9,  10,  13,  16,  17,  18,  20,  25,  26,  89,  «2, 
84,  86,  37,  40,  41,  45,  49,  50. 

So  that  the  other  numbers,  comprised  between  1  and  80^ 
which  are, 

8,  6,  7,  11,  12,  14^  15,  19,  21,  22,  Aï,  2*,  27,  28,  8«, 
31,  88,  35,  88,  89,  42,  43,  44,  46,  47,  48,  cannot  be  r«- 
tolved  into  two  squares  ;  consetiuently,  wlienever  a  is  one  of 
tbcie  last  numbers,  the  question  will  be  impossible;  which 
may  be  thus  demonstrated  :  Lrt  /i  +  x  =r  /r,  and  a  —  i==f\ 
dien  the  addition  of  the  two  formulae  will  give  2a  s:  fi^  4-  7*; 
therefore  2a  must  Iw  the  sum  of  two  scjuares.  Now,  if  5Sa 
be  such  a  sum,  a  will  be  so  likewise  *  ;  consenuently,  when 
a  is  not  the  sum  of  two  scjuares,  it  will  always  ue  impossible 
Ibr  a  +  jr,  and  a  —  jr,  to  lie  each  squares  at  the  same  time. 

218.  As  3  is  not  the  sum  of  two  S(|iiarcs  it  follow^ 
from  what  has  lx?en  said,  that,  if  a  =  3,  tiie  qui*sition  is  im- 
potable. It  niiglit,  however,  be  ol)jected,  that  there  an^, 
perhaps,  two  fractional  scjuares  whosi*  sum  is  3:  but  we 

answer  that  this  also  is  iniix)ssible  :  for  if    -  -f    .  =  3,  and 

q         s 


were  to  nuilliply  by  y^^f*,  we  hhoiiUl  have 
8a*#*  =  />***  +  y*r*  ;  and  the  second  side  of  this  ec|uation, 
wtiich  is  the  sum  of  two  M|uares,  would  l)o  divi>iMc  hv  3  ; 
but  we  have  already  seen  (Art.  170)  th.1l  the  stun  ot  two 
squares,  tlmt  are  prune  to  eaeh  other,  can  have  no  di vizirs. 
CXct*pt  numlKTo,  wliieh  are  themselves  suuis  oftuo  M]uar%>. 
The  nuuilHT^  !)  and  4.>,  it  is  true,  are  di viable  In  «>«  but 
they  an*  al^o  iliiiNÜile  hy  1),  and  e\en  eaeli  nf  the  tu.i 
aquares  that  eon)|N>M.*  both  tiie  one  and  the  other,  is  divisible 
by  9,  sinee  Î)  -i  iJ'  +  0%  auil  ^>  n  (5*  -f-  3'  ;  «hieh  is 
therefore  a  diH'eriMit  casc>,  and  iloi*s  not  enter  into  eim- 
âderation  Iktc.  \Ve  may  ri'sit  avsun-d,  therefore,  of  thtü 
conclu sion  ;  that  if  a  nundKT,  a,  U*  not  the  sum  of  tuo 
aquares  in  integer  nnudieiti,  it  will  not  Ik*  so  in  fraetioiu. 

*  lor,  li't  x^  -|-  y-  ^Qa  \  and  put  x  =  i  -f  'A  aiul  v  =-=  i*'^ ; 
then  (j-h^)*-f  («— ''J*=*-i«'  +  tÄrf':  that  i*,  j*+^'  =  *J# »'+-*/•  =  •*«, 
ort'4.«l*sa.    It. 


CHAP.  XIV.  OF   AL6EBEÀ.  417 

On  the  oontrary,  when  the  number  a  is  the  sum  of  tw5 
squares  in  fractional  numbers,  it  b  also  the  sum  of  two 
squares  in  iot^r  numbers  an  infinite  number  of  ways: 
and  this  we  shall  illustrate. 

219*  Question  5.  To  resolve,  in  as  many  ways  as  we 
please^  a  number,  which  is  the  sum  of  two  squares,  into 
another,  that  shall  also  be  the  sum  of  two  squares. 

Let  y^  +  é^  be  the  given  numbcar,  ana  let  two  other 
squares,  a^  and  y\  be  required,  whose  sum  x^-^-j^  may  be 
equal  to  the  number^**  -f-  g^.  Here  it  is  evident,  that  if  x 
is  either  greater  or  less  than^  ^,  on  the  other  hand,  must 
be  either  less  or  greater  than  g:  if,  therefore,  we  make 
X  =:y  +  pz,  and  y  zz  g-^  qz^we  àiall  have 

f  +  Sfpz+p'z^  +g'  -2gqz  +  ^^  =/^  +  g% 

where  the  two  terms  J^  and  g*  are  destroyed  ;  after  which 
there  remain  only  terms  divisible  by  z.  So  that  we  shall 
have  2^  -I- ;>*z  —  S;g?  +  J«2:  =  0,  oxp'z  +  q'z:='^-%fp\ 

therefore  z  n  ^^"7^^  whence  we  get  the  fdlowing  values 
for  X  and  v,  namely,  x  =  /,  ^ — ^--  j  find 

_.  JPH't'gyp — T) .  jjj  iihich  we  may  substitute  all  pos-  ' 

sible  numbers  for;)  and?. 

If  2,  for  example,  be  the  number  proposed,  so  that 
/"  =  1,  and ^  ==  1,  we  shall  have  a:*  +y^  =  *?  «nd because 

and  y  z=  1,  we  shall  find  ar  =  |,  andy  =  |. 

220.  Quesiion  6.  If  a  be  the  sum  of  two  squares,  to 
find  such  a  number,  a:,  that  a  +  Xy  and  a  —  ar,  may  become 

squares. 

Let  a  =  13  =  9  +  4,  and  let  us  make  13  +  ar  =  p% 
and  13  —  X  r:  q\  Then  we  shall  first  have,  by  addition, 
^6  zzp^+  q^;  and,  by  subtracüon,  2a?  =  p«  -  y*  ;  con- 
sequently, the  values  otp  and  q  must  be  such,  that  P*  +  ?* 
may  become  equal  to  the  number  .26,  wWch  is  also  the  sum 
of  two  squares,  namely,  of  25  +  1.  Now,  since  die  ques- 
tion in  reality  is  to  resolve  26  into  two  souares,  the  greater 
of  which  may  be  expressed  by  p\  and  üie  less  by  51*,  we 
shall  immediately  have/?  =  5,  and  y  =  1  ;  so  that  x  ==  12. 
But  we  may  resolve  the  number  26  into  two  squares  in  an 

E  £ 


418  BtBMRNTS  FAKT  11. 

infinite  number  of  other  wayii:  for,  since;;  =  5,  nnd  y  «s  1, 
if  we  write  i  and  Uy  instead  ofp  and  q,  and  p  and  q^  lïMtmà 
of  X  and  y^  in  the  formula  of*  the  forgoing  example, 
we  shall  find 

Here  we  may  now  substitute  any  numbers  for  t  and  ti,  an<l 
bjr  those  means  determine  p  antl  f,  and,  consequently,  akcv 

the  Talue  of  x  =      o     ' 

For  example,  let  <  =  S,  and  ti  =  1  ;  we  shall  then  ha\T 

p  =  y ,  and  7  =  %?  ;  wherefore  /;'-  —  y*  =  \Y  •  •"^ 
«. «04 

ÎBSI.  But,  in  order  to  resolve  this  question  generallv,  let 
a  s  e*  4-  cf'f  and  put  ;  for  the  unknown  quantity  ;  tfmt  i» 
to  aay,  the  formula?,  a-^-z^  and  a  -9,  must  become  square«. 

Let  us  therefore  make  «  +  r  =  r*,  and  a  ^  z  =  y^  ami 
we  shall  thus  have  first  2a  =  ^{f  +  cf«)  =  x«  +  y,  then 
5b  =  j:*  —  y».  Therefore  tlic  squares  .r-  nnd  y-  must  In* 
such,  that  j:*  +  y  =  S!(c*  -f-  dr)  ;  where  2(c-  +  «/  >  is  really 
the  sum  of  t\»oM|uari>s,  namely,  (r  -h  J)-  4-  (r  —  </)•;  aiul. 
in  order  to  abbreviates  let  us  sup])oae  r  +  J  =y!  and 
e — d=ff\  then  we  must  have  t^  +  ^-  =./**4-  ^'''  ;  and  thi* 
will  ha]i{)en,  according  to  whul  has  In^en  already  !«uid,  when 

from  which  wc  obtain  a   very  ci^^v  s<»liitii)n,   l>\    makiii;^ 

mm  '  m  f* 

0=1,  and  y  —  1  ;  for  wc  find  j  =  ~^  =  j:  =  c-  —  </,  an«! 

Jf  =y=  r  -h  rf;  conse()uentlv«  .*:  =  2rr/;  nnd  it  i-  tvidti.i 
that  fl  +  2  =:  c-  ^  î*rfi  -   J*'z:  (r  -  rf-,  and 

rt  -  2  =  r*  —  2r</  +  J   =:  (r  -  (i)\ 
Let  us  attempt  another  soluiii>n,  by  niakin«;  p  =-.  ^.  ati«l 

9  =  1  ;  He  stiall  then  have  x  =:  — z — y  ami  //  =  — ^ — , 

wluTC  c  and  <f,  .ik  uell  a«  .r  ami  v.  »"a\  Iv  taken  ruini/*. 
becauM.*  we  have  only  to  coiiMiUr  tlu-ir  m] tiares.  Nou.  s\uk\ 
X  must  U»  greater  tlinn  //•  I«  l  ns  inakr  //  m«;iitlvi\  atui  w^- 

shall  ha^c  r  --  : — ,  jiüI  #/         -  *  .   ■      In  mv 


.f  .1 


CHAP.  XIV.  OF  ALGEBRA.  419 

X  =  ■ ;    and  this   value  being  added  to 

0  =  c«  -f  (?,  gives -^~ 9  the  square  root  of  whici) 

is  — = — .     If  we  then  subtract  z  from  a,  there  remidns 

49c«-.14crf+c?      ....     .  ellrJ    .u     r 
— ,  which  IS  the  square  of  — r —  ;  the  former 

of  these  two  square  roots  being  jr,  and  the  hitter  y. 

2S2.  QxieHton  7.  Requireid  such  a  number,  x,  that 
whether  we  add  unity  to  itself,  or  to  its  square,  the  result 
may  be  a  square. 

It  is  here  requii*cd  to  transform  the  two  formulas  ^  +  If 
and  r«  +  1,  into  squares.  Let  us  therefore  suppose  the 
first  x  +  \  =  p^  ;  and,  because  x  =  p*  —  1,  the  second, 
jc«  -I-  1  =:  JE?*  —  Äp*  -f-  2,  must  be  a  square  :  which  last 
formula  is  of  such  a  nature  as  not  to  admit  of  a  solution, 
unless  we  already  know  a  satisfactory  case  ;  but  such  a  case 
readily  occurs,  namely,  thatof  p=:l  :  therefore  let  J3=l-fgr, 
and  we  shall  have  x^^\  =  1  +  47*  +  4ç^  -|-  q\  which  may 
become  a  square  in  several  ways. 

1.  If  we  suppose  its  root  to  be  1  +  ç%  we  shall  have 

1  -|-4g^-:-45'»  +  <7*=:l  -f  2ç«+jr*;so  tliat  49  +  ^=% 
or  4  +  4^  =  Ä,  and  y  =  —  4  ;  therefore  p  =  -y,  and 
X  =  —  ^. 

2.  Let  the  root  be  \  ^  q\  and  we  shall  find 
1  +  4g*  +  y'  -!-  ?*  =  1  — 25F*  +  y*;  consequently  y  =  —  |, 
and  p  =  —  4^,  which  gives  x  =  —  |.,  as  before. 

8.  If  we  represent  the  root  by  1  +  Äy  +  y*,  in  order  to 
destroy  the  first,  and  the  last  two  terms,  we  have 

1  -f  -*?*  +  V  +  ?*  -  1  +  *7  -f-  65^  -1-  4?»  4-  y*, 

whence  we  get  5  =  —  2,  and  /)=—!;  and  therefore 
»r  =  0. 

4.  We  may  also  adopt  1  —  ^  —  ^  for  the  root,  and 
in  this  case  shall  have 

l  +  4y*  +  4ç»  +  y*=il-4ç4-2?*+4<7»  +  5r*; 

but  we  find,  as  before,  y  =  —  2. 

5.  We  may,,  if  we  choose,  destroy  the  first  two  terms, 
by  making  tlie  root  equal  to  1  -f  9q^\  for  we  shall  dien 
have  1  +  4y«  +  4y=»  +  g^  =  1  +  4ö«  +  4ç*  ;  also,  y  =  |, 
and p  =  ^;  consequently,  jr  =  %?  ;  lastly,  «+1  =*^9=s(^)% 
and  or  -f  1  =  '14'  =  (V)*- 

E  £  2 


MO  ELEMENTS  PAET   IL 

A  pvater  number  of*  values  will  be  fouiul  for  q^  by 
making  une  of  tliose  which  we  have  already  detemiimxi. 
Thus  having  found  y  =  -  {  ;  let  now  y  »  -  ^  +  r,  and 
wc  shall  have  ;;  =  J  +  r;  also,  ;>«  =  |  -I-  r  +  r«,  and 
p*  zu  ^\  -r  Ir  +  {r^  +  8r*  +  r*;    whence  the  expresuon 

to  which  our  formula,  x^  -k-  1,  is  reduced,  must  Ik*  a  squarr« 
and  it  must  also  be  so  when  multiplied  by  1()  ;  in  wliidi  case*, 
wc  have  25  -  24r  -  8r •  +  32H  +  lor*  to  be  a  squarv. 
For  which  reason,  let  us  now  represent 

1.  The  root  by  5  +^  ±  4r*  ;  so  tliat 

26_24r   -    Sr^  +  SAr'+lOr^sr 

«5  4-  \Qfr  ±  40r«  -f/'r«  ±  Ç/P  +  16r*. 

The  first  and  the  last  terms  destroy  each  oth<T;  and  we  may 
destroy  the  second  also,  if  we  make  10/*=  —  24,  and,  ci»n- 
«quently,  /*=  —  V  ;  then  dividing  the  remaining  term^ 
hy  r*,  wc  have  —  8  +  8«r  =r  i  40  -^f*  ±  8/r;  and,  ad- 

48  +/* 
mitttng  the  upper  sign,  we  find  r  =  <k>  _  h?    N€>w,be- 

camcyÄ—  'j,  we  have  r  =r  \l\  therefore  p  =  J*,  and 
-r  =  Kii  sothatx+  I  =(;;)',  and  x'+l  =  (:;!)\ 

2.  If  wc  adopt  the  lower  sign,  we  have 

-  8  +  82r  =  -  40  +y^  -  ii^r, 
whence  r  =•^3———.  ;    and    since  y  =   -    \',    wc  liav^» 

r  =  —  î*  ;  therefore/?  =  \{^  which  lends  to  thf  pnvixliiig 
equation. 

3.  Let  4»^  +  4r  ±  Ö  l)e  the  root  ;  so  that 

16r*  +  3Ôr'  -     8r«  -  24r    +  î>r>  := 
16r*  +  32H  +  40r«  -f    16r'  ±  lOr  +  SO  : 

and  as  on  both  sides  the  first  two  terms  and  the  Li^t  ili*vtniv 
each  other,  we  sliall  have 

-  8r  —  24  =  ±  Wr  +  lf>r  4    K).  or 

-  24r  —  24  =    t:  ^^r  j.  40. 

Here,  if  wc  admit  the  up|HT  sign,  wc  fthnll  have 

-  24r  -  i>4  z:  44>r  +  K).  <»r  0  -  G4r  -f  Ö4,  or 
0  =  r  +  1,  that   is   r  =  -  1,  and  />  -=  —  J  ;  Inil  ihi?  ii:  n 


e  already  known  to  us,  niul  we  nIioiiM  woX  have  found  n 
ditTcrent  one  hy  making  uh*  of  tlic  t»llicr  M;;n. 

4.  I^*t  iu>w  the  niot  U«  5  +./'  +  ^T' '*•  ">"'  let  us  deter- 
mine /'ami  ^  M),  thai  llie  tir>t  lliiiv  terms  ni;i\  \:ini%Ji  . 
then,  MiKv 


CHAP.  XIV.  OF  ALGEBBA.  421 

25  -  24r   -    8/^    +  32/^    +  16r*  =: 

25  +  lOfr  +  10^V+  IQgr*  +  2/g^r»  +  gV, 

we  shall  first  have  1Q^=— 24,  so  thatyzz—  '^  ;  then 
,^     ,   ^  ^  -8-/*      -344      -172 

When,  therefore,  we  have  substituted  and  divided  the  re- 
maining terms  by  r^,  we  shall  have 

2Ä'~  32 
32  +  16r  =  2^+é^--r,  and  r  =  ^^^Z^- 

Now,  the  numerator  2/g'  —  32  becomes  here 
-f24xl72-32x625_  -32x496_  -16x32x31 

5x125  ""       625       ""  625         *  *""* 

the  denominator 

so  that  r=  —  V^  ;  and  hence  we  conclude  that p=  —  ttti' 
by  means  of  which  we  obtain  a  new  value  of  a:  =  />*  —  1. 

223.  Ciuestian  8.  To  find  a  number,  x,  which,  added  to 
each  of  the  given  numbers,  a,  6,,c,  produces  a  square. 

Since  here  the  three  formulae  a:  -h  a,  j:  +  6,  and  a:  -f  r, 
must  be  squares,  let  us  make  the  first  j?  -f-  a  =  zS  and  we 
shall  have  a:  ==  z^  —  a,  and  the  two  other  formulae  will  be 
changed  into  z'  +  6  —  a,  and  z^  -{-c  -^  a. 

It  18  now  required  for  each  of  these  to  be  a  square  ;  but 
this  does  not  admit  of  a  ^neral  solution  :  the  problem  is 
frequently  impossible,  and  its  possibility  entirely  oepends  on 
the  nature  of  the  numbers  6  —  a,  and  c  '^  a.  For  example, 
if  6  —  a  =  1,  and  c  ~  a  =  —  1,  that  is  to  say,  if  6  =  a  +  l, 
and  c  =  a  --^  1,  it  would  be  required  to  make  z*  -|-  1,  and 
z'^  —  1  squares,  and,  consequently,  that  z  should  be  a  frac- 
tion :  so  that  we  should  make  »  =  — ,  and  it  would  be  ne- 

ccssary  that  the  two  formula;  p*  +  y^,  and  p'  —  q%  should 
be  squares,  and,  consequently,  that  their  product  also, 
p^  -  9^,  should  be  a  square.  Now,  we  Iiave  already  shewn 
(Art.  202)  that  this  is  impossible. 

Were  we  to  make  6  —  a  =  2,  and  c  ^  a  =  —2,  that  is, 

P 
6  =  a  4-  2,  and  c  =  «  —  2;  and  also,  if  2  =  ^,we8hould 

have  the  two  formulae,  p*  +25^«,  and  p*  —  2g*,  to  transform 
into  squares  ;  consequently,  it  would  also  be  necessary  for 


482  ELEMENT«  fABT  II. 

their  product^  p*  —  4^%  to  become  a  square  ;  but  this  we 
have  likewise  shewn  to  be  impossible.     (Art  209. ) 

In  general,  let  é  —  «  =  m,  c  —  a  =ss  ft,  and  x  zz-^  :  then 

the  formula!  p*  +  mq\  and  p*  -i-  nq\  must  become  squares  ; 
but  we  have  seen  that  this  is  imposable,  both  when  m  =  4- 1^ 
and  n  =  —  1,  and  when  m  =  +  2,  and  n  =:  —  2. 

It  is  also  imposable,  when  m  ^J^S  and  n  =  -^'  ;  ffar, 
in  that  case»  we  should  have  two  formulae,  whu&e  prodnct 
would  be  =  fi^  '^y^*9*y  ^^  ^  ^  say,  the  difference  of  two 
biquadrates  ;  and  we  know  that  such  a  difference  can  never 
become  a  square. 

Likewise,  when  m  =:  2/',  and  n  =  —  2/*',  we  have  the 
two  formula?  p'  -f-  2/*'^*,  and  p*  ~  ?/*'?'»  which  cannot 
both  become  squares,  because  their  product  p*  —  y*y*  must 
become  a  square.  Now,  if  we  make^^  =r  r,  this  product  is 
dianged  into  p*  -  4r*,  a  formula,  the  impossibility  of  which 
has  w^cn  already  demonstrated. 

If  we  suppose  m  =r  1,  and  n  s  2,  so  that  it  is  required  to 
reduce  to  squares  the  formulae  p*  4  q*t  ^nd  p*  +  2g\  we 
shall  make  D*  ^-  ?•  =  r\  and  p*  -!  &•=#•;  the  first 
equation  will  give  p'  =  r'  —  9*,  and  the  second  will  give 
r*  V  y*  =  #*  ;  anci  therefore  both  r'  —  q\  and  r'  -i  q', 
must  DC  squares  :  but  the  impossibility  of  this  is  proved, 
since  the  prôduct  of  these  formula?,  or  r*  —  q\  cannot  bc^ 
come  a  square. 

These  examples  are  sufficient  to  shew,  that  it  is  not  easy 
to  choose  sucli  numbers  for  m  and  n  as  nill  render  the  foli^ 
tion  |iosHble.  The  only  means  of  finding  i^uch  values  of  in 
and  fi,  is  to  imagine  them,  or  to  detenninc  tliem  by  the  fbl* 
lowing  metliod. 

Let  us  makey*'  -f  niff'  z=,h\  and/'  -j-  ng'  =  A*  ;  tlun 

we  have,  by  the  fonner  ci|ualian,  m  = ^— ,  and,  by  the 


(rr 


latter,  fi  = j—  ;  this  being  done,  we  have  only  to  take 

Ibry^  I?«  ^  ^^^  ^*  '^y  numbers  at  pleasure,  and  we  shall 
have  volues  of  ffi  ami  n  that  will  remler  llic  solution  jiossiUe. 
For  example,  let  ä  =  îJ,  A-  =  5,/=  1,  and  fi  =  2,  no 
shall  have  m  =  2,  and  n  =r  6  ;  and  we  may  now  l)c  certain 
that  it  is  possible  to  reduce  the  formuue  p*  +  ^*  ^hI 
p' -|- C7*  to  squan^H,  since  it  takes  place  when  /)  =  1, 
and  7  =  2.  Hut  the  former  formula  generally  lircomcs  a 
square,  if/*  =  r-  —  2#*,  and  q  =  ftrs  ;  tor  then  p^  +  27*  =. 


CHAP.  XIV.  OF   JlLGEBEA.  4äS 

(r*  +  2*-)*.  The  latter  formula  also  becomes  ü*-|-6g'2  = 
r*  +  ^r-s*  +  4tf*  ;  and  we  know  a  case  in  whicn  it  betomes 
a  square,  namely,  whep  ^  =  1,  and  j  =  2,  which  gives 
r  =  1,  and  j  =  1  ;  or,  generally,  r  ,=  *  ;  so  that  the  formula 
is  25s\  Knowing  this  case,  therefore,  let  us  make  r=8-\-t; 
and  we  shall  then  have  r*  =  ^  +  fc^-f^',  or  r*  =  ^  + 

4*5/ +  6#-^'  + 4tf^  +  ^*?  ^  t^»t  ^ur  formula  will  become 
25s^  -Î-  44rt  -Î-  ^sH*  +  4tf^  -}-  <♦  :  and,  supposing  its  root 
to  be  5s*  -^Vßt  -,'-  ^*,  we  shall  make  it  equal  to  the  square 
255*  +  1Q^<  +./***^*  +  105*^  +  2/W»  -f  fj  by  which 
means  the  first  and  last  terms  will  be  destroyed.  Let  us 
likewise  make  g/'zr  4,  or/*=  2,  in  order  to  remove  the  last 
terms  but  one,  and  we  shall  obtain  the  equation 
44*  +  26^  =  IQ^  +  10^  +/2^  =  20*4-  14^,  or  2#  =  -  ^, 
I» 

and  --  =  —  4.  ;  therefore  j  =  —  1,  and  <;=.2,or<=:— 2*; 
z 

and,  consequently,  r  =  —  *,  also  r*  =  *^,  which  is  noUiijag 
more  than  the  case  already  known. 

Let  us  rather,  therefore,  determine  y*  in  such  a  manner, 
that  the  second  terms  may  vanish.  We  must  make  10^=44, 
or  f=  Y  ;  and  then  dividing  the  other  terms  by  #^,  we 
shall  have  2fo+4/  =  lOs  +/«*  +  9ß,  that  is,  -|^*  =  V^  ; 

T 

which  gives  t  =  — Z^^,  and  r  =?^  +  <  =  ,Vj  or  —  =7^;  so  tliat 

r=3,  and  5=10;  by  which  means  we  find  o=S**—r^ =191, 
and  q  =  2r«  =  60,  and  our  formuke  will  oe 

p*  +  2j«  =  43681  =  (209)«  and 
p«  +  6j*  =  58081  =  (241)«. 

224.  Remark.  In  the  same  manner,  other  numbers  may 
be  found  for  m  and  n,  that  will  make  our  formula;  squares  ; 
and  it  is  proper  to  observe,  that  the  ratio  of  m  to  n  is 
arbitrary. 

Let  this  ratio  be  as  ^  to  6,  and  let  tn  =  az,  and  n  =  bz; 
it  will  be  required  to  know  how  z  i$  to  be  determined,  in 
order  that  the  two  formulas  p^  +  azq\  and  />*  4-  bzq'^,  may 
be  transformed  into  sauares  :  the  method  of  doinff  which  we 
shall  explain  in  tlic  solution  of  the  following  problem. 

225.  Question  9.  Two  numbers,  a  and  6,  being  given»  U> 
find  the  number  z  such,  that  the  two  formulae,  p^  4-  azq\ 
and  p^  +  bzq^f  may  become  squares  ;  and,  at  the  same  time, 
to  determine  the  least  possible  values  of  p  and  q. 

Here/  if  we  make  p^  +  azq^  =  r*,  and  p«  -|-  6z^  =  jt, 
and  multiply  the  first  equation  by  a,  and  the  second  by  6, 
the  différence  of  the  two  products  will  furnish  the  equation 


4X4  BLftliSNTl  PJkMT  II. 

{b'^a)f^^ln*  -a^f  and,  oonsequently,  p^^^i~ — 5  which 

formula  must  be  a  square  :  now,  this  happens  when  r  ^  #• 
Let  us,  therefore,  in  order  to  remove  the  fractions,  su] 
r  =  #  +  (^  —  o)ti  and  we  shall  have 

P  ""  b — a   ""  6— a 

ft-a  " 

Let  us  now  make  p  s  «  +  —  /,  and  wc  ihall  have 

y 

;<»  =  ,«  + ^,<  +  ^  <*  =  #»  + 2&rt  +  6(6  -  o)r, 

in  which  the  terms  ^  destroy  each  other  ;  so  that  the  other 
terms  being  divided  by  /,  and  multiplied  by  y*,  gire 
flmry  +  tr*  =  S6#y«  4-  6(6  -  a)t^  ;  whence 

So  that<  =:  £ry  -  22^*,  and  #  =  6(6  -  a)y*  -  jf  ;  farther, 
r  »  8(6  -  a)jy  ~  6(6  •  a)/  -  if*;   and,  coosequendy, 

p  =s  «  4-  — /  =  6(6  — fllty*  +  X«  —  Ä&ry  =  (x  -  6y)<— a6y*. 

Havinff  therefore  fo^nd  n,  r,  and  #,  it  remains  to  determine 
z  ;  and,  for  this  purpoae,  let  us  subtract  the  first  equation, 
1^  -f  a*g^  =  f\  from  the  second,  p*  +  isy^  =  j*  ;  tlie  re- 
mainder will  be  zq^{b  —  a)  :s  j*  —  r«  =  (#  -f  ^)  ^  (#  —  r). 
Now,  #  -I-  r  -  2(6  —  o)jv  -  2x«,  and 

t  -  r  =  26(6 -o)j/«  -  2(6—  fl)xy,  or 
t  4-  r  =  2Lr((6  — /i)[y  —  x),  and 
#  -  r  =  2(6  —  a)  X  (6y  -  x)y;  so  that 
(6  — fl):y'  =  2x((6  — a^y  —  x)  x  2(6-«)  x  (6v-.x\y,ar 
2^'  =  2x((6  -  ii)y  -  x)  X  (Ay  -  x)2y,  or 
ry*  =  4ry(  (6  —  a)tf  -  x)  x  (6^  -  x)  ; 

We  must  therefore  take  tlie  greatest  square  for  q*,  that 
will  divide  the  numerator;  but  let  us  observe,  that  we  have 
already  found  p=:6(6— aW'-|-x*— 26xv  =  (x-6y)'  — /i6y*  ; 
and  thcrefcire  we  may  simplify,  by  making  x  zz  v  +  ht/^  or 
X  —  6y  ^  V  ;  for  then  p  :z  v* '•^  ^^y%  and 


CHAP.  XIV. 


OF    ALtiKBRA. 


4^5 


z  m  ■'       ,  *  orz—  ,  • 

By  these  means  we  may  take  any  numbers  for  v  and  v»  and 
assuming  for  q*  the  greatest  square  contained  m  the  nu- 
merator, we  snail  easily  determine  the  value  of  z  ;  after 
which,  we  may  return  to  the  equations  m  =  02,  w  ==  fe, 
and/)  =  V»  —  oby'j  and  shall  obtain  the  formulœ  required. 

1.  p'^  +  azq*  =  (i/*  —  abjf^y  -Î-  4savy(v  +  ay)  x  (v  +  iy), 

which  is  a  square,  whose  root  is  r  =  —  v^  —  ^ty  —  a&y*. 
S.  The  second  formula  becomes 

p\  +  bzq'  ^  (»•  -  a6y')'+  ^^(t'  +  fly)  x  (ü  +  6j^), 
which  is  also  a  square,  whose  root  is  s=  —  v*  —  Sftry— oiy*, 
and  the  values  both  of  r  and  s  may  be  taken  positive. 

It  may  be  proper  to  analyse  these  results  in  some  ex- 
amples. 

226.  Example  1.  Let  a  =  —  1,  and  i  =  -f- 1,  and  let  us 
endeavour  to  seek  such  a  number  for  Zj  that  the  two  formula 
p^  —  25^,  and  p*  -h  zy*,  may  become  squares  ;  namely,  the 
first  r^,  and  the  second  «*• 

We  have  therefore  p  =  1;*  +  y*  ;  and,  in  order  to  find  a, 
we  have  only  to  consider  the  formula 

«  =  — 2 ,       ■  ■   ■  ;  and,  by  givmg  dînèrent  values  to 

V  and  y^  we  shall  see  those  that  result  for  z. 


1 

2 

S 

4 

5 

6 

V 

2 

d 

4 

5 

16 

8 

y 

1 

2 

1 

4 

9 

1 

p-y 

1 

1 

S 

1 

7 

7 

©+y 

S 

5 

5 

9 

25 

9 

zy 

4x6 

4x30 

16X15 

9x16x5 

S6x25xl6x7 

16x9x14 

t 

4 

4 

16 

9x16 

S6x25'xl6 

16x9 

Z 

6 

SO 

15 

5 

7 

14 

V 

5l       IS 

17 

41 

SS7 

65 

And  by  means  of  these  values,  we  may  resolve  the  following 
formulae,  and  make  squares  of  them  : 

1.  We  may  transform  into  squares  the  formulae  p*  ^6q', 
and  d'-|-  bq'  ;  which  is  done  by  suppo8iii^/7=5,  and  q^i; 
for  tne  first  becomes  25  —  24  =  1,  and  the  second 

25  +  24  =  49. 

2.  Likewise,  the  two  formulae  f'— 30?*>  and  p'  +30q*  ; 


426  FLKMKNTa  rAlT  I 

namely,  by  making  ^y  r=  13,  and  ç  s  8  ;  Ibr  the  fini  k^ 
conies  16i)  -  KH)  ^  49,  and  die  second  169  +  1£0  =  SB 
,*J.  LikcwiKC  tlic  two  tbrmulff/?'  —  159',and  0'  +  ISq'  • 
for  if  wc  make  p  =179  <^nd  q  •=  4,  we  nave,  for  the  fint, 
«289  '  ^40  =  49,  and  for  the  second  289  -r  ^40  =  5S9. 

4.  Tiie  two  formulae,  p*^  ->  5q\  and  /^^  +  5^%  Tigu— 
likewise  s(|uares :  namely,  when  p  zz  41,  and  g  ^  Hi  Sat 
then;/  -  5y*  =  1681  -  720  =  961  =  SI»,  and 

p^  +  5//»  =  IGSI  +  7^0  =  2401  =  49*. 

5.  The  two  formula»  «*  —  7y*,  and  p*  -«-  7g\  are  9q< 
if  p  =  337,  and  (7  =  lîio  ;  for  the  first  is  then 
113569  -  100800  =  12769  =  113',    and    the 
113569  +  100800=^214369=  463s 

6.  The  fonnulœ  I/*  — 14^%  and/>^  +  14;*,  become  aquan» 
in  the  case  of  0  =  60,  and  q  :=z  lui  for  then 

p^  —  liy*  =  42i>5  —  2016  =  2209  =  47-,  and 
/>*  +  Ik/*  =  4225  4-  2016  =  6241  =  7ff-. 

227.  Example  :2.  When  the  two  numlx-rs  m  and  n  aic 
in  the  ratio  of  1  to  2  ;  that  i»  to  say,  when  a  =  1,  and 
iß  =z  2,  and  therefore  m  =■  ?,  and  n  =  2z,  to  lind  sudi 
values  for  2,  that  the  formuhe  p*  -i-  zq-  and  p^  -f  izg"*"  niay  be 
transformed  into  M|uarefl. 

1 1ère  it  would  l)e  superfluous  to  make  use  of  the  genetal 
fonnultf!  already  given,  since  this  example  may  be  im- 
mediately reduced  to  the  preceiling.  In  fact,  if  p'  +  ry *  =  r^, 
and  p*  +  2:,;^  =  «-«  we  have,  fnrni  the  first  oc]uatioa» 
;>•  =  r*  —  zq- ;  which  iK'in«:;  öulMituteil  in  the  second,  i^ivcs 
r-  -|-  zq-  =  J»'  ;  so  thai  the  (|ucslion  only  retjuires  that  the 
two  formula*,  r'  —  :q\  and  r'  -f  xq-^  may  lK*C4Hne  6c|uaf<v»; 
and  this  is  evidenily  tlie  case  of  the  preceifing  example.  We 
Kliall  conse(iiiently  have  for  :  the  tbllowin«^  valuer:  6^  30, 
15,  5,  7,  14,  &c. 

\\v  m«iy  also  make  a  similar  transformation  in  a  general 
manner.  For,  supiiosing  thai  the  two  formnliv  //>  -f  mtf\ 
imd  yi*  -f  fiq\  may  tKvnme  s(|uan%  let  us  make/r  +  mq'=-r*^ 
ami  /;*  -4-  /ly'  ■=  *-  ;  the  lirst  ei|uati4m  pVL»s/r  =  r*  •-  wy'; 
the  Mx*(md  will  Invome 

Ä*  =  r*  —  mq"^  t  n(f^  or  r*  -f  (11  —  w)  r/*  =  à^  :  if,  lherefon.\ 
the  lipit  fomiulx*  an*  |MKsihle,  tlu*se  Ixst  r*  —  r/«y,  aud 
r*  f  (n  —  wt)7%  will  Ik*  m»  likewise;  and  as  m  and  n  ni.iy  be 
sulüitituted  for  each  other,  the  formuhe  r^  —  nq*^  and 
H  +  (m  —  w)7*,  will  olïvo  Ik»  |X)siiible:  on  the  nmtrary,  if 
the  firnt  are  im|XMiiuble,  tlie  others  will  Ik.»  so  likewise*. 

228.  ExampU  3.  Let  m  Ik»  to  11  as  1  t«>  3,  or  let  /i  =  1, 
and  h  =  3,  m)  that  m  =  ;;,  and  n  =  3:,  and  let  it  Ik'  ro- 
f|Utrid  to  traiislbnn  into  Miiun*»  tlu*  formula'  //*  -f  -'/'•  ^'^d 
p^  +  l\zq\ 


CHAF.  XIV. 


OF    AL6KBKA. 


427 


Since  a  =  1^  and  ft  s=  3,  the  question  will  be  possible  in 
all  the  cases  in  which  z^  =  4ry(i7  -f  y)  X  (ü  -f  3y),  and 
^  =  i;2  —  3y2.     Let  us  therefore  adopt  the  following  values 
for  V  and  y  : 


1 
I 

12 

4 

16x2 

S 
*l 
5 
9 
4  X  9  X  30 

4 

1 

5 

7 

4x4x35 

1 
6 
9 

25 
4x9x25x4x2 

'        16 

9 

25 

43 

4  X  9  X  16  X  85  X  43 

16 
2 
SI 

4x9 
30 

i 

4x4 

8& 
13 

4  x  4  X  9  X  25 
191 

4x9x  16x25 
43 
IS 

Now,  we  have  here  two  cases  for  z  ^z2y  which  enables 
us  to  transform,  in  two  ways,  the  formulae  p*  -}-  8y«,  and 

The  first  is,  to  make  o  =  2,  and  9  =:  4,  and  conscaucntly 
also  /7  =  I9  and  q  ::zx;  for  we  have  then  from  tne  last 
p*  +  2g^  =  9,  and  p*  -{-  6gr*  =  25. 

The  second  is,  to  suppose  p  zz  191,  and  q  zz  60,  by  which 
means  we  shall  hav€p«+8g^=(209)S  and  p*-h6?*=(^l)^ 
It  is  difficult  to  determine  whether  we  cannot  also  make 
;2  =  1  ;  which  would  be  the  case,  if  zq'"  were  a  square  :  but, 
in  order  to  determine  the  question,  whether  the  two  formulae 
p*  -|-  9%  Ä^d  P*  '1*  %*>  can  become  squares,  the  following 
process  is  necessary. 

229.  It  is  required  to  investigate,  whethei  we  el^l  trans^ 
form  into  squares  the  formulée  p*  +  j*,  and  p'  -1-  8?%  with 
the  same  values  of  p  and  g.  Let  us  here  suppose  pi*  +;^isr\ 
and  p*  -f  8^*  =  #%  which  leads  to  the  investigation  of  the 
following  circumstances. 

1.  The  numbers  p  and  q  may  be  considered  as  prime  to 
each  other;  for  if  they  had  a  common  divisor^  the  two 
formulae  would  still  continue  squares,  after  dividing  p  and 
q  by  that  divisor. 

z.  It  is  impossible  fi)r  p  to  be  an  evra  number  ;  for  in 
that  case  q  would  be  odd  ;  and,  consequently,  the  second 
formula  would  be  a  number  of  the  class  4n  +  3,  which  can* 
not  become  a  square  ;  wherefore  p  is  necessarily  odd,  and  p* 
is  a  number  of  the  class  8n  +  1. 

3.  Since  p  therefore  is  odd,  q  must  in  the  first  formula 
not  only  be  even,  but  divisible  by  4,  in  order  that  q*  may 
become  a  number  of  the  class  16n,  and  that  p'  -{-  ;'  may  b^ 
of  the  class  8n  -|-  1. 

4.  Farther,  0  cannot  be  divisible  by  3;  for  in  that  case, 
p'  would  be  divisible  by  9^  and  q*  not;  so  thai  8g'  would 


4S8  ELEMENT!  FART  II. 

only  be  divisible  by  3,  and  not  by  9;  oonsequendj,  abo» 
p*  ■{■  Sq'  could  only  be  divisible  by  3,  and  noC  by  9,  and 
therefore  could  not  be  a  square;  so  that  p  cannot  he  di* 
visible  by  3,  and  p*  will  be  a  number  of  the  class  Su  4-  !• 

5.  Since />  is  not  divisible  by  3,  q  must  be  so;  for  other- 
wise q^  would  be  a  number  of  the  class  3n  -f  1»  and  ood- 
sequently  p<  -f  7*  a  number  of  the  class  3n  -^  %  which  can- 
not be  a  sciuare  :  therefore  q  must  be  divinble  by  8. 

6.  Nor  IS  p  divisible  by  5  ;  for  if  that  were  the  case,  q 
would  not  be  so,  and  q^  would  be  a  number  of  the  dâas 
5fi  4"  1»  or  5fi  +  4  ;  consequently,  3^*  would  be  of  the  da« 
ft«  -f  8,  or  5ffi  Hh  S  ;  and  as  p*  +  3^^  would  belong  to  the 
same  classes,  this  formuU  therefore  could  not  in  tuat  case 
become  a  square;  consequently  i>  must  not  be  divisUiie  by 
8,  and  p*  must  be  a  number  of^^thc  class  5fi  -f  1,  or  of  tlic 
class  5fi  +  4« 

7.  Butsinoepisnotdiviâbleby5,  let  ussee  whether  q  is 
divisible  by  5,  or  not  ;  since  if  q  were  not  divisible  by  5,  a* 
must  be  of  the  class  5if+S,orftfi-f3»aswe  have  alrttdy 
•oen  ;  and  nnce  d*  is  of  the  class  ftn  4-  1  »  or  5a  4-  4, 
|>* -f  Sf*  must  be  tne  same;  namely,  ftfi  +  1»  or  5w4>4;  and 
therefore,  of  one  of  the  forms  5a  -h  3,  or  5fi  -f  2.  Lei  us 
consider  these  cases  separately. 

If  we  suppose  p*(r)5a  +  1  ^>  then  we  must  have  q*  (r) 
fta  +  4,  because  otherwise  f^  -¥  ^  could  not  be  a  sauare  ; 
but  we  should  then  liave  37«(r)5fi  +  2  and  /^  4-  37«(f) 
5a  -f  3,  which  cannot  be  a  square. 

In  tlie  second  place,  let  p^(F)5n  +  4;  in  this  case  we 
must  have  q^(f)Bn  4  1,  in  order  that  fi^  -^  q^  niay  be  a 
SQuare,  and S^Mr) ^»  +  8;  therefore  p^  4  3y^(F)5fi  4  ^ 
which  cannot  be  a  square.     It  follows,  therefore,  that  q 
roust  be  divisible  by  5. 

8.  Now,  a  being  divisible  first  by  4,  then  by  3,  and 
in  the  third  place  by  5,  it  must  ue  such  a  numtxrr  as 
4  X  3  X  5m,  or  q  =~  COm  ;  so  that  our  formula*  would  be- 
come //  +  SGOOfii'  =  r\  and  />*  +  10800m«  =  j*  :  this  U^ 
big  eifÂablished,  the  first,  subtractixl  from  the  Hiinmd,  will 
give  7200m«  =  *«  —  r^'  =  (i  +  r)  x  (#  -  r)  ;  so  that  j  4-  r 
and  #  —  r  must  be  factors  of  7200m%  and  at  the  same  time 

*  In  the  former  cditiou»  of  thü  work,  the  »i^n  =  U  ui»Oil  to 
express  the  words,  **  of  the  form'*  This  wa»  mloptiHl  in  onler 
to  save  the  repetition  of  theiK.*  wortb  ;  but  a»  it  may  occa»ionalt> 
produce  ambiguity,  or  cjnfii^ion,  it  ^as  thought  pn»|Hrr  to  nub- 
stitute  (p)  instead  qÎ^,  wliich  is  to  be  read  tiius  :  />'  (  ^  )  Su  4  1 . 
^  the  form  5m -^  I. 


CHAP.  XIV.  OF  ALGEBRA.  4S9 

it  should  be  observed,  that  s  and  r  must  be  odd  numbers, 
and  also  prime  to  each  other*. 

9.  Fartlier,  let  TSOOot^  =  4^,  or  let  its  factors  be  ^and 
%,  supposing  *  4-  r  =  ^  and  *  —  r  =  2g,  we  shall  have 
s  =y-i- ^,  and  r  =y* — ^;y  and  g*,  also,  must  be  prime 
to  each  others  and  the  one  must  be  odd  and  tlie  other  even. 
Now,  as^  =  1800m%  we  may  resolve  ISOOwi*  into  two  fac- 
tors, the  one  being  even  and  the  other  odd,  and  having  at 
the  same  time  no  common  divisor. 

10.  It  is  to  be  farther  remarked,  that  since  r^  zz  p^  -^  q\ 
and  since  r  is  a  divisor  of  p*  +  y*,  r  =y  —  ^must  likewise 
be  the  sum  of  two  squares  (Art.  170)  ;  and  as  thid  number 
is  odd,  it  must  be  contained  in  the  formula  4/?  -f  1. 

11.  If  we  now  begin  with  supposing  m  =  1,  we  shall  have 
fg  =  1800  =  8  X  9  X  25,  apa  nence  the  following  results  : 
/=  1800,  and  ^  =  1,  orf^  200,  and  g^  =  9,  or  jr=  72, 

and  5  =  25,  or/s  225,  and  g  =.8. 

The  Ist^  rr  =/—  g  =  1799(f)4w  +  3  ; 

^  UvesJ  ^  =/-é^  =    ^91(')^  +  S; 
3d  rS^^^l  r  =/-  g  =     47(F)4n  +  3; 

4th  J  I  r  =/-  g  =   217(f)4i»  +  1  ; 

So  that  the  first  three  must  be  excluded,  and  there  remains 
only  the  fourth  :  from  which  we  may  conclude,  generally, 
that  the  greater  factor  must  be  odd,  and  the  less  even  ;  but 
even  the  value,  r  =  217,  cannot  be  admitted  here,  because 
that  number  is  divisible  by  7,  which  is  not  the  sum  of  two 
squares  •{•. 

12.  IfT/i  =  2,  we8hallhavey^  =  7200  =  32  X  226;  for 
which  reason  we  shall  make  J^z:  225,  and  ^  =  32^  so  that 
r  =y  —  g  =  193  ;  and  this  number  beins  the  sum  of  two 
squares,  it  will  be  worth  while  to  try  it  rîow,as  q  =  120,' 
and  r  =:  193,  and  p«  =  r*  —  j*  =  (r  +  j)  x  (r  —  ç,  we 
shall  have  r  +  q  =  313,  and  r  —  g  =  73  ;  but  since  these 
factors  are  not  squares,  it  is  evident  that  o*  does  not  become 
a  square.  In  the  same  manner,  it  would  be  in  vain  to  sub- 
stitute any  other  numbers  for  m,  as  we  shall  now  shew. 

230.  Theorem,  It  is  impossible  for  the  two  formulae 
P^  +  Ç^9  and  p-  +  3g*,  to  be  Doth  squares  at  the  same  time  ; 
so  that  in  the  cases  where  one  of  them  is  a  square,  it  is  cer- 
tain that  the  other  is  not. 


*  Because  p  is  odd  and  q  is  even  ;  therefore  p*  +q*sz  r*,  and 
/}*  +  3y*  =  #',  must  be  both  odd.     B. 

t  Because  the  sum  of  t>vo  squares^  prime  to  each  other,  can 
only  be  divided  by  numbers  of  the  same  form.     B.^ 


490  BLF.MBNTS  PAftT  H. 

Démonstration,  Wc  have  teen  that  p  b  odd,  md  f 
even,  because  p^  +  q^  caonot  be  a  iouare»  exœpc  whoi 
q  S3  8r#,  and/»  s  r^  —  #^;  andp*  -f  S^^ cannot  be  a  square, 
except  when  q  =  2<t#,  and  p  ^  f  —  8t*%  or  p  ts  8«*  —  f . 
NoWy  as  in  both  caaes  o  niust  be  a  double  pnxxluct,  let  us 
suppose  for  both,  q  »  fSabcd;  and,  for  the  first  formula,  kt 
us  make  r  :=z  ab^  and  s  ^  cd;  for  the  second,  let  I  a  #r, 
and  tt  s=  bd.  We  shall  hare  for  the  former  p=:a*fr*— r^d*, 
and  for  the  latter  p  =  a  V  —  86*rf*,  or  ;>  =  SiVT  —  n'e*, 
and  these  two  values  must  be  equal  ;  so  that  we  have  ather 
«•*•  -cM»  :r=o*c*  -36-dS  or  a»6»  -cM*  »SAM*  — «*c*  ; 
and  it  will  be  perceived  that  the  numbers  a,  6,  r,  and  d^  are 
each  less  than  p  and  9.  We  must  however  consider  each 
case  separately  :  the  first  gives  a***  -|-  34*{P  =  cV*  -f  oV, 

or  ftK«'  +  8^*)  =   <^(«'  +  rf*),  whence    ^  =  -r^  « 

fraction  that  must  be  a  square. 

Now,  the  numerator  and  denominator  can  here  have  no 
other  common  divisor  than  2,  because  their  difference  is 
HdK     If,  therefore,  2  were  a  common  dinsor,  both 

— 5 — ,  and  — 5 — ,  must  be  a  square;  but  the  numbers  a 

and  d  are  in  this  case  both  odd,  so  that  their  squares  have 

o*4-3d* 
the  fonii  8n  -f  1,  and  the  formula  — 5 —    is  contained   in 

the  expression  4^i -}"  2,  and  cannot  Ix?  a  st|uare;  ^hereforr 
ff  cannot  be  a  common  divisor  ;  the  numerator  a^  -f  d"^  and 
the  denominator  a*  -f  &/*  are  thcrelbre  prime  to  eacli  other, 
and  each  of  them  must  of  itself  Ik>  a  Sijuare. 

But  these  formula*  are  âmilar  to  the  former,  and  if  the 
last  were  squares,  similar  formula*,  Uiough  conipo?^!  of  the 
smxdlest  numbers,  would  have  also  been  stjuares  ;  so  that  we 
conclude,  recipn)call}',  fn)m  our  not  having  found  squares  in 
small  numbers,  that  then*  are  none  in  great. 

This  conclusion  however  U  not  admissible,  unless  the 
second  case,  n^b^  —  cd^  ■=■  3ô*d*  —  a'r*,  furnishes  a  similar 
one.  Now,  this  ei)uation  gives  a^&*  4-  a'r>  =  8A*(^  4-  f*J», 
or  a\b^  -i-  r^)  =  d'{<W  -f  r-);  and,  consequently, 

-r-  zr  r, ;  = -.tt  ;  «o  tlmt  as  tliis  fraction  ouirht  to  be  a 

•quare,  the  foregoing  concluaon  i«  fullv  confirmed  ;  for,  if  in 
great  numbi*rs  there  were  coses  in  whicli/)*-f  çSaiid  />*+''V/  , 
were  Miuares,  such  casi*s  must  have  also  existed  with  regani 
to  smaller  numbers;  but  thU  is  not  tla*  fact. 


CHAP.  XIV.  OF   AtOEBRA.  481 

231.  Oßcstion  10.  l^o  determine  three  numbers,  or,  y^ 
and  «,  such,  that  multiplying  them  together  two  and  two, 
and  adding  1  to  the  product,  we  may  obtain  a  square  each 
time  ;  that  is,  to  transform  into  squares  the  three  following 
formulae  : 

Let  us  suppose  one  of  the  last  two,  as  orjer  -f  1,  =  />*« 
and  the  other  ^2  +  1  =  g',  and  we  shall  liave 

X  =  ^ ,  and  V  =  ' •  The  first  formula  is  now  trans- 

^        (p»-l)x(gr»-l)        ,        ,  .  ^ 
formed  to  ^ —^ 4-  1;  which  must  consequently 

be  a  square,  and  will  be  no  less  so,  if  multiplied  by  2*;  so 

that  (p2  _  1)  X  (g^  —  1)  +  2%  must  be  a  square,  which  it 

is  easy  to  form.     For,  let  its  root  be  z-|-^>  *"^  ^^  ^^  have 

(p-  -  1)  X  (?2  —  1)  =  2r«  -J-  r«,  and 

substituted  for  p,  q,  and  r. 

For  example,  if  r  s=  (pg  +  1),  we  shall  have 

r-  =  pY  4-  2?/)  +  1,  and  *  =  ^  2pg  +  2     '  ^''«'«^o'« 

2(pg+l)X(g»-l) 

But  if  whole  numbers  be  required,  wd  must  make  the 
first  formula  jry  +  1  =  p-^  and  suppose  z  ^  x  +y  H-g  ; 
then  the  second  formula  be(x>me8 

X*  -|-  arj/  -f"  «^î  +  1  =  J^*  +  gj?  +  p*,  and  the  third  will  be 
•^  4"  y*  4"  îy+  1  =  ^  +  2y  M"  P*«  Now,  these  evidently 
become  squares,  if  we  make  g  z:  +  ^  ;  since  in  that  case 
the  second  is  x^  ±  9,px  -f-  p*^  the  root  of  which  is  x  ±p, 
and  the  third  is  y*  ±  2ojj  -f  j^*,  the  root  of  which  is  y  ±  p. 
We  have  consequently  this  very  elegant  solution  :  xy  + 1  =p*, 
or  J'y  =  p*  —  1,  which  applies  easily  to  any  value  ofp; 
and  from  this  the  third  number  also  is  found,  in  two  ways, 
since  we  have  either  z  =  jr  +  y  +  Äp,  or  z  =  or  +  y  —  2p. 
Let  us  illustrate  these  results  by  some  examples. 

1.  Let  p  =  3,  and  we  shall  have  p^  —  1  =  8;  if  we 
make  .r  =  2,  and  y  =  4,  we  shall  have  either  z  =  12,  or 
z  zzO;  so  that  the  three  numbers  sought  are  2,  4,  and  12. 


432  ELEMENTS  WAUX  II. 

S.  If  ji  =  4,  we  sliall  havep^—  1  =  15.  Now,  if  x  =  5, 
and  V  =  S,  we  find  ;:  =s  16,  or  z  s  0;  wherefore  the  three 
numbers  sought  are  3,  5,  and  16. 

3.  If  p  =.  £,  we  shall  liave  ji*  —  I  =  24;  and  if  we 
farther  make  x  s  3,  and^  =  8,  we  find  2;  =  521,  or  s  =  1  ; 
whence  the  following  numbers  result  ;  1,  3,  and  8  ;  or  3^  3, 
and  21. 

232.  Queaiion  11.  Reauired  three  whole  numbers  x,  y^ 
and  :,  such,  that  if  we  aad  a  ^ven  number,  a,  to  each  pso* 
duct  of  these  numbers,  multiplied  two  and  two,  we  nay 
obtain  a  square  each  time. 

Here  we  must  make  squares  of  the  three  following  fonnul«, 

xy  4-  Of  1*2;  -f  tfi,  and  yz  +  a. 

Let  us  therefore  suppose  the  first  xy  +  o  =  ^%  and  make 
xnx  +  y-f?;  then  we  shall  have,  for  the  second  formula, 
**  +  xy  +  xy  +  o  =  X*  +  xj  +/>•;  «od,  for  the  third, 
xy  +  y*  +W  +  ö=y*-»-jy4-p*;  and  these  both  be- 


oome  squares  by  makine  a  z=±  2/i:  so  that  z:=x-{-y±2Jp; 
that  is  to  say»  we  may  tma  two  different  values  for  z. 

233.  Question  12.  Reauired  four  whole  numbers,  x,  js 
a,  and  r,  such,  that  if  we  aad  a  ^ven  number,  a,  to  the  no» 
ducts  of  these  numbers,  multiphed  two  by  two,  each  or  the 
•urns  may  be  a  sauare. 

Here,  the  six  following  formulse  must  become  squares  : 

1.  xy+o,     2.  xz-{-r/,     S.  yz -^  a^ 
4.  xi;  +  Ö»     5-  yi>  +  of     6.  zv  +  a. 

If  we  begin  by  supposing  the  first  xj^  4-  o  =  p*,  and 
take  2;  s  X  4-  ^  -f  2p,  the  second  and  third  formula?  will 
become  squares.  If  we  farther  suppose  vri  x  ^  y  ^  ^, 
the  fourth  and  fiilh  formula?  will  hkewise  become  scjuam  ; 
there  remains  therefore  onK'  tlie  sixth  formula,  which  will 
be  X*  -f  ^^  +  y*  "*  4/)^  +  c/,  and  which  must  alM>  becocne 
a  square.  Now,  as  p*  =  xy  -f  ^9  this  lost  formula  beoomes 
X  «  2xy  -{•  tf^  ~  3a  ;  and,  consequently,  it  is  required  to 
transform  into  squares  the  two  following  formula;  : 

xy  +  «I  =  p',  and  (x  —  y)'  —  3«. 

If  the  root  of  the  last  be  (x  —  ^)  —  y,  we  shall  liaire 
(r  -  y)'  -  da  =  (x  —  y)*  -  iq\x  -  y)  +  ç'  ;  so  that 

^  ^  .  .  7'+3d 

—  3a  =:  -  9^(x  -  y)  +  T^i  »««  Jf  -  y  =      tçT^  ^ 

r^^  .       ...   7'43n     , 

x=y+  -5-—;  cünsi»qui-nlly,/r=ry-f  -;^— ^y  +  tf. 

If  /»  X  y  -f-  r,  we  shall  luivc 


CHAP.  XIV.  OF  ALGEBRA.  4i3S 

2ry+r  =1— -y+ö,  or 

4giy  +  8gr«  =  (gr*  +  3a)y  +  ««?,  or 
9qr^  —  fcg  =  (j*  +  3ai[y  —  4çry,  and 

_    Zqr'-Staq 

where  9  and  r  mi^y  bare  any  values,  provided  r  and  y  be- 
come whole  numlîers;  for  since  p  ^y  -^  r,  the  numbers, 
z  and  V,  will  likewise  be  integers*  The  whole  depends 
therefore  chiefly  on  the  nature  of  the  number  a,  ana  it  is 
true  that  the  condition  which  requires  integer  numbers 
might  cause  some  difficulties;  but  it  must  be  remarked, 
that  the  solution  is  already  much  restricted  on  the  other 
side,  because  we  have  given  the  letters,  z  and  v,  the  values 
s  -{-  y  ±  2/7,  notwithstanding  thev  might  evidently  have  a 
great  number  of  other  values«  Tne  foUowing  observations, 
however,  on  this  question,  may  be  useful  also  in  other 
cases. 

1.  When  xy  -{-  a  must  be  a  square,  or  ary  =  j?^  —  tf,  the 
numbers  x  and  y  must  always  have  the  form  r*  —  as* 
(Art.  176);  if,  therefore,  we  suppose 

X  =  6*  —  ac%  and  y  =  d*  —  o^*, 

we  find  xy  =  (bd  —  ace)*  —  a(be  —  cd)*- 

If  6^  —  cd  =  ±  1,  we  shall  have  xy  =  (bd  -  ace)*  —  a, 
and,  consequently,  xy  4-  0  =  (bd  —  ace)*. 

2.  If  we  farther  suppose  z  =y*  —  og*,  and  give  such 
value?  to/ and  g,  that  ïgf — ç^=  ±  1,  and  also  4?— £^=±lf 
the  forniulse  xz  +  a,  and  ys  +  a»  will  likewise  become 
squares.  So  that  the  whole  consists  in  giving  such  values 
to  by  c,  d,  and  ^,  and  also  toy*and^,  that  the  property  which 
we  have  supposed  may  take  place. 

3.  Let  us  represent  these  three  couples  of  letters  by  the 

h       d  /* 

fractions  —,  — •  and  — ;  now,  they  ought  to  be  such^  that 
c      e  g  ^      o 

the  difierence  of  any  two  of  thpm  may  be  expressed  by  a 
fraction,  whose  numerator  is  1.    For  since 

b        d      be^^dc    , .  ^  1       . 

—  —  —  =: r-,  this  numerator,  as  has  been  seen,  must 

ce  ce 

be  equal  to  +  1.  Besides,  one  of  these  fractions  is  ar- 
bitrary ;  and  it  is  easy  to  find  another,  in  order  that  the 
given  condition  may  take  place*.    For  eiample,  let  the  first 

F  F 


4S4 


KLBMEMT« 


rABT  IL 


—  =r  I,  the  second  —  must  be  neariy  equal  to  it  ;  if,  tboe- 

fore,  we  make  —  =  ^^  we  shall  have  the  difference  :  =  v 
We  may  also  determine  this  second  fraction  by  means  of  the 

first,  generally  ;  for  since  \ =  —3- — ^  we  must  have 

&  —  Sd  =  1,  and,  consequently,  Sd  =  3^  —  1,  and 

d  s  «  -f  "5^*     ^  ^^^^  making  -5—  =r  m,  or  ^  =:  8m  -(-  1, 

we  shall  have  d  =  Sm  +  1»  And  our  second  fraction  will  be 

—  =  ^       y     In  the  same  manner,  we  may  determine  the 

second  fraction  for  any  6rst  whatever,  as  in  the  (bllowii^ 
Table  of  examples  : 


» 

T 

f 

I  1 

1  % 

Y 

V 

d     t$«-f  1 

5»  4-1 

7m+*J 

Km+S 

llm-f.S 

l:)m-^i> 

17w+5 

e  ~2«  +  l 

SM-fl 

S»-M 

.îm-1-îi 

4m  +  l 

Sin-I-S 

7»  +  'i 

* 

4.  When  we  have  detcrminetl,  in  the  manner  required, 
the  two  fractions,  — ,  and  — ,  it  will  he  easy  to  find  a  third 
also  analogous  to  these.  We  liavc  only  to  suppose^*-:  6  +  J, 
and  ^  —  c  +  O  •o  that  •—  =  -   -  -  ;  for  the  two  first  giving 

Ar  —  rr/  =  f  1,  we  have  * =  • .  ;    and  subtract- 

g  c         c  \    Vl' 

ing  likewise  the  second  (nm\  the  third,  we  shall  luivo 

5.  After  having  detennined  in  thl»  manner  the  three 
fractions,  — ,  — ,  and  —,  it  will  be  easy  to  resolve  our  ques- 
tion for  three  numl)ers,  x,  y^  and  s,  by  making  the  thrre 
fêmiuloB  ory  4  a,  x:;  +  a«  ^nd  yz  -^  «i,  bec«mie  squarvs  : 
since  we  have  only  to  make  x  =  A-  —  ac\  y  =  if*  —  or*, 
nd  X  =/*  *  mg^.    Fat  example,  in  the  foregoing  Table» 


CHAP.  XIV.  OF  ALGEBRA.  435 

let  us  take  —  =4-*  and  —  =  ^  we  shall  then  have 
c        ^  e        ^ 

f 

î^  =  y  ;  whence  x  =  25  —  9^,  y  =  49  —  i6a,  and 

z  =  144  —  49a  ;  by  which  means  we  have 

1.  jy  +  a  =  1225  -    840a  +  144a*  =  (35  -  12a)«; 

2.  xs  +  Ö  =  8600  -  2520a  +  441a*  =  (60  -  21a)*; 

3.  j^z  -f  a  =  7056  -  4704a  +  784a*  =  (84  -  28a)\ 

234.  In  order  now  to  determine,  according  to  our  que&> 
tion,  four  letters,  x^  y^  z,  and  v,  we  must  add  a  fourth 
fraction  to  the  three  preceding  :  therefore  let  the  first  three 

,      b      d     f      b+d       ,  ,  ,     ^       .  i. 

be  — ,  — f  ^^  = 9  and  let  us  suppose  the  fourth  frac- 

h       6+d     2d-\-b  ,       .  .  ,        • 

tion  -r-  = = ,  so  that  it  may  have  the  given 

h      e-^-g     2^  +  cr  -^  ® 

relation  with  the  third  and  second  ;  if  after  this  we  make 
a:  =  é«  —  ac% y  =  d^  -  ae^^z  =/*  —  a^%  and  v^h^^àlâ^ 
we  shall  have  already  fulfilled  the  following  conditions  : 

3cy-\'a'=z  Uy     xz  +  a  zz  Uj    j^z-|-ö=0, 
yv  '^  a  zu  n^    zy  •{-  a'=i  U, 

It  therefore  only  remains  to  make  xv  -{-  a  become  a  square, 
which  does  not  result  from  the  preceding  conditions,  because 
the  first  fraction  has  not  the  necessary  relation  with  the 
fourth.  This  obliges  us  to  preserve  the  indeterminate 
number  m  in  the  three  first  fractions  ;  by  means  of  which, 
and  by  determining  m^  we  shall  be  able  also  to  transform 
the  formula  xv  -{-  a  into  a  square. 

6.  If  we  therefore  take  the  first  case  from  our .  small 

Table,  and  make  --  =  |,  and  —  =  ^ =■  ;  we  shall  have 

c  e       xm  + 1 

/       3m-f4        ,  h       6m+5      ,  n       a  j 

—  =  Q — T'ay  ^nd  -7-  =  3 — — :,  whence  x  ^  9  —  éa,  and 

V  =  (6m  -h  5)'-  —  a(4m  -f  4)«  ; 

or  ari;  +  a  -  j  »a(288m*  +  528»  -f  244),    * 

which  we  can  easily  transform  into  a  square,  since  m*  will 
be  found  to  be  multiplied  by  a  square  ;  but  on  this  we  shall 
not  dwell. 

7.  The  fractions,  which  have  been  found  to  be  neees- 

¥  F  2  \ 


486  mULUMvrt  fabt  ii« 

WÊOjf  may  alto  be  repmented  in  a  more  genoral  manner; 

.    b       ß      d      nß"! 

for  if —  =  -=-f  —  = f  ^«  «Iwd'  have 

e        le  n    ' 

g  n-|-l  h  Sfi-|-I 

tkm  we  suppose  in-^l  ^  m,  it  will  become ^  ; 


aequendy,  the  first  gives  x  =  ß^  ^  a^  and  thç  last  fumishea 
V  s  (/9ni  —  2)*  *  aml^.  The  only  question  therefore  isp 
to  make  xv  +  atL  square.    Now,  Because 

V  =  (lP^a)m^  —  4ßm  +  4,  we  have 

so  +  azziß"^  a)<iii^  -  4{ß^  ^  a)ßm  4- 4^"  -  8a;  and 
^noe  this  must  be  i^  square,  let  us  suppose  its  root  to  be 
Qf  —  a)m  ~-  p;    the  square   of   whicn    quantity    being 
(^  -.  a)hn*  ^  S(ßt  ^  a)mp  4-  p\  we  shall  have 
-  4(/P  -  o)/3st  +  40' *  8a  =:— S(0<  —  a)fiip +p>  ;  wherefore 

p*— 4^+8a 
at  Ä  -rrf- — r — jzr- — TZT.    If  P  =  8/5  +  ç,  we  shall  find 

in  n  ^  ,pl — v"f  in  which  we  may  substitute  any  num» 

bars  whatever  for  ß  and  q. 

For  example,  if  a  =  1,  let  us  make  0  =  2  :  we  shall  then 

have  fn  =  ^ •  •^  making  ç  =  1»  we  shall  find 

at  4.  ;  farther,  m  =  2n  +  1  ;  but  without  dwelling  any 
longer  on  this  question,  let  us  proceed  to  another. 

mS.  QtêeHum  18.  Required  three  such  numbers,  x,  ^, 
and  2,  that  the  sums  and  diflerences  of  these  numbers,  taken 
two  by  two,  may  be  squares. 

The  question  requiring  us  to  transform  tlie  six  following 
fiormul«  into  squares,  vi^. 

*  +  y»    X  +  «•    y  +  z^ 
X  —  y,    X  -  r,    y  -  «, 

lei  us  bq;in  with  the  last  three,  and  suppose  x  -  y  =:  p^, 
X  ^z^  q\  and  ^  —  r  =  r* ;  the  last  two  wiU  furnish 
xs^-l-z,  andy=r*-f  s;  so  that  we  shall  have  9*:=  0* -I- r^, 
because  x— ^  =  9-  —  H=p';  hence,  p*  +  r%  or  tne  sum 
of  two  «quare«,  must  be  equal  to  a  square  q^  ;  now,  this  hap- 

EIS,  when^  =  806,  and  r^  a^  —  6',  since  then  f =o*-|-A*. 
t  let  us  still  preserve  the  letters  p,  cr,  and  r,  and  consider 
also  the  first  three  formube.     We  shaU  have. 


CHAP.  XIV«  OF  ALOJURA.  487 

1.  d?  -f  y  =  gr^  +r«  +  aK; 

8.  J/  +  »  =>«  +2«. 

Let  the  first  j'+r«+2«,  =<«,  by  which  means  2«=<*-gr*— r'  ; 
we  must  also  have  ^  —  r^  =  a ,  and  fi  ^  q'^  =  a  ;  that  is 
to  say,^«  —  (a*  —  b^Y  =  ü ,  and  /»  —  (a«  -f  **)«  =  D  ;  we 
shall  have  to  conûder  the  two  formulae  <*  —  «*  —  Ä*-f8a*6«, 
and  ^  —  a*  —  J*  -  2a*ô«.  Now,  as  both  c«  +  d»  +  2cd; 
and  c*  4-  d'  .  2cdy  are  squares,  it  is  evident  that  we  shall 
obtain  what  we  want  by  oomparinff  <*  —  a*  —  é*,  with 
c^  +  d^i  and  2a^i^  with  iccL  With  this  view,  let  us  suppose 
cd^a'b'  ^/'g'h'k%  and  take  e  =f'g\  and  rf  =  *•*•  ; 
a'  =y Ä%  and  ft*  =  g*k\  or  a  =/ä,  and  b=^gk;  the 
first  equation  <*  —  a*  —  i*  =  c*  +ir,  will  assume  ue  form 
r  -/»A*  -  g^k*  =f*g^  4-  Ä***;  whence 
r  =f^g^  js-fh^-g^k^  +  A*fc*,or  r =(/*+**)  x(^+A*); 
consequently,  this  product  must  be  a  square  ;  but  as  the  re- 
solution of  it  would  be  difficult,  let  us  consider  the  sutgect 
under  a  different  point  of  view. 

If  from  the  first  three  equations  j:— y-p*,  j?  —  r  =■?*> 
y  ^  z  ^  r*j  we  determine  the  letters  y  and  Zy  we  shall  mid 
y  ^  X  —  p*,  and  «  =  a:  —  j*  ;  whence  it  follows  that 
j'=:p'+^'-  Our  first  formulae  now  become  a:+yi=2a:— p% 
or  H-  z  =  2r  —  j%  and  y  +  s  =  2*  —  p*  —  y^  Let  us 
make  this  last  2x  —  p'  — gr»=<»,  so  that  %X'=V  +p*  +J%  and 
there  will  only  remain  the  formulae  V  +  j*,  and  V  +  pS*  to 
transform  into  squares.  But  since  we  must  have  q*  =p*  +^'9 
let  q  =  a*  +  b%  an4  p  ^a*  —  6'  ;  and  we  shall  then' 
have  r  =  2^6,  and,  consequently,  our  formulae  will  be  : 

1.  <*  +  (a»  +  **)•  =  ^  +  a*  +  Ä*  +  2a«ô«  =  D  ; 

2.  r  +  (a»  -  ft«)-  =  <•  +  «♦  +  4*  —  2a«6*  =  D. 

In  order  to  accomplish  our  purpose,  we  have  only  to  com» 
pare  again  <»  +  a*  +  Ä*  with  e'  +  d*,  and  Sta^b^y  with 
2cd.  Therefore,  as  before,  letc  =^f*g'y  d  =  h*k\  a^fh, 
and  6  =  git;  we  shall  then  have  cd  =:  a'i%  and  we  must 
again  have 

^  +/**♦  +  g***  =  c*  +  £P  =/*^  +  A'**;  whence 

So  that  the  whole  is  reduced  to  finding  the  differences  of     • 
two  pair  of  biquadrates,  namely,^^  —  i*,  and^* —  A*,  which, 
multiplied  together,  may  produce  a  square. 

For  this  purpose,  let  us  consider  the  formula  m^  —  nf\ 
let  us  see  what  numbers  it  furnishes,  if  we  substitute  riven 
numbers  for  m  and  n,  and  attend  to  the  squares  that  wnl  be 


488 


BLBMIim 


FAST  II. 


found  among  thofe  numbers  ;  the  property  of 

ffi*  —  n*  =  (m*  +  n^)  x  (m* —  n*),  will  enable  ua  to  coo- 

itruct  for  our  purpose  the  following  Table  : 

A  Table  of  Numbers  contained  in  the  Formula  m^ —  n^. 


m' 

n'   1 

•••—*• 

«•  +  «' 

«♦-a* 

4 

1 

3 

5 

3x5 

9 

1 

8 

10 

16x5 

9 

4 

5 

13 

5x13 

16 

1 

15 

17 

3x5x17 

16 

9 

•• 
i 

25 

25x7 

25 

1 

24 

26 

16x3x13 

25 

9 

16 

34 

16x2x17 

49 

1 

48 

50 

25x16x2x3 

49 

16 

33 

65 

3x5x11x13 

64 

1 

63 

65 

9x5x7x13 

81 

49 

32 

130 

64x5x13 

121 

4 

117 

12.3 

25x9x5x13 

121 

9 

112 

130 

16x2x5x7x13 

121 

49 

72 

170 

144x5x17 

144 

25 

119 

169 

169x7x17 

169 

1 

168 

170 

16x3x5x7x17 

169 

81 

88 

250 

25x16x5x11 

225 

64 

161 

289 

2Sf)x7x23 

^'^e  may  already  deduce  some  answers  from  this.  For, 
if/*  =  9,  and  **  =  4,  wc  nhall  have/*— A*  =  13  x  5; 
farther,  let  ^  =  81,  and  A*  =  49,  wc  »*-hall  then  have 
g*  —  A*  =  64  X  5  X  13;  therefore  /*  =  64  x  Îi5  X  Ifl», 
and  t  =  520.  Now,  »ince  /*  =  270400,  f=  3,  ff  r=  9^ 
1:  =  52,  A  SS  7,  we  shall  have  a  =  21,  and  //=r  18  ;  so  that 
p  =  117,  y  =  765,  and  r  =  756;  from  wliich  results 
Sx  =  r  +  ;;«  +  f/  =  HflaJM;  cons«iuenilv.  x  =  434^157  : 
then^  =  X-— /r=4209()H,  and  lastly,  r:=al-//=r-— iria'>(>H. 
This  last  nunilxT  may  also  be  talwi-n  |K>sitivt>ly  ;  the  dif- 
ference then  bcaimes  the  sum,  and,  recinrocally,  tlic  sum 
becomes  the  difference.     Since  therefore  Uie  three  numbers 

ght 


CHAP.  XIV.  OF  ALOBBBA.  409 

1:=:  434657 

j^  =  4a0968 

2=150568 


we  have  x  +  v  =  8556S5  =  (9iBY 

X  +  z  =  585225  =  (765)* 

and  y  +  a  =  571536  =  (756)« 

also,  a:-j^=    18689  =  (117)' 
X  "  z=^  284089  =  (Ö33)« 
and  y  -  z  =  270400  =  (520)«. 

The  Table  which  has  been  given,  would  enable  us  to  find 
other  numbers  also,  by  supposing  y  n  9,  and  A*  =:  4, 
g'  =  121,  and  h'  =  4;  for  then  r  =  13  x  5  x  5  x  18  x 
9x2o  =  9x25x25x  169,  and 

^  =  8x5x5x13=:  975. 

Now,  as^=  8,  g  =  11,  AT  =  2,  and  Ä  =  2,  we  have 
a  =/h  =  6,  and  6  =  gA:  =  22  ;  consequently, 
p  =  a'  -b'  =  -  448,  gr=a«+ô»=620,  and  r=ai6=264; 
whence  2ar  =  /*+/?«  +  q*  =  950625  +  200704  +  270400  = 
1421729,  and  x  =  «♦»47*9;  wherefore  y  =z  x  -  p^  = 
'^*|.^*  Sands  =  a>  — g«  =  »80^9*9, 

Now,  it  is  to  be  observed,  that  if  these  numbers  have  the 
property  required,  they  will  preserve  it  by  whatever  square 
they  are  multiplied.  If,  therefore,  we  take  them  four  times 
greater,  the  following  numbers  must  be  equally  satisfactory  : 
X  =  2848458,  y  =  2040642,  and  z  =  1761858  ;  and  as 
these  numbers  are  greater  than  the  former,  we  may  oon^ 
sider  the  former  as  the  least  which  the  question  admits  of. 

236.  Question  14.  Requ'urçd  three  sMch  squares,  that  the 
difference  of  every  two  of  them  may  be  a  square. 

The  preceding  solution  will  serve  to  resolve  the  present 
question.  In  fact,  if  j?,  y^  and  z,  are  such  numbers  tliat  the 
following  formulas,  namely, 

X  —  z=G,         y  +  Ä  =s  D,         y  — »=a, 

may  become  squares  ;  it  is  evident,  likewise,  that  the  pro- 
duct x^  —  y*  of  the  first  and  second,  the  product  jt*  —  ;^  of 
the  third  and  fourth,  and  the  product  y^  —  z*  of  the. fifth 
and  sixth,  will  be  squares;  ana,  consequently,  x\y\sLnd  2*, 
will  be  three  such  squares  as  are  sought.  But  these  num- 
bers would  be  very  great,  and  there  are,  doubtless,  \em 
numbers  that  will  satisfy  the  question  ;  since,  in  order  that 
X*  —  y^  may  become  a  square,  it  is  not  necessary  that  Jr  +  y, 
and  X — y,  should  be  squai-es  :  for  example,  95—9  is  a  square» 


440  miaiMBXTs  past  n. 

although  neither  5  +  8»  nor  ff  »  8,  are  squares.  Let  ii% 
therefore,  resolve  the  (juestion  independently  of  this  oop- 
nderation,  and  remark^  in  the  first  plaoe,  that  we  maj  take 
1  for  one  of  the  squares  sought:  the  reason  for  whîdi  la,  that 
if  the  formulse  x^  --  t/^j  x!*  -  z\  and  v'  —  a%  are  aquarea» 
diey  will  continue  so,  though  divided  oy  x'  ;  consequently, 
we  may  suppose  that  the  question  is  to  transform 

(7-7)»   (~  -  1).  and  (^  -  l^mto  squares,  and  it 

then  refers  only  to  the  two  fractions  —,  and  •^. 

^      P*+l        ,  V      7*  +  l      . 
If  we  now  suppose  — n'-r — r,  and -^-= -^ — r,  the 

^'^         z     p*— 1  z      q*—l 

two  conditions  will  be  satisfied;  for  we  shall  then  hare 
mains,  therefore,  to  consider  the  first  formula 

x^     y  _(f^  -I-  ir  _  (g*  -I-  D*  _ 

/p--H       g»^l\      /f^-l-1      ql±l\ 

Now,  tlie  first  factor  here  is  —r — ^—r-z — r.  ;  ^c  second 

(P  -1)  X  ((/-l) 

IS  ;— T — rr — f-r; — r-.,  and  the  product  of  these  two  factors  is 

=    ,    .     ,,     .  /    ,,.  .     It  IS  evident  that  the  denominator 
(p*— l)x(y'^-l)* 

of  this  product  is  already  a  scjuare,  and  that  the  numerator 
contains  the  square  4  ;  therefore  it  is  only  required  to  trans- 
form into  a  square  the  furniula  (/>*^*  —  1)  x  {q^  —/>*),  or 

(p*ç*  —  1)  ><  (    »  —  1)  ;  and  this  is  done  by  making 

pq  =     g^^  ,and  —  =  —577—*  because  then  each  factor 

separately  becomes  a  square.     \Vc  may  also  be  convinced  of 

q  f^ +/r»      h*  -f  *•« 

this,  by  remarking  that pç  x  "t""*"      "^     ^     ^^.  -  ; 

and,  consequently,  the  product  of  these  two  fractions  must 
be  a  square;    as  it   must  also   be   when    multiplied    by 


CHAP.  XIV.   '  OF  ALGEBRA.  441 

^g^  X  &*ifc%  by  which  means  it  becomes  eûual  to 
f^f^  +  fi*)  X  Ai(**  +  V).    Lastly,  this  formula  becomes 
precisely  the  same  as  that  before  found,  if  we  make^=  a  4-  i, 
^  =  a—  6,  Asc-fd,  and  h  zz,  c  —  d\  nnce  we  have  then 

«(Ä*-  *♦)  X  a(c*  -  rf*)  =  4  X  (a4  -  J*)  X  (c*  -  d*), 

which  takes  place,  as  we  have  seen,  when  a'  =  9,  i'  =  4, 
c*  =  81  ;  and  d*  =  49,  or  a  =  8,  ft  =  2,  c  =  9,  andrf  =  7. 
Thus,y*=:  5,  ^  =  1,  Ä  =  16,  and  fc  =  8,  whence  ^g  =  y , 

and  —  =  *^y  =  y4  ♦  ^'^^  product  of  these  two  equations 

65x13     13x13       ,      .  .,       ^  -,  fij 

gives  J  =  Tß — r  =  — Yfi —  »  wherefore  y  =s  y ,  and  it  fol- 
lows that  p  =:  ^  by  which  means  we  have 

—  =:^T~i"  =  —  V>  ^d  ^  =  V-Ï  =  TTT Î  therefore, 

4U       ,        185«    .  _  1     .        »   t 

smce  X  zsz  — — -  and  y  =  -=-=2rf  m  order  to  obtain  whole 

9  ^      153 

numbers,  let  us  make  %  z:  153,  and  we  shall  have  x  s=  —  697» 
and  y  =  185. 

Consequently,  the  three  square  numbers  sought  are, 

x«  =  485809)  Car«  ^jf-  =  451684  =  (678)« 

y  =    34225  \  and  Jy«  —  «»  =    10816  =  (104)« 
2«  =    23409)  C^«  -  2'  =  462400  =  (680)*. 

It  is  farther  evident,  that  these  squares  are  much  less  than 
those  which  we  should  have  found,  by  squaring  the  three 
numbers  x,  y^  and  z  of  the  preceding  solution. 

237«  Without  doubt  it  will  here  be  objected,  that  this 
solution  has  been  found  merely  by  trial,  since  we  have  made 
use  of  the  Table  in  Article  235.  But  in  reality  we  have 
only  made  use  of  this,  to  get  the  least  possible  numbers  ;  for 
if  we  were  indifferent  wiSi  regard  to  orevity  in  the  calcula*- 
tion,  it  would  be  easy,  by  means  of  the  rules  above  given,  to 
find  an  infinite  number  of  solutions  ;  because,  having  found 

X       o*  +  l        ,  y       ö«  +  l  .  1      J   . 

—  =  ^-r — r,  and  —  =  --i — ;,,  we  have  reduced  the  question 

Z         /?*— 1  Z  J«— 1  .    ^ 

to  that  of  transforming  the  product  (/?«j«  —  1)  x  (z^  —  1) 

into  a  sqiuure.    If  we  therefore  make  ~  s  m,  or  ;  =r  ly^, 

our  formula  will  beccme  (m'j?*  -"  1)  x  (*'»*  —  IX  which  is 
evidently  a  square,  when  p  ^  1  ;  but  we  shall  fiuther  see. 


44S  KLEMKNT9 

that  this  Tftkie  will  lead  as  to  others,  if  we  write/)  as  1  -f  #; 
in  oonsequence  of  which  supposition,  we  have  to  tnÊÈtSarm 
the  formula 

into  a  square  ;  it  will  be  no  less  a  square,  if  we  diride  it  bj 
(m*  —  1)^;  this  diviâon  gives  us 

m' 
and  if  to  abridge  we  make  ^ ^  =  0,  we  shall  have  to  re- 
duce the  formula  1  +  4af  +  ^^'  +  ^^  +  «^  to  a  square. 
Let  its  root  be  1  -^Js  +  gs\  the  square  of  which  is  ' 
1  +  %^  +  2^*'  -^f's'  +  ^/gi'  +Ar'A  and  let  us  deter- 
miney*and  1^  in  such  a  manner,  that  the  first  three  terms 
may  vanish  ;  namely,  by  making  ^=^  4a,  or  y*=  Sa,  and 

6a  =  %r+y,  or  ^  = -^^^^  =  3a  — 2aS  the   last   two 

terms   will   fumisli    the   equation   4a -|- a*  =  i^r -j-^'i; 

4fl-2/2r       4a-liia  +«"' 
whence  s  =  — r — '-^-^  =  7-3 — tt^^ttti, —  — 

^-a       4a'-12£i»+9ci»-a 

4-12a-f8a'  ^,  .^,      ^  ,  4(2a^l) 

4a^-12a-H>9a-r^-^^''^'"g'^y^  "  ^'*  =  4^8^r 

This  valuo  is  already  suflirionl  to  give  us  an  infinite  nuniht  r 
of  answers,    IxK^ause    the    number   w,  in    the   vahie  of  a, 

=  — ; — -  ,  may  be  taken  at  pleasure.      It  will  Ix»  pn>|)er  to 

illustrate  this  by  some  exaniplen. 

1.  Let  m  n  ^,  we  »Iiall  have  n  z=  ^  ;  so  thai 

*  =  4  X  —I';  =  -  ;^  ;  whenee/)  =  -  ;;,  and  y  =~   ;t  ; 

•> 

bstly,4=  ît%and  - j^ -=  J;  J. 

2,  If  m  ~  J,  wc  nhall  have  a  =  J,  and 

I  1 

#  =4  X    _/,  —     -   \','i    cir.MHjuei.ilv,  i>  -  —  '/,',  and 

y  =        '^Yt  by  which  nuaiis  we  niav  detirmine  the  rnu'tions 

-,  and  -  . 

»  a» 

There  is  liere  a  |iarticular  eauc  tliat  dc6cr\C8  to  be  ai- 


CHAP.  XIV.  OF   ALGEl&A.  44$ 

tended  to  ;  which  is  that  in  whidi  a  u  a  iqaare,  and  takes 

Elace,  for  example,  when  .m  =  4  '  ^'^^^  ^^°  ^  ^  -t4*  '^ 
ere  again,  in  tmer  to  abridge,  we  make  a  =  6%  so  that  our 
formuk  may  be  1  +  4é**  +  66*5*  4-  4éV  +  éV,  we  may 
compare  it  with  the  square  of  1  +  2b^s  +  bs\  that  is  to  say, 
with   1  +  Ws  +  86*«  -f  4Ä*«*  -f  4* V  +  6«^  ;    and  ex- 

Sunging  on  both  sides  the  first  two  terms  and  the  last,  and 
ividing  the  rest  by  s\  we  shall  have  66^  -f  4sb*ê  =  26  4- 

.1^      A^.       ^.  66«-.26-46*    86  - 1  -  «6^     ^ 

4i* +  46»*,  whence  *=—jj3—^p-  =  —ggj—2g—;   but 

this  fraction  being  still  divisible  by  6  ->  1,  we  shall,  at  last, 

1-26-26«      J         1—26» 
have*=: ^_,andp  =  -g^. 

We  might  also  have  taken  1  +  26*  +  6*^  for  the  root  of 
our  formula  ;  the  square  of  this  trinomial  being 
1  -f  46*  +  26*'  -f  46  V  +  46  V  +  6  V,  we  should  have  de- 
stroyed the  first,  and  the  last  two  terms  ;  and  dividing  the 
rest  by  *,  we  should  have  been  brought  to  the  equation 
46;  +  66-*  =  46  +  2i*  +  46^5.  Butas *«  =»|^and6  =  4, 
this  equation  would  have  given  us  *  =  —  2,  and  p  =  —  1  ; 
consequently,  jj*  —  1  =  0,  from  which  we  could  not  have 
drawn  any  conclusion,  since  we  should  have  had  2  =  0. 

To   return   then   to  the  former   solution,   which   gave 

1-26* 
p  =  — ^j —  ;  as  6  =  |,  it  shews  us  that  if  m  =  -j-*  ^^  have 

sc 
p  =  -i-J,  and  q  z=imp  ==  -H;  consequently,  —  =  444»    <w*d 

238.  Question  16.  Required  three  square  numbers  such, 
tha^  the  sum  of  every  two  of  them  may  be  a  scjuare. 

Since  it  is  required  to  transform  the  tliree  formulae 
^  "h  y *i  **  +  ^*>  »nd  y*  +  2f*  into  sq[uares,  let  us  divide 
them  by  s*,  in  order  to  nave  the  three  following, 

X     0«— 1 
The  last  two  are  answered,  by  making  — =-3 — ,  and 

—^^ — ,  which  also  changes  the  first  formula  into  this, 
^"   "^ — --   I  -=—■ ,  which  ouffht  also  to  conUnue  a  square 


T4T* 


444  SLBMEirrt  »abt  il 

after  bang  multiplied  by  4^^^^*;  that  it,  we  moat  hsf« 
^(p^  -.  1)^  -hp'(?'  -  1^  =  O.  Now.thiscanacamljba 
obtained,  unless  we  previously  know  a  case  in  wUdi  tkis 
formula  becomes  a  square  :  and  as  it  is  also  difliciilt  to  find 
such  a  case,  we  roust  have  recourse  to  other  artifioea,  amne 
of  which  we  shall  now  explain. 

1.  As  the  formuU  in  question  may  be  cjiui cased  tboii 
q\p  +  !)•  x(p-  iy^p\q  +  1)*  X  (y  —  I)*  =  O,  let 
us  make  it  divisible  by  the  square  (p  +  1)*  ;  whidi  may  be 
done  by  making  g^l^p  +  l,org=sp  +  St;  far  tbea 
q  '{'I  =zp  -^  3^  and  the  formula  becomes 

so  that  dividing  by  (p  +  1)%  we  have  (p  +  *)'  X  (p  —  1)*+ 
P^(P  +  3)  S  ^">cn  must  be  a  square,  and  to  whidi  we  may 
give  the  form  Äp*  +  8p*  +  6p*  —  4p  +  4.  Now,  the  fauK 
term  here  being  a  square,  let  us  suppose  the  root  of  the 
formula  to  be  8  -k-Jp  -f  f^\  or  gp^  -k-fp  -f-  2,  the  square 
of  which  is  ^y  +  yjgp'  +  4gp'  +/y  -f  t^  +  4,  and 
we  shall  destroy  the  last  three  terms,  by  making  4/*:=  —  4, 
or^=  —  1,  and  4^  +  1  =  6,  or^z:^*  ^to  toe  first  tema 
being  divided  by  />*,  will  give  SJp-f- 8=g*/>  +^^=ttP  —it 

or/>  =  —24,  andfs—  22;  whence — =^3 —  =—  y^; 

or  X— —  ,^-.,anu  ^   —  ^^  ,  or  y ^^z. 

Let  us  now  make  s=:16x3xll;wc  shall  then  have 
X  =  575  X  1 1,  and  y  =  48S  x  12  ;  and,  consequently,  the 
roots  of  the  three  scjuares  sought  will  be  : 

x  =  6325  =  11  X  23  X  25; 
y  =  5796=  lî3  X  2J  X  ÄJ; 
andz  =    528  =    3  x  11  x  16; 
for  from  these  result, 

X*  +  jr  =  23»(275*  +  252*)  =  23»  x  373«. 

1^  +  s«  =  11«(575*  +    48*)  =  11»  X  577«. 

and  y  -h  2«  =  12  («3«  +    44«)  =  W  x  485-. 

2.  We  may  also  make  our  formula  divisible  by  a  square, 
in  an  infinite  number  of  ways  ;  for  example,  if  we  suppose 
(y  +  1)«  =  4(p  -f  1)',  or  9  4-  1  =  2(/>  +  1).  that  is  to  say, 
y  =  2p+  1,  and  y—  1  =  2p,  the  formula  will  lx*cocne 
(2p+l)«  X  (p  +  Ij«  X  (;/-  1)^  -h  D»  X  4(;>  +  1)«  x  4/;«  =  c  ; 
which  may  be  divided  bv  (p  -f  1)%  by  which  means  we  have 
(2p  +  D*  X  (p  -  D'  -f  I6p*  =  r ,  or 

2C^*  -  4^  —  3p«  -I-  2p  -»-  1  =  r  ;  but  from  this  we  de^. 
rive  nothmg. 


CHAF.  XIV.  Of  ALGEBRA«  445 

8.  Let  us  then  rather  make  {q  —  1)'  =  4(p  -f  1)%  or 
g  —  1  =  2(p  +  1)  ;  we  shall  then  have  q  rsS^-^-S,  and 
o  +  l=%>-f4s  or  9  +  1=  2{p  +  2),  and  after  having 
aivided  our  formula  hy  (j)  +  1)S  we  shall  obtain  the  foU 
lowing;  (2p  +  3)*  x  (p  -  1)*  +  16p*(p+  2f,  or 


may  destroy  the  third  by 
making  %  +  1  =  58,  or  ^  =  y  ;  so  that  the  other  terms 
are  divisible  by  p^  and  give  ^Op  -I-  68  =  g'^  —  S^,  or 
*^6p  =  *^«  ;  uierefore  p  ==  44,  and  q  =  yi/,  by  which 
means  we  obtain  a  new  solution.  ^ 

4.  If  we  make  j  —  1  =  4(p  —  1),  we  have  9  =  tP  ""  t» 
and  î  +  1=tP  +  t  =  t  C%^  +  ^)>  *"d  ^®  formula,  after 
being  divided  by  (p  —  1)*,  becomes 

X  (p  +  1)«  +  44p*(2p  +  1)«  ;  multiplying  by  81, 


m 


we  have  9(4p  -  !)•  X  (p  +  1)«  +  64p*(2p  +  1)«  = 

400p*  +  472p'  +  73p«  -  54p  -f  9, 
in  which  the  first  and  last  terms  are  ooth  squares.  If, 
therefore,  we  suppose  the  root  to  be  20p'  —  9p  -f  3,  the 
square  of  which  is  40Qp*  —  860p» + 1 20p»  +  81p»  -  64p  +  9, 
we  shall  have  472p  -f  78  =  —  360p  +  201  ;  wherefore 
p  =  tV>  and  9  =  3»^  -  ^  =  —  ^. 

We  might  likewise  have  taken  for  the  root  2()p*+9p— S, 
the  square  of  which  is  400p*+ 360p*— 120p2-|-8V-  54p+9; 
but  comparing  this  square  with  our  formula,  we  should  have 
found  472p  +  78  s=  SôQp  —  39,  and  consequently  p  =  —  1, 
a  value  which  can  be  of  no  use  to  us, 

5.  We  may  also  make  our  formula  divisible  by  the  two 
squares,  (p  +  1)*,  and  (p  —  1)^  at  the  same  time.     For 

this  purpose,  let  us  make  q  =  — —  ;  so  that 

pt'^P'\'i'\'l     rp41)x(<+l) 
y  +  l  =  .-^^— = ^^ ,and 

pi^p^t+l     (p-l)X(<-l) 

this  formula  will  be  diviâble  by  {p  +  lY  x  (p  —  ly,  and 
will  be  reduced  to  ^V^^+V^l!!.-^^'  x  pK    If  « 

multiplv  by  (p  4-  t)\  the  formula,  as  before,  must  be  trans- 
formable into  a  square,  and  we  shall  have 

(p<  +  1)«  X  (p  -f  <)«  +  p«(<  +  1)«  X  (<  -  l)%or 


446  KLKMENTS  FABT  II. 

in  which  the  finit  and  the  last  terms  are  squares.  Let  us 
therefore  take  for  the  root  tp^  +  (^  -f*  l)p  —  ^  the  aquareef 
which  is 

and  we  shall  have,  by  comparing, 

2fp  +  (/«  +  D^p  +  2/(/«  +  1)  4-  (/«  -  1)>  = 
—  2/'p  +  (^  +  l)*p  -  2/(/-  +  1),  or,  by  subtraclkm« 
4/ >  +  4t(i'  4- 1)  +  (/»  -  l)»p  r=  0,  or 
(r+l)V  +  4^(<*  +  l)  =  0, 

—  4/  —  4/ 

that  is  to  say,  ^  4-  1  = ;  whence  p  =  tt— -,  ;    oooae- 

•^  p  "^       tr  +  l 

quently,  p^  +  1  =  ■  '^>^|>  and  p  +  f  =  ^r— J  5     ï^tlj. 

q  =  — -  - — jr  ,  where  the  value  of  the  letter  t  is  arUtnury. 

g 

For  example,  let  <  =  2  ;  we  shall   then  have  p  =  — - 

—11  j:      p«-l 

and  9=  — ^;  so  that --=-^—  =  +  i-?,and 

V      or'-l  ,  3x13  ^  9x13 

-^  3c  -— - —  =  •  Y ,  or  X  =  t; — ;; — z^9  and  y  =:  r -r  r. 

z         2q  ^^'  4x4>5  ^       4x11 

Farther,  if  x  =  3  x  11  x  13,  wo  have 
^  =  4  X  5  X  9  X  1  J,  and 
2  =  4x     4x5x11, 

and  the  niots  of  the  thnv  squares  sought  are 
T  tt:  ;j  X  11  X   13  =r  J.*2i), 
1/  =  4  y     5x9x1 3  -  12340,  and 
*r  r=  4  X     4  X  5  X  11  -  HSO: 

where  it  is  evident  that  these  are  sllll  less  than  those  fourni 
above,  froni  which  wo  derive 

x'  +  t/''  =    3-  X  13'(lî21  -f  3G(){))  ^  3'  x  1:1'  x  61  \ 
X*  +  2*  =  W  X  (15xM  +  (ikX))  =  IV  X  89\ 
y'  +  :*  ^  20*  X  (lfJ6S9  +  1930)  =  !>()*  X  lii5*. 

6.  The  la»t  remark  we  shall  make  on  this  cjui^tion  is,  tliat 
each  answer  easily  furnishes  a  new  one;  for  when  we  hare 

•  Thus  (/*— I)*  =/*  —  !?/•  4-  I.  which  nuiltiplied  hyp  be- 
come« pi*  —  *2pt^ -^  fi. 
Then  adding  1/;/^ 

We  havi-        pt*  +  *.»;>/*  +  ;j  =  (/    -f  |  )  ';>,  iu»  ahtne. 


CHAP.  XIV«  OF   ALGEBRA.  4AI7 

found  three  values,  x  =:  a,y  =i  b,  and  2  =  c,  so  that 
a*  +  ô*  =  D,  a*  -f  c«  =  D,  and  é'  +  c2=r  o,  the  three 
following  values  will  likewise  be  satisfactory,  namely,  x  =  ab, 
y  =  bcj  and  z  =  ac.    Then  we  must  have 

ar*  4-^«  =  a«  6*  +  ÔV*  =  6»(a*  +  c*)  =  d, 
X«  4-  ;s*  =  a»62  ^  arc*  =  a*(62  +  c")  =  D, 
y«  +  2«  =  aV  +  éV  =  c*(a*  -f  &*)  =  D . 
Now,  as  we  have  just  found 

a:  =  a  =  S  X  11  X  13, 
y;=6  =  4x    5x    9x13,  and 
z=:c  =  4x    4x    5x11, 
we  have,  therefore,  according  to  the  new  solution, 

a:  =  aé  =  3  X  4  X  5  X  9  X  11  X  13  X  13, 

y  =  ic  =  4x4x4x5x    5x    9x11  x  13, 

z  =  oc  =  3  X  4  X  4  X  5  X  11  X  11  X  13. 

And  all  these  three  values  being  divisible  by 

3  X  4  X  5  X  11  X  13, 

arc  reducible  to  the  following, 

ar  =  9  X  13,.  v  =  3x4x4x5,  and  r  =  4  x  11  ;  or 
X  =  117,  j/  =  240,  and  z  =  44, 

which  are  still  less  than  those  which  the  preceding  solution 
gave,  and  from  them  we  deduce 

a:«  +  y*  =  71289  =  267*, 
x^  +  2*  =  15625  =  125S 
y  +  ;s»  =  59536  =  244^ 

239.  Questioîi  16.  Required  two  such  numbers,  x  and 
y,  that  each  being  added  to  the  square  of  the  other,  may 
make  a  square  ;  that  is,  that  x^  +  y  =D,  and  y*  -I-  j:  =  D . 

If  we  begin  with  supposing  x'^  +  y  =  p*^  and  from  that 
deduce  y  =i  p*  ^  x\  we  shall  have  for  the  other  formula 
p^  —  2p*x*  -f.  a:*  +  x  =  D ,  which  it  would  be  difficult  to 
resolve. 

Let  us,  therefore,  suppoto  one  of  the  formulas 
x*+y  =  (p  —  xY  =:/>^  —  2/}jr  +  jr*  ;   and,  at  the  same 
time,  the  other  y^  +  ;r  =  (y  —  y)*  =  j^*  —  ^y  +  y,  and 
we  shall  thus  obtain  the  two  following  equations, 

y  +  2px  =  p\  and  x  +  ^py  =  q\ 

from  which  we  easily  deduce 

in  which  o  and  q  are  indeterminate.  Let  us,  therefore, 
suppose,  for  exiunple,  ^  =  2,  and^  n  3,  then  we  shall  have 


448  *    ELEMENTS  TAMT  tt. 

for  the  two  numbers  sought  x  =  44,  and^  =  4t*  ^  wlyeh 
means  x*  +  j^  =  |î|  +  44  =  fj-j.  =  (U)«,  and 

y  +  X  =  ViV*  +  ^4  =  ViV  =  (fî^)*.  if  wenMrfep  =1, 
and  7  =  S,  wc  should  have  x  =  —  <|V»  Mid  jf  =  44v  *■ 
answer  which  is  inadmisâble,  since  one  of  the  nanben 
sought  is  nq;ative. 

But  let  p  ==  1,  and  g  z=.  4«  we  shall  then  have  x  =:  ^ 
and^  =  i^Q,  whence  we  derive 

240.  Question  17.  To  find  two  numbers,  whose  sua 
may  be  a  square,  and  whose  squares  added  together  mmj 
make  a  biquadrate. 

Let  us  call  these  numbers  x  and  ^;  and  since  x*  •!>  ^ 
must  become  a  biquadrate,  let  us  begin  with  "*ftVftg  it  a 
square  :  in  order  to  which,  let  us  suppose  j:  =5  p*  —  1^  and 
y  =  2pö,  by  which  means,  x*  +y«  =  (p^  +  o*)\  Eut,  in 
cnder  tnat  this  square  may  become  a  biquaarate,  p^  -^  ^ 
must  be  a  square  ;  let  us  therefore  make  p  =  r^  —  ««,  and 
^  =  2rjr,  in  order  that  p*  +  j«  =  (r^  4-  #*)*;  and  we 
immediately  have  x^  '■\-y^  =  (^^  +  '^)S  which  is  a  biqua- 
drate. Now,  according  to  these  supportions,  we  bave 
X  =  r*  -  6r*#*  -f  **,  and  y  =,  4r*#  -  4r*';  it  therdbi« 
remains  to  transform  into  a  square  the  formula 

X   j-  y  =  r*  4-  4r  5  -  Gr^s^  -  4r,f*  f-  ^. 

Supposing  its  root  to  be  r-  -*-  2r*  +  **,  or  the  formula 
equal  to  the  square  of  this,  r*  +  4-r^ê  \-  6r***  -f-  4r#»  +  j*, 
we  may  expunge  from  both  the  first  two  terms  and  also  #*, 
and  divide  the  rest  by  r«*,  so  that  we  shall  have 

6r  -f  4*  =  —  6r  —  4é,  or  12r  -h  H#  :==  0;  so  that 

12r 
#  = —  =-•  —  Jr.     We  might  also  suppose  the  root  to  be 

o 

r*  —  2r«  -|-  «^  and  make  the  formula  e(]ual  to  its  square 
f*  —  4/S,  -[.  6r»f»  -  4r#*  +  #♦;  the  first  and  the  last  two 
terms  being  thus  destroyed  on  lx>th  side^,  we  should  have, 
by  dividing  the  other  tenus  by  r*jr,  4r  —  &  =  -  4r  +  fit, 
or  8r  =:  lîiy;  conse^iucnllv,  r  n  J*  ;  so  that  by  this  accood 
supposition,  |if  r  =  3,  ancf  «  =  2,  we  shall  fmd  x=— 119, 
or  a  negative  vahie. 

But  let  us  make  r  =  |«  -h  /,  and  wc  shall  have  for  our 
formula 


CHAP.  XV.  OF  ALQBVRA.  449 

Therefore  f^  =      fj#*  +  V*'^  +  V**^  +  &^^  +  /* 

^  4r^  =  -    6**  -    4*'/ 
+  **  =  +      #*;  and,  consequently,  the  formula  wUI 
1  S7  ßl 

be  Yß«*  +  -^*'<  +  Y'*^  +  ^^^'  +  ^*r 

This  formula  ought  also  to  be  a  square,  if  multiplied  by 
16,  by  which  means  it  becomes 

Let  us  make  this  equal  to  the  square  of  **  +  148*/  —  4/*, 
that  is,  to  *♦  +  296**/  +  21896*«/«  -  1184$<»  + 16/*  ;  the 
first  two  terms,  and  the  last,  are  destroyed  on  both  sides, 
and  we  thus  obtain  the  equation 

21896*  —  1 184/  =  4085  +  160/,  which  gives 
* 

1144     —      3  16      —       14 

^  ""  TT;çtT  —  T3TT  —  114!' 

Therefore,  since  *  =  84,  and  /  =  134S,  we  shall  have 
r  =  1^  -|-  /  =  1469,  and,  consequently, 

ar  =  r*  -  6r«*«  +  **  =  4566486027761,  and 
y  =  4r'*  -  4r*'  =  1061662893520. 


CHAP.  XV. 

Solutions  Q/'*om^  Questions,  in  which  Cubes  are  required. 

241.  In  the  preceding  chapter,  we  have  considered  some 

Îjuestions,  in  which  it  was  required  to  transform  certain 
ormulc  into  squares,  and  they  afforded  an  opportuni^  of 
explaining  several  artifices  requisite  in  the  apphcaticm  or  the 
rules  which  have  been  given.    It  now  remains,  to  consider 

S|uestions,  which  relate  to  the  transformation  of  oertun 
ormulœ  into  cubes;  and  the  following  solutions  will  throw 
some  light  on  the  rules,  which  have  been  ahready  explained 
for  transformations  of  this  kind. 

242.  Question  1.     It  is  required  to  find  two  cubes,  ;r', 
and  y,  whose  sum  may  be  a  cube» 

Since  x^  '\-  ^  must  be  a  cube,  if  we  divide  this  formula 
by  ^,   the    quotient   ought   likewise    to   be  a  cube,  or 

—3-  +  ^  =  c.     If,  therefore,  —  =  «  —  1,  we  shall  have 


4fiO  BLEM^WTS  FAAT  IL 

jk^  —  a^  +  &  -  P  =  c.  If  we  should  here,  moooiiémg  to 
the  rules  alraadv  given,  suppose  the  cube  root  to  be  S-- tit  aody 
by  comparing  the  formula  with  the  cube  a^ — 8ia^-f^ift*2«->ti*9 
determine  u  so,  that  the  second  term  may  also  vamah,  we 
iboukl  have  «  :=:  1  ;  and  the  other  terms  rorming  the  cqus- 
tkm  Sz  =  du*2  —  u^  =  3;  —  1,  we  should  find  x  =  ac, 
from  which  we  can  draw  no  condunon.  Let  us  thcrefijpe 
rather  leave  u  undetermined,  and  deduce  z  from  the  qua- 
dratic equation  —  Sa*  +  8^  =  —  9fAS^  +  9u*x  —  ti*,  or 
8t«*-82'=8a«z-3r-ti^,  or  8{tt-.l)r*=8(tt»-l)r-«*,  or 

2^  s=  (u  +  1)^  -*  37 îTt  froro  ^Ws  we  shall  find 

9(tf— 1) 

tt  +  1  ^     y+2u4-l  u^     , 

"^^"^  *^^ — 4 — 8<;rn")' 

or  «  =  -^  4-  ^( 12(h^I) ^  '  "^  **^  thcque». 

tion  is  reduced  to  transforming  the  fraction  under  the  radical 
0gn  into  a  square.  For  this  purpose,  let  us  first  multiply 
the  two  terms  by  3(u  —  1),  in  order  that  the  denominalor 
becoming  a  square,  namely ,  86(ti  —  1)^,  we  may  only  have 
to  consioer  the  numerator  —  Su*  +  12u^  —  ISu*  -j"  9  :  and, 
as  the  last  term  is  a  square,  wc  shall  suppose  the  formula, 
according  to  the  rule«  equal  to  the  square  of /!u^  -^fu  -|-  8^ 
that  is,  to  iT^w*  +  ygn'  +fu'^  +  CW*^*  +  (}ffi  +  9.  We 
may  make  tlie  last  three  terms  disapix-iu*,  by  putting  (>/'-  i\ 
or/=  0,  and  6g  -f /'  =  —  18,  or  ^  =  -  3;  and  the 
remaining  equation,  namely, 

—  3tt  +  12  =  g^fi  -h  2/ü  =  9m, 

will  give  N  =:  1 .  But  from  this  value  we  learn  nothing  ;  so 
that  we  shall  proceed  by  writing  t/  s  1  -ri.  Now,  as  our 
formula  becomes  in  this  case  ^  \2i  —  8/%  which  cannot  be 
a  square,  unless  t  be  negative,  let  us  at  once  make  /  =  —  #  ; 
by  tliese  means  we  have  the  fonnula  12^  *  8^*,  which  bcv 
eomes  a  s(}uarc  in  the  case  of  s  ss  1.  Hut  here  we  are 
•Copped  again;  for  when  j  =:  1,  wc  have  I  =  —  1,  and 
M  s  0,  from  which  we  can  draw  no  conclusion,  except  that 
in  whatever  manner  we  set  alxnit  it,  we  sliall  never  find 
a  value  that  will  bring  us  to  the  end  pro|x>sed  ;  and  hence 
we  may  already  infer,  with  some  degree  of  certainty,  that 
it  is  impossible  to  find  two  cul)e«  whose  sum  is  a  cube. 
But  we  shall  bo  fully  convinced  at  this  from  the  following 
denMHistration. 

2-ki.   Tht'omn,     It  is  ini|x>ssible  to  find  any  two  cubea« 
whose  sum,  or  diffhrence,  is  a  cube. 


CHAP.  XV.  Oï   ALGKBEA.  451 

We  shall  begin  by  observinc,  that  if  this  impossibility 
applies  to  the  sum,  it  applies  also  to  the  difference,  of  two 
cuDes.  In  fact,  if  it  be  impossiUe  for  Jt:'  4-  ^  «  3^  it  is 
also  impossible  for  «*  — j/*  =:  ar^.  Now,  a*  —  y*  is  the  difc 
ference  of  two  cubes;  therefore,  if  the  one  be  possible,  the 
other  is  so  likewise.  This  being  laid  down,  it  will  be  suf- 
ficient, if  we  demonstrate  the  impossibility  either  in  the  case 
of  the  sum,  or  difference  ;  which  demonstration  requires  the 
following  chain  of  reasoning. 

1.  We  may  consider  the  numbers  x  and  y  as  prime  to 
each  other;  for  if  they  had  a  common  divisor,  tne  cubes 
would  also  be  divisible  by  the  cube  of  that  divisor.  For 
example,  let  x  =  m/7,  and  y  n  mb,  we  shall  then  have 
J?*  +  J/*  =  m V  +  mW  ;  now  if  tins  formula  be  a  cube^ 
a*  -+-  6^  is  a  cube  also. 

2.  Since,  therefore,  x  and  y  have  no  common  factor,  these 
two  numbers  are  either  both  odd,  or  the  one  is  even  and  the 
other  odd.  In  the  first  case,  z  would  be  even,  and  in  the 
other  that  number  would  be  odd.  Consequently,  of  these 
three  numbers  Xy  y,  and  z^  there  is  always  one  which  is 
even,  and  two  that  are  odd  ;  and  it  will  therefore  be  suf- 
ficient for  our  demonstration  to  consider  the  case  in  which  x 
and  y  are  both  odd  :  because  we  may  prove  the  imposâbility 
in  question  either  for  the  sum,  or  for  the  difference  ;  ana 
the  sum  only  happens  to  become  the  difference,  when  one  of 
the  roots  is  negative. 

3.  If  therefore  x  &nd  v  are  odd,  it  is  evident  that  both 
their  sum  and  their  diflcrence  will  be  an  even  number. 

Therefore  let  — J^  =  />>  and  — ö^  =  ?j  and  we  shall  have 

X  zz  p  +  q,  and  y  zip  ^^  q\  whence  it  follows,  that  one  <rf 
the  two  numbers,  p  and  ;,  must  be  even,  and  the  other  odd. 
Now,  we  have,  by  adding  (p  +  y)'  =  ^,  to  (p  —  qf  =  y*, 
a:»  +  y  =  2p'  -h  6pS''=^P*  +  3?*)  ;  so  that  it  is  required 
to  prove  that  this  product  9,p(p^-{-^^)  cannot  become  a 
cube  ;  and  if  the  demonstration  were  applied  to  the  dif- 
ference, we  should  have  ûfi  —y" = 6p V + jqr»  =  Sy(y*  +  8/>*), 
a  formula  precisely  the  same  as  the  former,  if  we  substitute 
p  and  q  for  each  other.  Consequently,  it  is  sufficient  for 
our  purpose  to  demonstrate  the  impossibility  of  the  formula 
2i>(/7^  +  3j^),  since  it  will  necessarily  follow,  that  neither 
tne  sum  nor  the  difference  of  two  cubes  can  become  a 
cube. 

4.  If  therefore  2©(p*  +  8ç")  were  a  cube,  that  cube 
would  be  even,  ana,  consequently,   diviriUe  by  8:    con- 

G  oâ 


4S8  SLBMinrTs  fabt  il 


tequently,  the  eighth  port  of  our  fonnula,  or  ipO^  -I*  ^9*)» 
would  neoeflsarily  be  a  whole  number,  and  also  a  cube. 
Now,  we  know  that  one  of  the  numbers  f  and  q  ia  evca, 
and  the  other  odd;  so  that  fi^  +  Sj*  must  be  an  odd 
number,  which  not  being  divisible  by  4,  p  must  be  so^  or 

^  must  be  a  whole  number. 

5.  But  in  order  that  the  product  \v{t^  +  89^)  may  be  a 
cube,  each  of  these  factors,  unless  tney  have  a  cmwon 
divisor,  must  separately  be  a  cube  ;  for  if  a  product  of  two 
fiictorB,  that  are  prime  to  each  other,  be  a  cube,  each  of  itself 
must  necessarily  be  a  cube;  and  if  these  factors  have  a 
oommon  divisor,  the  case  is  dUTerent,  and  requires  a  par- 
ticular consideration.  So  that  the  question  here  is,  to  kiiow 
if  the  factors  0,  and  f>^  +  8^%  might  not  have  a  comaoo 
divÎBor.  To  actermine  this,  it  must  be  considered,  that  if 
these  factors  have  a  common  divisor,  the  numbers  c^,  and 
P*  +  3?%  vill  ba^'^  the  same  divisor  ;  that  the  dinefeooe 
also  of  these  numbers,  which  is  Sf^,  will  have  the  same  com- 
mon divisor  with  p^  ;  and  that,  since  p  and  q  are  prime  to 
each  other,  these  numbers  p*,  and  Sc-,  can  have  no  other 
common  divisor  than  S,  Ivhich  is  the  case  when  p  is  diviable 
by  3. 

6.  We  have  consequently  two  cases  to  examine  :  the  one  is, 
that  in  which  the  factors  p,  and  p^  4-  3^%  have  no  common 
divisor,  which  happens  always,  when  p  is  not  divisible  bv  S  ; 
the  other  cose  is,  when  these  factors  have  a  common  divisor, 
and  that  is  when  p  may  be  divided  by  3  ;  because  then  the 
two  numbers  are  diviû^le  by  S.  We  must  carefully  distin- 
guish these  two  cases  from  each  other,  because  each  requires 
a  particular  demonstration. 

7.  Ccae  1.     Suppose  that  p  is  not  divi&ible  by  3,  and, 

consequently,  that  our  two  factors  -^,   and  p^  +  S^*,  are 

prime  to  each  other;  so  that  each  must  separately  be  a  cube. 

Now,  in  order  that  /i^  +  •^'  may  become  a  culîe,  we  have 

only,  as  we  have  seen  Ix^fore,  to  »uppose 

p4çv/— 3=(<-fii^/-S)\  and  p-y  ^/-3  =  (/-ii  ^^-3)», 

which  gives  p*  -f  3^-  =  (/•  4.  3w*)\  which  is  a  cube,  and 

give»  us  p  =  <»  —  ^iu^  =s  /{<'  —  »M*),  also 

q  =  3/^tt  —  3«'  =  3ii(/*  -  m').     Sinix»  therefore  ç  is  an  odd 

numlMrr,  u  must  also  he  odd  ;  and,  n)nsix}uently,  /  must  be 

even,  l)ecauie  otlierwiiic  /•  —  n*  would  l)e  even. 

M.  Having  transformed  p^  -f  89"  into  a  cube,  and  having 


CHAP.  XY.  OF   ALGEIKA«  45S 

found  p  =  t(t^  -  9m*)  =  t(t  -k-  8m)  X  (/  —  Sm),  it  is  also 

P 
required  that  -^,   and  consequently  Sp»  be  %  cube;  or, 

which  comes  to  the  same,  that  the  formula 
%t(t  +  3m)  X  (^  —  Sm)  be  a  cube.  But  here  it  must  be  ob- 
served that  t  is  an  even  number,  and  not  divisible  by  3  ; 
since  otherwise  jp  would  be  divisible  by  8,  which  we  nave 
expressly  supposed  not  to  be  the  case:  so  that  the  three 
factors,  2^,  <  +  8m,  and  t  —  3m,  are  prime  to  each  other  ; 
and  each  of  them  must  separately  be  a  cube.  If,  therefore, 
we  make  ^  +  8m  =y^>  and  <  —  8m  =  ^,  we  shall  have 
^t  =sy*  +  g^.  So  that,  if  ^  is  a  cube,  we  shall  have  two 
cubes /^,  and  g^y  whose  sum  would  be  a  cube,  and  which 
woula  evidently  be  much  less  than  the  cubes  a^  and  jf^  as- 
sumed at  first;  for  as  we  first  made  xssp+q^  andy=p— ;, 
and  have  now  determined  p  and  q  by  the  letters  t  and  m,  the 
numbers  x  and  y  must  necessarily  be  much  greater  than 
t  and  M. 

9.  If,  therefore,  there  could  be  found  in  great  numbers 
two  such  cubes  as  we  require,  we  should  also  be  able  to 
assign  in  less  numbers  two  cubes  whose  sum  would  make  a 
cube,  and  in  the  same  manner  we  should  be  led  to  cubes 
always  less.  Now,  as  it  is  very  certain  that  there  are  no 
such  cubes  amonç  small  numbers,  it  follows  that  there  are 
not  any  among  tne  greater  numbers.  This  conclusion  is 
confirmed  by  that  which  the  second  case  furnishes,  and  which 
will  be  seen  to  be  the  same. 

10.  Ccise  %  Let  us  now  suppose,  that  p  is  divinble  by 
3,  and  that  q  b  not  so,  and  let  us  make  p  ss  8r  ;  our  formula 

3r 
will  then  become  -j-  x  (9r«  -f  Sc*),  or  |r(3r«  +  y*)  ;  and 

these  two  factors  are  prime  to  each  other,  since  8/^  +  j}^  is 
neither  divisible  by  S  nor  by  8,  and  r  must  be  even  as  well 
as  p  ;  therefore  each  of  these  two  factors  must  separately  be 
a  cube. 

11.  Now,  by  transforming  the  second  factor  8r^  +  j^,  or 
^  +  3r%   we  find,  in  the  same  manner  as  before, 

q  =  t(t^  _  9k«),  and  r  =  ^(t^  -  m')  ;  and  it  must  be  ob- 
served, that  since  q  was  odd,  t  must  be  here  likewise  an  odd  . 
number,  and  m  must  be  even. 

9r 
1^  But  -7-  must  also  be  a  cube  ;  or  multiplying  by  the 

2r 
cube  /y,  we  must  have  -5-,  or 


4M  ELMtKTtf  FAMT  II. 

fhê(f^  —  «')  =  2u{t  +  u)  X  (t  -^  u)  a  cube;  And  m  ihem 
three  factors  arc  prime  to  each  other,  each  must  of  itself  be 
a  cube.  Suppose  therefore  i  +  ü  =y^,  and  ^  —  «  =  g*^ 
we  shall  have  9u  '^J^  —  g^  ;  that  is  to  say,  if  2u  were  a 
cube,y*^  —  g^  would  be  a  cube.  We  should  consequeotlj 
have  two  cubes,  J'^  and  g^,  much  smaller  than  the  fint, 
whose  difference  would  be  a  cube,  and  that  would  ennble  ua 
also  to  find  two  cubes  whose  sum  would  be  a  cube  ;  since . 
we  should  only  liave  to  makc^*^  *  g'  =  A%  in  order  to  have 
y^  ^  h^  +  g3,  or  a  cube  e^ual  to  the  sum  of  two  cubes. 
Thus,  the  foregoing  conclusion  is  fully  confirmed  ;  (or  as  we 
cannot  assign,  in  great  numbers,  two  cubes  whose  sum  or 
difference  is  a  cube,  it  follows  from  what  has  been  bcfiwe 
observed,  that  no  such  cubes  are  to  be  found  among  small 
numbers. 

S44.  bince  it  is  impossible,  therefore,  to  find  two  cubes, 
whose  sum  or  difference  is  a  cube,  our  first  question  falls  to 
the  ground  :  and,  indeed,  it  is  more  usual  to  enter  on  this 
subject  with  the  question  of  determining  three  cubes,  whose 
sum  may  make  a  cube  ;  supposing,  however,  two  of  those 
cubes  to  be  arbitrary,  so  that  it  is  only  required  to  find 
the  third.  We  shall  therefore  proceed  immediately  to  this 
question. 

S4n3.  Questiofi  2.  Two  cubes  rj^,  and  b\  being  given,  rtv 
quired  a  third  cube,  such,  that  the  three  cubes  auded  to- 
gether may  make  a  culx\ 

It  is  here  rtxjuireil  to  transform  into  a  cube  the  formula 
a* -f  &^  +  x^;  which  cannot  be  done  unless  we  already 
know  a  suti>factory  case;  but  such  a  ca>e  cKTurs  imme- 
diately; namely,  tliat  c»f  jc  =  —  a.  If  therefore  we  make 
X  ^  if  —  a,  we  bhull  have  j*^  =  ^''  —  i^aj/^  -j-  îia'i/  —  a*  ; 
and,  ct)n.se<juently,  it  is  ihe  inrinula  ^**  —  iLy*  \  Stty  +  ^ 
that  inuHt  become  a  cuIk».  Now,  the  first  and  the  last  term 
here  l)eing  cubes,  we  inime«liately  lind  two  solutions. 

1.  The  first  rw|uires  us  to  re[)resent  Uie  root  of  llic 
formula  by  1/  -^^t  the  cuIh.»  of  which  is  v'  +  î5''V*-l-îiAV+^'  ; 
and  we  tfius  obtain  — «lay  -^  3a*  =  liby  -f  «3»^^  ;  and,  con- 
sequently, ^  =  T-  =s  a  -  A;  but  u:  =  -  ^,  so  that  this 

solution  is  of  no  use». 

SÎ.  Hut   we  may   also  reprissent  the  nxit  byyV  +  />,  the 

cube  of  which  is^'y'  +  *^/'Y  "^  '^^^'/M   ^  ^^>  ""^  **^*^"  ^*^'- 
termine  /' in  such  a  manner,  that  ihe  ihird  tenus  may  he 

tr 
de?>troyeti,  namely,  by  making 'J*i-  —  :V//;  or /*  =     ,.   ;    IW 


CHAP.  tt.  OF  ALGfiBEA«  4d5 

we  thus  arrive  at  the  equation 

y  -  8a  =/»^  +  8ér*  =  -^+  -^,  which  multiplied  by  i<^, 

becomes  A^y  -  Sa^  =  a^^  +  8a*Ä\    This  gives 

8o*y+8a6ß     8öi'(ö'+*')       Soft»        :, 
y  =      y)-rt^-=      y^^cfi      =  g5::^,;and,coMequendy, 

;r  =  V  —  ^  =  "ü 7"  =  a  X  -Ti r.     So  that  the  two 

cubes  a'  and  V  being  given,  we  know  also  thé  root  of  the 
third  cube  sought  ;  and  if  we  would  have  that  root  positive, 
We  have  only  to  suppose  6'  to  be  greater  than  a>.  Let  us 
apply  this  to  some  examples. 

1.  Let  1  and  8  be  the  two  given  cubes,  so  that  £t  =  1| 
and  5  =  2;  the  formula  9  +  ^^  will  become  a  cube,  if 
jT  =  »  7  ;  for  we  shall  have  9  +  a?*  =  ^-^  =  (%?)*. 

2.  Let  the  given  cubes  be  8  and  27,  so  that  a  =  2, 
and  6  =  8;  the  formula  85  -|-  a:'  will  be  a  cube,  when 


^  =    tV*- 


3.  It  27  and  64  be  the  given  cubes,  that  is,  if  a  =  8| 
and  6  =  4,  the  formula  91  +  ^  will  become  a  cube,  if 


X  =  ♦«' 


And,  generally,  in  order  to  determine  third  cubes  for 
any  two  given  cubes,  we  must  proceed  by  substituting 

—r\ — "^ — h  z  instead  of  or,  m  the  formula  a*  +  y  +  ^r*  : 

for  by  these  means  we  shall  arrive  at  a  formula  like  the  pre- 
ceding, which  would  then  furnish  new  values  of  t\  but 
it  is  evident  that  this  would  lead  to  very  prolix  cal-« 
culations. 

246.  In  this  question,  there  likewise  occurs  a  remarkable 
case  ;  namely,  that  in  which  the  two  given  cubes  are  equal, 

3a* 
or  a  b:  A  ;  for  then  we  have  x  ^  —  =  qd  ;  that  is,  we  have 

no  solution  ;  and  this  is  the  reason  why  we  are  not  able  to 
resolve  the  problem  of  transforming  into  a  cube  the  formula 
2a^  +  x^.  For  example,  let  a  z=  1,  or  let  this  formula  be 
2  +  ^y  we  shidl  find  tnat  whatever  forms  we  give  it,  it  will 
always  be  to  no  purpose,  and  we  shall  seek  in  vain  for  m 
satisfactory  value  of  x.  Hence,  we  may  conclude  with 
sufficient  certainty,  that  it  is  impossible  to  find  a  cube  equal 
to  the  sum  of  a  cube,  and  of  a  double  cube  ;  or  that  the 
equation  2a'  +  ^^  =  jr*  is  impossible.     As  tins  equation 


466  XUCM£NTë  rABT  II. 

gives  fUt^  ziy^  —  jc^^  it  is  likewise  ioipotsible  to  find  two 
cubes  having  their  difference  equal  to  ttie  double  of  another 
cube;  and  the  same  impossibility  extends  to  tb«  sum  of 
two  cubes,  as  is  evident  from  the  following  demonstratioo. 

247.  Theorem.  Neither  the  sum  nor  the  differenee  of 
two  cubes  can  become  equal  to  the  double  of  another  cube  ; 
or,  in  other  words,  the  formuU  x*  ±  jf^zi9t^  it  alwajs 
impossible,  except  in  the  evident  case  of^  =  x. 

We  may  here  also  conûder  x  and  y  as  prime  to  each 
other  ;  for  if  these  numbers  had  a  common  divisor,  it  would 
be  necessary  for  z  to  have  the  same  divisor;  and«  coo» 
sequently,  for  the  whole  equation  to  be  divisible  by  the  cube 
6[  that  aivisor.  This  being  laid  down,  b»  x^  ±y  must  be 
an  even  number,  the  numbers  x  and  y  must  both  be  odd,  m 
consequence  of  which  both  their  sum  and  their  diffc 


must  be  even.  Making,  therefore,  -^  =sp,  and  — ^  =  y, 

we  shall  have  x  ssn  +  q  and  y  zzp  ^  q;  and  of  the  two 
numbers  p  and  7,  tne  one  must  be  even  and  the  other  odd. 
Now,  from  this,  we  obtain 

and  *»  «y  =  6p«y  +  2y'  =  2?(3p*+  ç*)> 

which  are  two  formulae  perfectly  similar.  It  will  therefore 
be  sufficient  to  prove  that  the  formula  ^p(p*  4-  3^^)  cannot 
become  tlie  double  of  a  cube,  or  that  p^p^  '\-  3^')  cannot 
become  a  cube  :  uhich  may  be  demon6tratcd  in  the  follow, 
ing  manner. 

1.  Two  different  cases  again  nre?^*nt  thems^vlves  to  our 
consideration  :  the  one,  in  whicii  the  two  factors  p^  and 
p*  -^  \\q''y  have  no  common  divisor,  ami  must  so|uuratelv  be 
a  cube;  the  other  in  which  thei»e  fac*tors  have  a  common 
divisor,  which  divitior,  however,  as  we  liave  seen  (Art. 
24d),  can  be  no  other  than  3. 

2.  Case  1.  Suptx>äing,  therefore,  tiiat  p  is  not  divisible  by 
S,  and  that  thus  the  two  foinors  are  prime  to  each  other,  we 
»hall  first  reduce  //*  +-3^^  to  a  cube  by  making  p  -  t(t^  —  Öm-), 
and  q  =  3w(r*  —  9m*);  by  which  means  it  h  ill  only  lie  far- 
ther necessary  for  ;>  to  Ini^ome  a  ciil>e.  Now,  t  n«>t  Ixan^; 
divisible  by  3,  »ince  otherwise /^  would  aU»  l)e  di\i4hle  by  X^^ 
the  two  factors  /,  and  V  —  i)ii-,  are  prime  to  one  aiiotiier, 
and,  oonseciuently,  each  muht  separately  Ik*  a  cuIk\ 

3.  But  the  last  factor  lia.s  also  two  factory  namely  /  ^  34f« 
and  i  —  3i/,  which  an*  prime  to  each  other,  first  liecause  /  t% 
not  divisible  by  3,  and,  in  the  HTond  ploic,  liecaiiK'  oik*  %ji 


CHAP.  XV.  OF   ALGEBAA.  457 

the  numbers  /  or  ti  is  even,  and  the  other  odd  ;  for  if  these 
numbers  were  both  odd,  not  only  p,  but  also  q^  must  be  odd, 
which  cannot  be  :  therefore,  each  of  these  two  factors,  t-r9u, 
and  t  —  3uy  must  separately  be  a  cube. 

4.  Therefore  let  t  -{-  Su  ^J^,  and  ^  —  3tt  =  ^,  and  we 
shall  then  have  2/  =y'*  +  g^*  Now,  t  must  be  a  cube, 
which  we  shall  denote  by  h\  by  which  means  we  must  have 

J**^  g^  zz  2Ä^  ;  consequently,  we  should  have  two  cubes 
much  smaller,  namely,  y*^  and  g^,  whose  sum  would  be  the 
double  of  a  cube. 

5.  Case  S.  Let  us  now  suppose  p  divisible  by  3,  and^ 
consequently,  that  q  is  not  sa 

If  we  make  p  zsQr^  our  formula  becomes 
3r(9r*  +  S^)  =  9r(3r«  -h  q^),  and  these  factors  being  now 
numbers  prime  to  one  another,  each  must  separately  be  a 
cube. 

6.  In  order  therefore  to  transform  the  second  q*  +  8r*, 
into  a  cube,  we  shall  make  ç =/(/*  —  9w*),  and  r =3u(/*  — tt*^  ; 
and  again  one  of  the  numbers  t  and  u  must  be  odd,  and  the 
other  even,  since  otherwise  the  two  numbers  a  and  r  would 
be  even.     Now,  from  this  we  obtain  the  first  factor 

9r  =  21u(t*  —  u^)  ;  and  as  it  must  be  a  cube,  let  us  divide 
it  by  S7,  and  the  formula  «(/*  —  u*),  or  u(t  +  w)  x  (<  —  u), 
must  be  a  cube. 

7.  But  these  three  factors  being  prime  to  each  other,  they 
must  all  be  cubes  of  themselves.  Let  us  therefore  suppose 
for  the  last  two  <  -}-  w  =y^,  and  <  —  «  =  ^,  we  shall  then 
have  2m  =y*  —  g*'  ;  but  as  u  must  be  a  cube,  we  should  in 
this  way  have  two  cubes,  in  much  smaller  numbers,  whose 
difference  would  be  equal  to  the  double  of  another  cube. 

8.  Since  therefore  we  cannot  assign,  in  small  numbers,  any 
cubes,  whose  sum  or  difference  is  the  double  of  a  cube,  it 
is  evident  that  there  are  no  such  cubes,  even  among  the 
greatest  numbers. 

9.  It  will  perhaps  be  objected,  that  our  concluâon  might 
lead  to  error;  because  there  does  exist  a  satisfactory  case 
among  these  small  numbers  ;  namely,  that  otj'ssff.  But 
it  must  be  considered  that  when^=  ^,  we  have,  in  the  first 
case,  t  -{-Su  =  t  -^  3m,  and  therefore  u  =  0  ;  consequently, 
also  q  zzO;  and,  as  we  have  supposed  or  =  p  +  ?>  And 
V  =^  p  —  ?9  the  first  two  cubes,  x^  and^^,  must  have  already 
been  equal  to  one  another,  which  case  was  expressly  ex* 
cepted.  Likewise,' in  the  second  case,  \£  fzzg^  we  must 
have  t'\'U^t^Uy  and  also  m  =  0 :  therefoi^  ^  =:  0,  and 
p  =  0  ;  so  that  the  first  two  cubes,  jfi  and  y',  would  agûn 


4i6  BLBMBIITS  FAST  II. 

become  equal,  which  does  not  enter  into  the  tulgoct  of  tbe 
pfoblem. 

S48.  Question  S.  Reauired  in  general  three  cubes,  x*,  j^^ 
and  2^,  whose  sum  may  tie  equal  to  a  cube. 

We  have  seen  that  two  of  these  cubes  may  be  suppoaed  to 
be  known,  and  that  from  them  we  may  determine  the  third, 

Sovided  the  two  arc  not  equal  ;  but  the  preceding  metbod 
mishes  in  each  case  only  one  value  for  the  third  cube,  mod 
it  would  be  difficult  to  deduce  from  it  any  new  ones. 

We  shall  now,  therefore,  consider  the  three  cubes  as  mi- 
known  ;  and,  in  order  to  give  a  general  solution,  let  us  make 
jr*  +y*  -h  z^  =  r*.  Here,  by  transponng  one  of  the  terms, 
we  have  x*  +  y •  =  t7*  —  r*,  the  conditions  of  whidi  equa- 
tion we  may  satisfy  in  the  following  manner. 

1.  Let  X  ssp  -i-  q^  and  y  =:  p  —  ^,  and  we  shall  hare,  as 
before,  jr»  H-y'  =  2p(p«  +  %*).  Also,  let  r  =  r  +#,  and 
s  =  r  —  #,  which  gives  r*  —  z*  =  2*(#*  +  Sr^  ;  therefore 
we  must  have  Zp(p*  +  8y«)  =  2s{ê*  +  Sr*),  or 

Pip- ^  Sf)  zz  s(s^  ^Sr^). 
Jv  s        s.  We  have  already  seen  (Art  17^),  that  a  number,  such 
fy  ^  .     as  />-  +  3y*,  can  have  no  divisors  except  numbers  of  the 
^  same  form.     Since,  therefore,  these  two  formula?,  »*  -f  Sy", 

and  ^  +  Sr^f  must  necessarily  have  a  common  divisor,  m 
that  divisor  be  r»  +  3w*. 
9.  And  let  us,  therefore,  make 

p*  +  »7«  =  (/-  +  ^)  X  (r  -^  ßw«),  and 
s'  4-  ^'•^  =  (A*  +  .%*)  X  (/•  ^-  Su'), 
and  wc  shall  have  p  =Jl  -{-  .*^'i<,  and  q  ^ifft  — ^w  ;  con- 
setiucntly,  p*  =fU'  +  (}fgtn  -f  9^u\  and 

q2  =  yrj^/«  -  o)^r/w  +/-I/-  ;  whence, 

p«  +  S^*  =  (/^  f-  iig')i'  +  (Sf^  +  fl^nw'  ;  or 

p-'  -h  3</^  =  (/-  +  3-^)  X  (r  +  3ii0. 

4.  In  the  same  manner,  we  mav  deduce  from  the  other 
iormula,  s  —  hi  -^  iiku,  and  r  =  À-^  —  hu  ;  whence  result« 
the  etjuation, 

^/  +  .'U-m)  X   (ft*  +  :ik')  X  (/•  +  iW), 
which  being  «lividetl  i)y  t*  +  Hu',  and  rwhiced,  gives 

MP  +  'hi')  +  ^.s»  (./••  +  ik'*)  = 

hi(h>    +  iitr')  +   '.iku(h'    +  iik'),  or 

ßU'  +  -V)  -  W*'  +  aA^)  = 

by  which  means  t  =  ^^  ^  .^^^.^y^^Tn^Vy'^- 


CUAf.  KV.  OF  ALGfilBA.  4AB 

5.  Let  us  noir  remove  the  fractions,  by  making 

u  =^f{f^  +  %«)  —  A(A«  +  3i«)  ;  then 

where  we  may  give  any  values  whatever  to  the  letters^  g, 
hy  and  X:. 

6.  When  therefore  we  have  determined,  from  these  four 
numbers,  the  values  of  t  and  u,  we  shall  have 

r  =  kt^  hu,  ê  ^M'\' Sku ; 

whence  we  shall  at  last  arrive  at  the  solution  of  the  question, 
X  =^p  +  qy  ÎI  ^P  -^  p  z  :=sr  -^  3^  and  i;  =  r  -f  *  ;  and 
this  solution  is  general,  so  far  as  to  comprehend  all  the 
possible  cases,  since  in  the  whole  calculation  we  have  ad- 
mitted no  arbitrary  limitation.  The  whole  artifice  con- 
sisted in  rendering  our  equation  divisible  by  ^  +  ^*  »  f^f 
we  have  thus  been  able  to  determine  the  letters  t  and  u  by 
an  equation  of  the  first  decree  :  and  innumerable  applica- 
tions may  be  made  of  these  formulas,  some  of  which  we  shall 
give  for  the  sake  of  example. 

1.  Let  X:  =  0,  and  A  =:  1,  we  shall  have 

^  =  —  3^(/*  +  8«*),  and  u=:f(J^  +a^)-.l;  go  that 
P=-^/g(f'  +  Sg')+¥gif'+»ë')-»g.orp^^8g^, 

r  =  -/(/*  +  %^)  +1';  consequently, 

lastly,  t'  =-(%+/)  X  (/«  +  a^)  +  1. 

It  we  also  suppose/2=  —  1,  and  g  ä  +  1,  we  shall  have 
X  =—  20, y  =  14,  z  =3  17,  and  v  =—  7;.  and  thence  re- 
sults the  final  equation,  -  2œ  + 14^  +  17^  =  —  7*,  or 
14'  +  17^  +  7'  =  2œ. 

2.  Let/ ~  2,  g-  =  1,  and  consequently/«  -h  3^«  ex  7; 
farther,  A  =  0,  and  Ar  =  1  ;  so  that  A«  +  3A«  ss  3  ;  weahall 
then  have  ^  =  —  12,  and  u  =  14  ;  so  that 

jP  =  2^+3m  =  18,  gr  =  |  —  2«  «—  40, 

r  =  ^  =  -  12,  and  ^  3=  8tf  =r  42. 

From  this  will  result 

a?=ji-|-g=—  22,  y=fcp— j±=S8, 

2?  =  r  —  #=—  54,        and  v  ^±  r  +  ä  =  30; 

therefore,  80»  =^  22^  +  68^  —  54?,  or  V 

58»=:3œ  +64*  +22»; 

and  as  all  these  roots  are  divisible  by  2,  we  shall  ako  have 

2îF  =  15^  +  27»  +  lR 


400  SLKMXirrs  fabt  ft. 

8.  Let/=  S,  g  =1,A=1,  andta.!;»  diat 
/«  H.aiç«  =  12,A«  +  3fc*  =  4;  aIso<=-«4,mndM  =82. 
HerCi  Uiesc  two  values  being  divisible  bj  8»  and  as  we  ooiw 
nder  only  their  ratiosi  we  may  make  ^  =:  —  3,  and  m  =  4w 
Whence  we  obtain 

rsr/— tt=— 7,        and*  =  <  +  8M  =  +    9; 

consequently,  or  s  —  12,  and  y  =  18, 

«  =  —  16,  and  r  =    2, 
whence  -12»  + 18^  -  16»  =  2%  or  18=  =  16»+ l£»  +  r, 
or,  dividing  by  the  cube  of  2,  9»  =  8»  +  6»+  P. 

4.  Let  us  also  suppode  ^  =  0,  and  jr  =  A,  by  which 

means  we  leavey*  and  k  undetermined«     We  shall  thus  bftv« 

/«  4-  V  =/*,  and  A«  +  Sit«  =  4A«  ;  so  that  <  =  lfth\mnà 

u  =/^-  4A';  also,  /I  =  #/  =  I2fh\   q  =  -/♦  +  4^ik», 

r=  12A*- V'^^-  4Ä*=  16A*-A/^,and*  =  »!/»;laaÜy, 

;r  =  p  -h  y  =  16/A»  -/*,  y^p^q:^%fh^  -h/^, 

r  =  r  -  *  =  16A*  -  4/i/^,  andr  =  r  -h  *  =  16A*  +2*/^. 

If  we  now  roakeyrs  A  =  1,  we  havex  s  15,  y  =  9$  z  —  12, 
and  r  =  18  ;  or,  dividing  all  by  3,  x  =  5,  v  =  3,  a  =  4, 
and  V  =  6  ;  so  that  3»  +  4»  +  5»  =  6».  The  pipgresnoo 
of  these  three  roots,  3,  4,  5,  increasing  by  unity,  is  worthy 
of  attention  ;  for  which  reason,  we  shall  investigate  whether 
there  are  not  others  of  the  same  kind. 

249.  Question  4.  Required  three  numlx^rs,  whose  dif- 
ference is  1,  and  forming  such  an  arithmetical  progression, 
that  their  cubes  added  together  may  make  a  culx;. 

Let  X  be  the  middle  number,  or  term,  then  x  —  1  will  be 
the  least,  and  x  +  1  the  greatest  *,  the  sum  of  the  cubes  of 
these  three  numbers  is  Sx*  +  6x  =  3x{x*  +  2),  which  must 
be  a  cube.  Here,  we  must  previously  have  a  case,  in  which 
this  property  exists,  and  we  find,  aiter  some  trials,  that  that 
case  IS  X  z=  4. 

So  that,  according  to  the  niles  already  given,  we  may 
make  x  =:  4  -h  ^  ;  whence  x*  =  16  +  Hy  +  y,  and 
jJ  r=  64  +  4t^  +  l^y*  +  y,   and    by    thcbc    means   our 
formula  becomes  216  -»-  ISOy  -f  «*%*  +  3y\  in  which  the 
first  term  is  a  cul)e,  but  the  last  is  not. 

Let  us,  therefore,  sujjpose  the  root  to  l)e  6  +^,  or  the 
formula  to  be  216  +  108/^  +  IH/'y  +/y.  and  de3»tn>y 
the  two  second  terms,  bv  writing  l(>H/'=  1.50,  ox  J'=.  J  J  ; 
the  other  terms,  divided  l)y  y,  will  give 

25*     25* 
36  +  3y  =  18/*  -^ry  =  fH  +iH-5^-  ''' 


CHAF.  XY«  or  ALQEMMA»  4SI 

18»  X  36  +  18«  X  8y  =  18»  X  26«  +  26«y,  or 

18*  X  86  -  18^^  X  aô«=26«y—  18»  x  8y  ;  therefore 

_  18»  X  36  -  18«  X  g5«_18*  x  (18  x  36  —  25«) 
^  "        25»  —  3  X  18»       ""        26»  -  8  X  18»        '     ^^ 

—324x23      -7452       ^  ,  ,. 

^'^^  — Î87Î —  ^  ~Î87Î  •        '  consequently,  x^i\^. 

As  it  might  be  difficult  to  pursue  this  reduction  in  cubes, 
it  is  proper  to  observe,  that  tne  question  may  always  be  re- 
duced to  squares.  In  fact,  since  '  Sx{x*  +  2)  must  be  a 
cube,  let  us  suppose  Sx{a^  -[-  2)  =  ^y  ;  dividing  by  x,  we 
shall  have  Sa:^  +  6  =  af^^  ;  and,  consequently, 

ft  §{({ 

j?«  =  -^ — h^ß^ — 77».    Now,  the  numerator  of  this  frac- 
^  —  3     qy'  — 18 

tion  being  already  a  square,  it  is  only  necessary  to  transform 
the  denominator,  %»  —  18,  into  a  square,  which  also  re- 
quires that  we  have  already  found  a  case.  For  this  purpoee^ 
let  us  consider  that  18  is  divisible  by  9»  but  6  only  by  8^ 
and  that  y  therefore  may  be  divided  by  3  ;  if  we  make 
y  =:  Szj  our  denominator  will  become  162js»  —  18,  which 
being  divided  by  9^  and  becoming  18x^  —  2,  must  süll  be  n 
square.  Now,  this  is  evidently  true  of  the  case  i;  =  1.  So 
that  we  shall  make  js  =  1  +Vj  and  we  must  have 
16  4-  54i;  4-  54i;«  -f  18ü»  =  Q.  Let  its  root  be  4  +  yvy 
the  square  of  which  is  16  -f-  54p  -}*  tt  ^%  ^^  ^®  must  have 
54  +  18i;  =  Vy  ;  or  18ü  =—  VyS  or  2»  =-  f»;  and, 
consequently,  v  =  —  ^f^  ;  which  produces  js  ss  1  +  v  =  ^ 
and  then  y  ==  44« 

Let  us  now  resume  the  denominator 

V  -  18  =  162«»  -  18  =  9(182»  -  2)  ; 

and  since   the  square  root  of  the  factor,   18js»  —  2,   is 
4  4-  y  i;  CS  -f. 14,  ttiat  of  the  whole  denominator  is  -f-lr  -  but 

the  root  of  the  numerator  is  6  ;  therefore  x  =  ^n  —  tItj  * 


value  quite  different  irom  that  which  we  found  before.  It 
follows,  therefore,  that  the  roots  of  our  three  cubes  sought 
are  X  —  1  =  ^-J^,  x  =  f^,  *  +  1  =  f|f  :  and  the  sum  of 
the  cubes  of  these  three  numbers  will  be  a  cube,  whose  root, 

jrij    —  ^S6    V    ''  —   130S6   40s 

•*y>  —  J-crjr  ^   TT  —    TTTT    "—  T^' 

250.  We  shall  here  finish  this  Treatise  on  the  Indeter- 
minate Analysis,  having  had  sufficient  occasion,  in  the  ques- 
tions which  we  have  resolved,  to  explain  the  chief  artifices 
that  have  hitherto  been  devised  in  this  branch  of  Algebnu 


4tSt  ELE1IBVT8  OF  ALOEBBA.  TABT  It. 


QUESTIONS   FOR   PRACTICE. 


I.  To  divide  a  square  number  (16)  into  two  squares. 

Ans.  Vt^  "d  W- 

SL  To  find  two  square  numbers,  whose  différence  (60)  it 

given.  Jm.  72^,  and  l^if. 

3.  From  a  number  x  to  take  two  g^ven  numbm  6  and  7f 

so  that  both  remainders  may  be  square  numbers. 

Jns.  Jt  =  %^'. 

4»  To  find  two  numbers  in  proportion  as  8  is  to  15»  aod 

such,  that  the  sum  of  tlieir  squares  shall  make  a  square 

■umber.  An».  576,  and  lOMl 

5.  To  find  four  numbers  such,  that  if  the  square  nomber 
100  be  added  to  the  product  of  every  two  of  them,  the  suoi 
shall  be  all  sauares.  Ans.  12,  32,  88,  and  10& 

6.  To  fina  two  numbers,  whose  difTercnce  shall  be  equal 
to  the  difiWrcnce  of  their  squares,  and  the  sum  of  their  squares 
a  square  number.  An»,  ^,  and  '. 

7.  To  find  two  numbers,  whose  product  being  added  to 
the  sum  of  their  squares,  shall  make  a  square  number. 

An».  5  and  3,  8  and  7,  16  and  Js  Sec 

8.  To  find  two  such  numbers,  that  not  only  each  number, 
but  also  their  sum  and  their  difference,  iK^ing  increased  by 
unity,  shall  be  square  numbers.  Jri».  302^,  and  56^4. 

9.  To  find  three  square  numl)cr8  such,  that  the  sum  of 
their  squares  shall  be  a  square  number. 

An».  9,  16,  and  •♦*• 

10.  To  divide  the  cube  number  8  into  three  other  culie 
numbers.  Ans.  *♦,  Vr  ♦  •"**  1- 

II.  Two  cube  numbers,  8  and  1 ,  licing  given,  to  find  two 
Other  cul)e  numbers,  wliose  diflTcrence  shall  be  equal  to  the 
sum  of  the  given  cubes.  Ans.  V/j»  ^"^^^  V*  i'- 

12.  To  find  three  such  cul)e  numbers,  that  if  1  be  sud- 
tracted  from  every  one  of  them,  the  sum  of  the  remainders 
shall  be  a  scjuare.  Ans.  J^  J  J,  VAVt  »nJ  8L 

13.  To  faml  two  numbers,  whose  sum  shall  be  equal  to 
the  sum  of  their  cubes.  Ans,  ^,  and  ^. 

14.  To  find  three  such  cube  numbers,  that  the  sum  ol 
them  may  be  both  a  square  and  a  cube. 


o 


ADDITIONS 


M.  DE^LA  GBANGE. 


ADVERTISEMENT. 

The  geometricians  of  the  last  œntuiy  pud  ^eat  atten^ 
tion  to  the  Indeterminate  Analysis,  or  what  is  commonly 
called  the  Diophantine  Algebra;  but  Sachet  and  Fennat 
alone  can  properiy  be  said  to  have  added  any  thing  to  what 
Diophantus  himself  has  left  us  on  that  subject 

To  the  former,  we  particularly  owe  a  complete  methof} 
of  resolving,  in  integer  numbers,  all  indeterminate  problems 
of  the  first  degree  *  :  the  latter  is  the  author  of  some  method» 
for  the  resolution  of  indeterminate  equations,  which  exceed 
the  second  degree  +  ;  of  the  singular  method^  by  which  we 
demonstrate  uat  it  is  impossime  for  the  sum,  or  the  difw 
ference  of  two  biquadrates  to  be  a  square  \  ;  of  the  solution  ^ 
a  great  number  of  very  difficult  problems  ;  and  of  several 
admirable  theorems  respecting  integer  numbers,  which  he 
lefl  without  demonstration,  but  of  which  the  greater  part  hep 
since  been  demonstrated  by  M.  Euler  in  ue  Petersburg 
Commentaries  II. 

*  See  Chap.  Z,  in  these  Additiona.  I  do  not  he?e  men« 
tion  his  Commentary  on  Diophantus,  because  that  work,  pro<- 
perly  speaking,  though  excellent  in  its  way^  contains  ne  dis- 
covery. 

t  These  are  explained  in  the  Sth,  9th,  and  10th  chapters  of 
the  preceding  Treatise.  Père  Billi  has  collected  them  from  dif- 
ferent writings  of  M.  Fermât,  and  has  added  them  to  the  new 
edition  of  Diophantus,  published  by  M.  Fermât,  junior. 

ÎThis  method  -is  explained  in  the  13th  chapter  of  the  pr^ 
ing  Treatise  ;  the  prmciples  of  it  are  to  be  found  in  the  Re» 
marks  of  M.  Fermât^  on  the  XXVIth  Question  of  the  Vlth  Book 
of  Diophantus. 

II  The  problems  and  theorems,  to  which  we  allude,  are 


464  ADDITI0K8. 


preflent  century,  this  branch  of  analyn  httt  bm 
tirelv  neglected  ;  and,  except  M.  Euler»  I  know  ma 


In  the 
almofit  entirel 

'peraon  who  (las  applied  to  it:  but  the  beautiful  and  im- 
merouB  discoveries,  which  that  great  matheniatician  ' 
made  in  it,  sufficiently  compensate  for  the  indiffi 
which  mathematical  auüiors  4)P^r  to  have  hitherto  ( 
taincd  for  such  researches.  Tne  Commentaries  of  PeCcrs> 
burg  are  full  of  the  labors  of  M.  Euler  on  this  subject, 
and  the  precedinff  Work  is  a  new  service,  which  he  has  ~^ 
dered  to  the  admirers  of  the  Diophantinc  Al^ebnu^  *^ 
the  publication  of  it,  there  was  no  work  in  which  this 
was  treated  methodically,  and  which  enumerated  and  ex* 
plained  the  principal  rules  hitherto  known  for  the  aoluuaii 
of  indeterminate  problems,  llie  preceding  Treatise  unites 
both  these  advantages  :  but  in  order  to  make  it  still  more 
complete,  I  have  thought  it  necessary  to  make  several  Ad- 
ditions to  it,  of  which  I  shall  now  give  a  short  account 

The  theory  of  G>ntinued  Fractions  is  one  of  the  most 
useful  in  arithmetic,  as  it  ser\'es  to  resolve  problems  with 
fiuility,  which,  without  its  aid,  would  be  almost  unmanage- 
able ;  but  it  is  oF  still  greater  utility  in  the  solution  of  inoe- 
terminate  problems,  wnen  integer  numbers  only  are  sought 
This  consideration  has  induced  me  to  explain  the  theory  of 
them,  at  sufficient  length  to  make  it  uoaerstood.  As  it  is 
not  to  be  found  in  the  chief  works  on  arithmetic  and  algebra, 
it  must  be  little  known  to  mathematicians  ;  and  I  shall  be 
happy,  if  I  can  contribute  to  render  it  more  familiar  to  them. 
At  the  end  of  this  theory,  which  occupies  the  first  Chapter, 
follow  several  curious  and  entirely  new  problems,  depending 
on  the  truth  of  the  same  theory,  but  which  I  have  thought 
pn>per  to  treat  in  a  distinct  manner,  in  order  tliat  tlieir 
solution  may  l)ecc)mo  more  interesting.  Among  thes4^  will 
particularly  l)c  remarked  a  very  simple  and  easy  method  of 
reducing  the  nx)ts  of  et]uations  of  the  second  degree  to  C*on- 
tinued  Fractions,  and  a  rigid  demonstration,  that  tliotic  frac* 
tions  must  nece&sarily  he  always  nericxlical. 

The  otlier  Additions  chiefly  relate  to  the  resolution  of  in- 


scattered  through  the  Rtmarkt  of  M.  Fermât  on  the  Quevtioiu 
of  Diophantus;  and  tlinuii^h  his  Li-tters  printed  in  the  Optra 
Mathematical  &c.  and  in  the  second  volume  of  the  work»  of 
Wallis. 

There  are  also  to  be  found,  in  the  Menioim  of  the  Academy 
of  Ik'rlin,  for  the  year  1770,  et  licq.  the  demonstration»  of  some 
of  this  author's  tlieorenis,  which  hud  not  been  dcmonnfrati*«! 
before. 


CHAP«  I.  ADDvman*  400 

delermtfi«itc  equations  <rf*  die  first  «ad  ieeond  degree;  for 
these  I  gire  new  end  general  methoda,  both  6x  the  cue  Hi 
which  ttuB  numbers  are  (xiy  required  to  be  ntioBal,  and  for 
that  in  whidi  the  numb^s  sought  are  required  to  be  imiter; 
and  I  consider  some  other  important  matters  relating  to  the 
same  subject. 

The  last  Chapter  contains  researches  on  the  functions^ 
which  have  this  property,  that  the  product  of  two  or  more 
similar  functions  is  alwajrs  a  similar  tunction.  I  give  a  general 
method  for  finding  such  functions,  and  shew  their  use  itt  -the 
resolution  of  different  indeterminate  problems^  to  wbidi  th» 
usual  methods  could  not  be  aj^fdied. 

Such  are  the  prinâpal  objects  of  these  Additions,  wbicb 
might  have  been  made  mucb  more  extensive,  had  it  not  been 
for  exoeedmg  proper  bounds  ;  I  hope,  however,  that  the  sub- 
jects here  treated  will  merit  die  attention  of  matheipMidciani^ 
and  revive  a  tase  for  this  branch  of  almbra,  which  appears  to 
me  very  worthy  of  exercising  their  skill. 


CHAPTER  I. 

ON 

CONTINUED  FRACTIONS. 

1.  As  the  subject  of  Condnued  Fracdons  is  not  firand  in 
the  common  books  of  arithmetic  and  algebra,  and  for  tbb 
reason  is  but  little  known  to  mathematicians,  it  will  be  nro^ 
per  to  begin  these  Additions  by  a  short  explanation  of  tlieir 
theory,  which  we  shall  have  frequent  opportunities  to  apply 
in  what  follows. 

In  general,  we  call  every  expression  of  tUs  tonß,  a  cofi* 
Hnueajradionf 

b 

*  A  term  used  in  algebra  for  any  expression  containing  a 
certaio  letter,  denoting  an  unknown  qoandtjr«  however  mixed 
and  compounded  wim  other  known  quantities  or  numbers. 

Thus,  fljp  +y*;  2«— a  V^-^)  Î  W  +^/  (-^),areall 

functions  of  x. 

H  n 


ißß  ADD1TIOII8.  CKAT.  U 


in  which  the  quantities  m,  0j  y^ij  ftc  and  k^  r,  d,  tuu, 
int^^  numbers  poâtivc  or  ncgaÜTe  ;  but  at  pfcacnt  we  ahaD 
consider  those  Continued  Fractions  onW»  whoae  nunmaton 
&y  c,  d^  8cc  arc  unity  ;  that  is  to  say,  fractions  of  thia  fira, 

1 


«  +  -^  .  i      1 


•f  fit  7>  &C.  bebg  any  integer  numbers  positiTe  or  nc^pative; 
fer  tbesaare,  properly  npeudnff,  theonly  nnmfaerst  which  are 
of  great  utiBty  m  analysis,  the  others  being  scamly  any 
thing  more  than  objects  of  curiosity. 

it  Lord  Brouncker,  I  believe,  was  the  first  who  thou^t 
of  Continued  Fractions;  we  know  that  tl^  continued  finaD» 
tion,  which  he  devised  to  express  the  ratio  of  the  dicum* 
scribed  square  to  the  area  of  ttie  circle  was  thb; 


1+4. • 

+  ^  +,  &C. 

but  we  are  ignorant  of  the  means  which  led  him  to  it.  We 
only  find  in  the  Arithmetka  inûnitorum  some  researdies  «m 
this  subject,  in  which  Wallis  demonstrates,  in  an  indirect, 
though  uigenious  manner,  the  identity  of  Brounckei^s  es« 

,.       ....    3x3x5x6x7,  &c       „      . 
pre«>on  to  h».  which  .«,  ^_^_^-^g-^.     He  there 


also  gives  the  general  method  of  reducing  all  sorts  of 
tinned  fractions  to  vulgar  fractions  ;  but  it  does  not  appear 
that  cither  of  those  great  mathematicians  knew  the  principal 
properties  and  singular  advantages  of  continued  fractions; 
andf  we  shall  aßerwards  see,  that  the  discovery  of  them  is 
chiefly  due  to  Huygens. 

3.  Continued  fractions  naturally  present  themselves,  when- 
ever it  is  rct|uirctl  to  express  fractional,  or  imaginary  quan» 
tities  in  numbers.  In  tact,  suppose  we  have  to  assign  the 
value  of  any  given  quantity  /?,  which  is  not  cxprcsuble  by 
an  integer  numlicr  ;  the  simplest  way  is,  to  begin  bv  seeking 
the  iiitetTer  nunilkT,  which  will  Ix?  nearest  to  the  value  of  a, 
ami  which  uill  differ  fn>m  it  only  by  a  fraction  less  than 
unity.     Let  this  number  lie  a,  and  we  sluill  have  a  —  a  equal 

to  a  fraction  less  than  unity;  so  that  will,  on  the 

contrary,  be  a  nurolx^r  greater  Üian  unity:  therefore  let 
=  h\  and,  as  b  must  be  a  number  greater  than  unitv. 


CHAP.  I.  ADDITIONS.  467 

0 

We  may  also  seek  for  the  integer  number,  which  diall  be 

nearest  the  value  of  h  ;  and  this  number  being  called  /3,  we 

shall  again  have  6-/3  equal  to  a  fraction  less  than  uni^  ; 

1 
and,  oonsequendy/T — ^  will  be  equal  to  a  quantity  greater 

than  unity,  which  we  may  represent  by  c  ;  so  that,  to  amgn 
the  value  of  c,  we  have  only  to  seek,  in  the  same  mammv 
fpr  the  integer  number  nearest  to  e,  which  b^a^  represented 
by  y,  we  shall  have  c  ^y  equal  to  a  quantity  less  .than 

1       . 

unity  ;  and,  consequently,  will  be  equal  to  a  quantity. 


dj  greater  than  unity,  and  so  on.  From  which  it  is  evident» 
that  we  may  gradually  exhaust  the  value  of  a,  and  that  in 
the  amplest  and  readiest  manner;  since  we  only  employ 
integer  numbers,  each  of  which  approximates,  as  nearly  aa 
possible,  to  the  value  sought. 

Now,  since  =  6,  we  have  a  —  «  =  -x-,  and 

a-«         '  h 

a  =  a  +  T"i  likewise,  since  7 — ö=c,  we  have  h^BA ; 

o  O-^p  c 

and,  since =  <L  we  have,  in  the  same  manner, 

c  =  y  +  "j*)  &c.  ;  so  that  by  successively  substituting  these 
values,  we  shall  have 

1     1 

Y  +  d' 
and,  in  general, •         ^=*+'3"j_2.     1 

It  is  proper  to  remark  here,  that  the  numbers  a,  0,  y,  be» 
which  represent,  as  we  have  diewn,  the  approximate  int^er 
values  or  the  quantities  a,  6,  c,  be.  may  oe  taken  each  in 
two  different  ways;  ânee  we  may  witii  equal  propriety 
take,  for  the  approximate  integer  value  of  a  eiven  quantity^ 
either  of  the  two  integer  numbers  between  which  that  quan- 


4flB  ADDITION».  CSAT*  I. 


ÛÈJ  lien  Tlierc  is,  however»  an  rfntbl  difegeoee 
Aeie  two  metbodf  of  takmg  the  appranmale  TaliMa^  «iih 
lopect  to  the  continued  firaction  wnich  leulu  from  U:  ht 
if  we  idways  take  the  approximate  values  k$i  than  the  true 
one%  the  denominators  ^  y»  I,  be.  will  be  all  puMtePS  ; 
whereas  they  will  be  all  negaUve,  if  we  take  all  the  a|^ 
proximate  values  greater  tmui  the  true  ones;  and  thcj 
inU  be  partly  pontiTe  and  pardy  negative^  if  the  appfwoHas 
wJnei  ere  taken  sometimes  too  small»  and  sonetiBMa  loo 


In  fact,  if  a  be  less  than  a,  «  —  s  will  be  a  positive 
tity  ;  wherefore  è  will  be  positive,  and  0  will  be  so  Bkcwist: 
on  the  contrary,  a  — a  wul  be  ncgstiye,  if  a  be  malcr  tim 
a  ;  then  b  will  be  negative,  and  ß  will  be  so  likewise«  h 
the  same  manner,  if  0  be  less  than  b^b  -^  ß  wiD  alwmjs  he 
a  positive  quantity  ;  therefore  c  will  be  poflitivc  also^  and, 
consequently,  also  y  ;  but  if  /3  be  greater  than  b^b-^ß  will 
be  a  negative  quantity  ;  so  that  c,  and  consequentlj  ano  y, 
will  be  negative,  and  so  on« 

Farther,  when  negative  quantities  are  fonridered,  I  on» 
derstand  by  kêê  quantities  those  which,  taken  positivdy, 
would  be  ffreaier.  We  shall  hrive  oooanon,  however,  flone> 
times  to  compare  quantities  simply  in  respect  of  their  ab- 
solute magnitude;  out  I  shall  uien  take  care  to  psfBUss^ 
that  we  must  pay  no  attention  to  the  signs. 

It  must  be  remarked,  also,  that  if,  among  the  quantities 
A,  Cf  (f,  &c.  one  is  found  equal  to  an  integer  numoer,  then 
the  continued  fraction  will  be  terminated  ;  because  we  shall 
be  able  to  preserve  that  quantity  in  it  :  for  example,  if  r 
be  an  integer  number,  the  continued  fraction,  whidi  gives 
the  value  of  a,  will  be 

»  =  •  +  7+1.. 

It  is  evident,  indeed,  that   we   must  take  y  =  r,   which 

gives  J  =  =  I  =  Qc  ;   and,  consequently,  da«; 

c— y 

so  tliat  we  diall  have 

"=-+}+i       1 

the  following  terms  vanishing  in  comparison  with  the  infinite 


CHAP.  I.  AllDITIOHS»  460 

1 

quantity  oo.  Now,  ^  =  0,  wherefore  tire  ahall  only  have 

1        I 

'^       c 

This  case  will  liappen  wheneyer  the  quantity  m  is  com- 
mensurable  ;  that  is  to  say,  expressed  by  a  ratioiial  firaction4 
but  when  a  is  an  irrational^  or  transoendental  quantity^  th^n 
the  continued  fraction  will  neoessarily  go  on  to  infinity. 

4«    Suppose  the  quantity  «  to  be  a  vulgar 


-^-^  A  and  B  being  ^ven  int^er  numbers;  it  is  evident^ 

that  the  integer  number,  a,  approaching  nearest  to  — ,  will 

be  the  quotient  of  the  division  of  a  by  b  ;  so  that  supposing 
the  division  performed  in  the  Usual  manner^  and  calling 
a  the   quotient,    and   c   the   remainder,    we    shall    have 

Ac  B 

—  •>-  «  s  —  ;  whence  b  =  — •    Also,  in  order  to  have 
B  B  c         ^^ 

the  approximate  integer  value  B  of  the  fraction  — ,  we  have 

c 

only  to  divide  b  by  c,  and  take  ß  for  the  quotient  of  this 
divinon;  then  calung  the  remainder  n,    we  shall  have 

DC 

6  —  /3  =  — 3  and  e  =:  — .    We  shall  therefiire  continue 

to  divide  c  by  d,  and  the  quotient  will  be  the  value  of 
the  number  y,  and  so  on;  whence  results  the  following 
very  simple  rule  for  reducing  vu]^;ar  fractions  to  continued 
fractions. 

RuLB.  First,  divide  the  numerator  of  the  given  fraction 
by  its  denominator,  and  call  the  quotient  a  ;  then  divide  the 
denominator  by  the  remainder,  and  call  die  quoUent  /3; 
then  divide  the  first  remwider  by  the  second  remainder, 
and  let  the  quotient  be  y.  Continue  thus,  always  dividing 
the  last  divisor  by  the  last  i^emmnder,  till  you  arrive  at  a 
division  that  is  peru>rmed  without  any  remaind^,  whidi  must 
necessarily  happen  when  the  remainders  are  ail  integer 
numbers  that  continually  diminish;  you  will  thai  have  the 
continued  fraction 


470  ADDITIONS.  CMM»»  I. 

which  will  be  equal  to  the  gtven  fraction. 

5.  Let  it  be  propoeed,  for  example,  to  reduce  y^  to  a 
continued  fraction. 

First,  we  divide  llOS  by  887,  which  gives  the  quotient  1, 
and  the  remainder  216;  887  divided  b;^  S16,  mwm  the 

auolicnt  4i;  and  the  remainder  23  ;  5216  divided  fa^  £S»  cms 
le  quotient  9)  and  the  remainder  9  ;  also  dividii^£«l  hf  9, 
we  cHitain  the  quotient  %  and  the  remainder  6;  then  9  bjr 
5y  gives  the  quotient  1,  and  the  remainder  4;  5  b j  4»  eves 
the  quotient  l,  and  the  remainder  1  ;  lastly,  dividing  4  ojr  1, 
we  obtain  the  quotient  4,  and  no  remainder  ;  so  that  the 
operation  is  finished:  and,  collecting  all  the  qiiolictits  'm 
order,  we  have  this  series  1,  4,  9^  S»  1>  l»  4,  whence  we 
fijrm  the  continued  fraction 

I  101    ..    1      I      • 

TTT    —  *   T^  T4.  I 

^T_L.  i 

T-T  i    I 

Tt  .    I 

i"T  4.1 
»   T* 

6.  As,  in  the  above  division,  we  took  for  the  quotient  the 
intq;er  number  which  was  equal  to,  or  less  than,  the  fmctioo 
proposed,  it  follows  that  we  shall  only  obtain  from  that 
mettiod  continued  fractions,  of  which  all  the  denomhiators 
will  be  positive  numbers. 

But  we  may  also  assume  for  the  quotient  the  integer 
number,  which  is  immediately  greater  Uian  the  value  of  the 
fraction,  when  that  fraction  is  not  reducible  to  an  inte|^T, 
and,  for  this  purpose,  we  have  only  to  increase  the  value  of 
the  quotient  found  by  unity  in  the  usual  manner  ;  then  the 
remamder  will  be  negative,  and  the  next  quotierit  will  ne- 
cessarily  l)e  negative.  So  that  we  mav,  at  pleasure,  make  the 
terms  of  the  continued  fraction  positive,  or  negative. 

In  the  preceiling  example,  msteaii  of  takmg  1  for  the 
quotient  of  11 03  divided  by  887,  we  may  take  2;  in  which 
case  we  have  the  negative  riMnainder  —071,  by  which  wc 
must  now  divide  887;  we  therefore  divide  887  by  — (i71, 
and  obtain  either  the  quotient  —  I,  and  the  n^nainder  iî16i, 
or  the  quotient  —  52,  and  the  n^maindcT  — 455.  Let  us  take 
the  gri'ater  quotient  ^1  :  then  divide  the  remainder  — 1>71 
by  5ilö;  whence  we  obtain  either  the  quotient  —3,  and  the 
remainder  -i£5,  or  the  ciuotient  — 4,  and  the  remainder 
1{)!5.  (Continuing  the  division  by  adopting  tin*  greater 
quotient  —3,  we  have  to  divide  the  reniainner  ^Iti  l>y  the 


CIL4^«  I«  ADDITI01I8.  471 

remàÎBder  -  S8,  which  gives  either  the  quotient  —  9^  and 
the  remainder  9^  or  the  quotient  -^10,  and  the  remainder 
— 14^  and  «o  on.    * 
In  this  way,  we  obtain 

1108  1_      J 

in  which  we  see  that  all  the  denominators  are  negative. 

7.  We  may  also  make  each  niegaûve  denominator  po- 
àtive  by  changing  the  sign  of  the  numerator;,  but  we  must 
then  also  change  the  sign  of  the  succeeding  numerator;  for 
it  is  evident  that 

Then  we  may  also,  if  we  choose,  remove  all  the  signs  ^  in 
the  continued  fraction,  and  reduce  it  to  another,  in  which  all 
the  terms  shall  be  poâtive  ;  for  we  have,  in  general, 

as  we  may  easily  be  convinced  of  by  reducing  those  two 
quantities  to  vulear  fractions  *• 

We  may  also,  oy  àmilar  means,  introduce  negative  terms 
instead  of  positive  ;  for  we  have 

whence  we  see,  that,  by  such  transformations,  we  may  always 
amplify  a  continued  fraction,  and  reduce  it  to  fewer  terms  : 
which  will  take  place,  whenever  there  are  denominators  equal 
to  unity,  positive,  or  nc^tive. 

In  general,  it  is  evi£nt,  that,  in  order  to  have  the  con- 
tinued fraction  approximating  as  nearly  as  possible  to  the 

1  y 

*  Thus,  the  mixed  number,  1  -| 7=  — -;  therefore 

r— 1     y— 1 

and,  consequently, 


4nt  AüDm«Mt.  CHA»«  I. 

Tahie  of  tbe  giveii  quantily,  we  Buü  ahrayt  Uk»  %  A  Tt 

Sbc.  the  integer  numbers  which  are  tieeiett  the 

Of  bj  c,  &c.  whether  they  be  leas,  or  greater  than 

titles.     Now,  it  is  cas^  to  perceive  that  if»  for 

do  not  take  for  a  the  mte^r  number  whidi  is  nearest  to  a» 

other  aboTe  or  below  it,  the  following  number  ß  will 

sarily  be  equal  to  unity  ;  in  fact,  the  difiereiice  bet 

and  a  will  then  be  greater  than  |,  consequently,  we  shaD 

httfeis less  than  8;  therefore  ß  asuai  be  equal  to 

uni^. 

So  that  whenever  we  find  the  denominators  in  •  c 
tinued  fraction  equal  to  unity,  this  will  be  a  proof  that 
have  not  token  the  preceding  denominators  as  near 
migfit  have  done;  and,  consequently»  that  the 
may  be  amplified  by  increaâng,  or  cuminishing  those  de» 
nominators  py  unity»  which  may  be  done  by  the  pcecediiui 
formulae,  without  the  necessity  of  going  through  the  whole 
calculation. 

8.  The  method  in  Art.  4  may  also  aerve  for  reducing 
every  irrational,  or  transcendental  Quantity  to  a  continued 
fraction,  provided  it  be  expressed  betöre  in  decimals  ;  but  ms 
the  value  in  dedmals  can  only  be  approximate,  by  aug- 
menting the  last  figure  by  umtv,  we  procure  two  Goûts» 
between  which  the  true  value  or  the  given  quantity  must 
lie  ;  and,  in  order  that  wc  may  not  pass  those  Emits,  we 
must  perform  the  same  calculation  with  both  the  fractions 
in  question,  and  tlien  admit  into  the  continued  fraction 
those  quotients  only  which  shall  equally  result  from  both 
operations. 

Let  it  be  proposed,  for  example,  to  express  by  a  omK 
tinued  fraction  the  ratio  of*  the  circumference  of  the  circle  to 
the  diameter. 

This  ratio  expressed  in  decimals  is,  by  the  calculation  of 
Vieta«  as  3,141 59i^()595  is  to  1  ;  so  tluit  we  have  to  reduce 

.     ^      .      3.  l4159S6.5îi5  •       ,  r      •       i       . 

the  fracUon  "lfti)önöoöOÖO        **  œnUiuicd  fraction  by  tlic 

method  above  explained.     Now,  if  wc  take  only  the  fnu-tiuii 

3  14159 

'  lOCMMMI*  ^^  ''"^  ^'**'*  M"^^*^*"^  3»  î>  15,   I,  &c.  oikI  il*  uc 

.      ,  .  3,141«)  .    ,    , 

take  the  greater  fraction  "î-miAui)»  ^'^*  hnd  tlie  (juoticnts  ;l, 

7,  IG,  kc.  »o  that  the  third  quotient   rtiiiains  doubtful; 


COAf.  U  ABDltMMMC  47S 

whence  we  see,  that^  in  order  to  extend  the  continued  frac- 
tion only  beyond  three  terms,  we  must  adc^  a  value  of  the 
circumference,  which  has  more  than  six  Beures. 

If  we  take  the  value  given  by  Ludmph  to  thirty-five 
decimal  places,  which  is  8,14159,  ^ßBSS,  89793,  23846, 
26433,  83279, 50288  ;  and  if  we  work  on  with  this  fraction^ 
as  it  is,  and  also  with  its  last  figure  8  increased  by  unity,  we 
shall  find  the  following  series  of  quotients,  3,  7,  15, 1,  292; 
1,  1,  1,  2,  1,  8, 1, 14,  2, 1, 1,  2,  è,  2,  2, 1,  84,  2, 1, 1, 16, 
3^  18,  1,  4^2,  6;  6, 1  ;  so  that  we  shall  have 


Circumference  ^ 
Diameter       "*  ^+tt 


+4 


^^+4  +  ,&C. 


And  as  there  are  here  denominators  equal  to  unity,  wc  may 
simplify  the  fraction,  by  introducing  negative  terms,  ac- 
coruing  to  the  formulas  of  Art  7,  and  shaU  find 

Circum/èrence 


Diameter 


^-j.+,&c. 


Circumference        «        1       i 
^ =8  +  T^l     _1 

-294-1-^^ 


Diameter  7  +7^  ^      ^  1 


-3+,&c 


9.  We  have  elsewhere  shewn  how  the  theory  of  continued 
fVactions  may  be  applied  to  the  numerical  resolution  of 
equations,  for  which  other  methods  are  imperfect  and  in- 
sufficient *.  The  whole  diiliculty  consists  in  finding  in  any 
cqtration  the  nearest  intecer  value,  either  above,  or  bdcnr 
the  root  sought  ;  and  for  mis  I  first  gave  some  general  rules, 
by  which  we  may  not  only  percdve  how  many  real  roots, 
poâtive  or  n^trve,  equal  or  unequal,  the  proposed  equation 
contains,  but  also  easily  find  the  hmits  of  each  of  those  roott^ 
and  even  the  limits  of  the  real  ouantities  which  compose  the 
imaginary  roots.  Suppoông,  tnerefore,  that  x  is  the  uii» 
known  quantity  of  the  equation  proposed,  we  seek  first  fbr 
the  integer  number  which  is  nearest  to  the  root  sought,  and 
calling  Uiat  number  a,  we  have  only,  as  in  Art.  3,  to  make 

*  See  the  Memoirs  of  the  Academy  of  Berlin,  for  the  years 
1767  and  1768;  and  Le  Gendrc's  Essai  sur  la  Theorie  des 
Nombres,  page  138,  first  edition. 


474  Al>J>ITIOII8.  CSAV.  L 

J?  =  a  +  —  ;  XfjffZf  &G.  representiiig  hoe  what  was  dt^ 

noted  in  that  article  by  a,  6,  c,  &c.  and  subttitatii^  dû 
▼alue  instead  of  or,  we  shall  have,  after  remoring  the  fiac- 
tions,  an  equation  of  the  same  degree  in  jr,  which  must  bive 
at  least  one  poative,  or  negative  root  greater  than  unitj. 
After  seeking  therefore  for  the  approximate  inte«r  vahir 
of  the  root,  and  calling  that  value  ß,  we  shall  then  oMke 

y  ss  ß  •{ y  which  will  give  an  equation  in  s,  having  lika- 

wise  a  root  greater  than  unity,  whose  approximate  integer 
value  we  must  next  seek,  and  so  on.  in  this  manner,  the 
root  required  will  be  found  expressed  by  the  continued 
fraction 

^^  è+,  &c. 
which  will  be  terminated,  if  the  root  is  commensurable; 
but  will  necessarily  go  on  oJ  tn/fniium,  if  it  be  îneam- 
mensurable. 

In  the  Memdrs  just  referred  to,  there  will  be  found  all 
the  principles  and  details  necessary  to  render  this  method 
and  Its  application  easy,  and  even  miferent  means  of  abridge 
ing  many  of  the  operations  which  it  requires.  I  bdierc 
that  I  have  scarcely  left  any  thine  farther  to  be  said  on  this 
important  subject  With  reffarcTto  the  roots  of  equations 
of  the  second  degree,  we  shall  afterwards  give  (Art.  S3  ct 
scq.)  a  {»articular  and  very  simple  method  of  changing  them 
into  continued  fractions. 

10.  After  having  thus  explained  the  genesis  of  continued 
fractions,  we  shall  proceed  to  shew  tlieir  application,  and 
their  princiual  pniperties. 

It  IS  evident,  that  the  more  terms  we  take  in  a  continued 
fraction,  the  nearer  we  approximate  to  the  true  value  of  the 

auantJty  which  we  have  expressed  by  that  fraction  ;  so  that 
*  we  successively  stop  at  each  term  of  the  fraction,  vc 
shall  Imve  a  series  of  quantities  converging  towards  the  given 
quantity. 

Thus,  having  reduced  the  value  of  a  to  the  continued 
fraction, 

1       1 

wc  »hall  have  the  (|uantitic». 


CHAF.  I.  ADDITIONS.  iflS 


or,  by  reduction^ 


oß  +  l     aßY-{.(i'{-Y  .     ^ 


^     e    '       ßY+l 
which  approach  nearer  and  nearer  to  the  value  of  a. 

In  order  to  judge  better  of  the  law,  and  of  the  con- 
vergence of  these  quantities,  it  must  be  remarked,  that,  by 
the  formulae  of  Art  S,  we  have 

a  =  a  +  y,  Ä  =  j3  +  — ,  c  =  y  +  -J,  &c. 

Whence  we  immediately  perceive,  that  a  is  the  first  ap- 
proximate value  of  a  ;  that  then^  if  we  take  the  exact  value 

of  a,  which  is  — r— ,  and,  in  this,  substitute  for  h  its  ap- 
proximate value  j3,  we  shall  have  this  more  approximate 

00+1 

value  — T —  ;  that  we  shaU,  in  the  same  manner,  have  a 

third  more  approximate  value  of  a,  by  substituting  for  b  its 

exact  value ,  which  gives  a  ==  — ^ — = ,  and  then 

takiqg  for  c  the  approximate  value  y  ;  by  these  means 
the  new  approximate  value  of  a  will  be 

Continuing  the  same  reasoning,  we  may  approximate  nearer» 
by  substituting»  in  the  above  expression  of  a,  instead  of  c, 

its  exact  value,  21— — ^  which  will  give 

((ft/3-fl>/-f«W+ft/3-H 

and  then  taking  for  d  its  approximate  value  },  we  shall  have» 
for  the  fourth  approximation,  the  quantity 

'  — ^vt> .  ^ f  *UMl  SO  on* 

Hence  it  is  easy  to  perceive,  that,  if  by  means  of  the 
numbers  a,  j3,  y,  },  &c.  we  form  the  following  expresûoos, 

*  See  note,  p.  471. 


A  ST  «  a'  =  1 

csyB  +  A  c'=yi'  +  A' 

D=^C   +   B  Uf  =:  id  -^  tf 

we  diall  have  this  series  of  fradioiis  oonyerging  towaids  the 
A     B     €     D     B     r     . 

If  the  quantity  a  be  rational,  and  represented  bj  any 

V 

fraction  «-j»  it  is  evident  that  this  fraction  will  always  be  the 

last  in  the  preceding  series;  since  then  the  continued  fiwc- 
tk»  will  be  tennin^ed,  and  the  last  fraction  of  the  ahove 
aeries  must  always  be  equal  to  the  whole  continued  fraction. 

Bat  if  the  quantity  a  oe  irrational,  or  transcendental»  then 
the  continued  fraction  necessarily  going  on  ad  infinitum^  we 

if  also  continue  ad  infinitum  the  series  of  converging 


II.  Let  us  now  examine  the  nature  of  these  fractions. 
1st,  It  is  evident  that  the  numbers  a,  b,  c,  &€.  must  omi- 
tinually  increase,  as  well  as  the  numbers  a',  b',  c',  &c.  for 
Ut,  if  the  numbers  a,  /3,  y,  8ic.  are  all  poutive,  the  numbers 
A,  B,  c,  &c.  a',  b',  df  &c.  will  also  be  positive,  and  we  shall 
evidently  hâve  b  7  a,  c  7  b,  d  7  c,  &c«  and  b'  =,  or  7  a', 
c*  7  b',  d'  7  c',  &c^ 

2diy,  If  the  numbers  a,  f3,  7,  See.  are  all,  or  partly  ne- 

Sitive,  then  amongst  the  numbers  a,  b,  c,  &c.  and,  a',  b',  c', 
ere  will  be  some  positive,  and  some  negative  ;  but  in  that 
case  we  mu&t  consider  that  we  have,  by  the  preceding 
formula*, 

-=e  +  -,     -=y-h— ,     .-  =  »+  8CC. 

A  a        B  '  B         C  C 

whence  we  immediately  see,  that,  if  the  numbers  a,  ß^  7,  &c. 
are  different  from  unity,  whatever  tlieir  signs  be,  we  shall 

necessarily  have,  neglecting  the  ûgns,  —  7  1  ;    and   tbere^ 
fore  —  ^  1  ;  consctjucntly,  —  7  1,  and  so  on  :  therefore 

B7A,  C7B,  &c. 

There  is  no  exception  to  this  but  when  some  of  the  num- 
bers a,  /3,  y,  &c.  an*  ujual  to  unity.  Sup|)os4',  for  oxaniplo« 
that  the  number  y  is  the  first  which  is  e€|ual  to    1  1  ;  wc 


CHAT.  I»  AAMIMNi.  ITT 

fibaU  then  hare  b  7  a,  but^c  i£  b,  if  it  happens  that  the  fno- 
tion  —  has  a  different  sim  from  y  ;  which  is  evident  fiom 

B 

the  equation  —  =  y  H ;  because,  in  that  case,  y  H 

jB  JB  B 

will  be  a  number  less  than  unity.  Now,  IsinTi  in  this  case»  w« 
must  bare  d  7  b  ;  for  since  y=  ±1^  we  shall  have  (Art.  10),. 

c  =  +  1  +  -T>  and  c  — r  =s  ±  1  ;   but  as  c  and  d  are 
""  a  a 

Quantities  greater  than  unity  (Art.  S),  it  is  evident,  that 
tnis  equation  cannot  snbmst,  umess  c  and  à  have  the  same 
si^s  ;  therefore,  since  y  and  I  are  the  approximate  integer 
vuues  of  c  and  d^  tàese  numbers  y  and  I  must  also  have  the 

C  A 

same  sign.  Farther,  the  fraction  — =  7  +  —  niust  have 
the  same  sign  as  y,  because  y  is  an  integer  number,  wbA 

A  C 

—  a  fraction  less  than  unity  ;  therefore  -^,  and  I*,  wffl  W 

b  b 

te 
quantities  of  the  same  ngn  ;  consequently^  -*-  will  be  a  po* 

D  B 

àtive  quantity.    Now,  we  have  —  «  i^ — ;andhenoe^ 

C  D  te 

mulüplying  by  — ,  we  shall  have  —  n  —  +  1 5    «>  that 

B  B  B 

te  D 

—  bemg  a  positive  quantity,  it  is  evident  that  —    will   be 

greater  than  unity  ;  and  therefore  d  7  b. 

Hence  we  see,  that,  if  in  the  series  a,  b,  c,  be.  Aere  be 
one  term  less  than  the  preceding  the  foUowinff  will  ne- 
cessarily be  ereater  ;  so  tnat  puttmg  aside  those  less  terms^ 
the  series  wm  always  go  on  increasing» 

Besides,  if  we  choose,  we  xeosj  always  aivoid  tUs  ineoo- 
venience»  either  by  taking  the  numbers  Of  /^  7,  &c*  positive^ 
or  by  taldng  them  different  from  umt^,  which  may  alw^w^ 
be  done. 

The  same  reasonings  apply  to  the  series  a',  b^,  c/»  &c.  vOk 
which  we  have  likewise 

whence  we  may  form  condunons  râmUur  to  the  prece£ngr 


478  ADDITIONS.  en  AP.  L 


12.  If  we  now  multiply  cross-ways  the  terms  of  the 
aecutiTe  fractions,  in  the  series  -^^    --^,   --j,  &G.  we  shall 

find  ba'  —  ab'  =  1,  Ob'  —  bc'  =  ab'  —  ba', 

Dd  —  cd'  =  Bd  —  Ob',  fcc 
whence  we  conclude,  in  general,  that 

ba'  -  ab'  =  1 
OB'  —  Bd  =  —  1 
Dd  — cd'^  1 
ed'— de'=  — 1,  &c. 

This  property  is  very  remarkable,  and  leads  to  aercral 
important  consequences. 

ABC 

First,  we  see  that  the  fractions  •-^,  --^,  -7,  Sec  mmt  be 

already  in  their  lowest  terms  ;  for  if,  for  exam|Je,  c  and  c' 
had  any  common  divisor,  the  integer  numbers  cb'  --  Md 
would  also  be  divisible  by  that  same  divisor,  which  oannoC 
be,  since  cb*  —  sd  =  —  1. 

Next,  if  we  put  the  preceding  equations  into  this  fcxn, 

B         A  _    1 

7"  V" Tv 

C         B  _  1 

^"7       cV 

d       c        1 

e'      d'  "       d'e^  ^' 
it  is  easy  to  perceive,  that  the  differences  between  the  ad- 

ABC 

jdning  fractions  of  the  series  — , ,  — ^ ,   —,    arc  continually 

A  B  C 

diminishing,  so  that  this  is  necessarily  converging. 

Now,  I  say«  tliat  the  difference  between  two  consecutive 
fractions  is  as  small  as  it  is  possible  for  it  to  be  ;  so  that 
there  can  be  no  other  fraction  whatever  between  those  two 
fractions  unli*ss  it  have  a  denominator  greater  than  the  de- 
nominators of  them. 

c  d 

Let  us  take,  for  example,  the  two  fractions  --7,  and   ^  the 

difference  of  which  is  -j-jf  and  let  us  sup{x)6c,  if  |K»aiblc, 


CHAF.  I.  ADDITIOICB.  479 


AM. 

that  there  is  another  fraction,— •  whose  value  falls  between 

n 

the  values  of  those  two  fractions,  and  whose  denominator  n 

is  less  than  d,  or  less  than  ly.    Now,  ânoe  —  is  between 

n 

-7-,and  -:,  the  difference  of  — ,  and  -r,  which  is -7-  ,or 

; — ,  roust  be  less  than  -7-7,  the  difference  between  — r 

c  ,   .       , 

and  -r  ;  but  it  is  evident  that  the  former  cannot  be  less  than 
c' 

1 
— j%  and  therefore  if  n  Z  i/,  it  will  necessarily  be  greater  than 

-7-7 .  Also,  as  the  difference  between  -  .and  —,  cannot  be  less 
CD'  n         jy 

1     .      .  1 

than  — |,  it  will  necessarily  be  greater  than  -jr7>   if  n  Z.  c', 

whereas  it  must  be  less. 

13.  Let  us  now  see  how  each  fraction  of  the  series 

—Jy   — p,  &c.  will  approximate  towards  the  value  of  the 

Quantity  a.     For  this  purpose,  it  may  be  observed  that  the 
formulae  of  Article  10  give 

__  AÄ  + 1  _  crf-f^ 

BC  +  a  D^+C 


b'c-|-a'  d'^4"^ 

and  so  on. 

c 
Hence,  if  we  would  know  how  nearly  the  fraction  -^^  finr 

example,  approaches  to  the  given  quantity,  we  seek  for  the 

c 
difference  between  ~j  and  a;  taking  for  a  the  quanti^ 

-7-= — :,  we  shall  have 

c^^ci-fB     c_   Bd^ctf    _         1 
^  "  ?""  c^Tb''"  ?"'  c^cW  +  bO"  c'(c'd  -f  B^' 
because  bc'  —  cb'  =  1,  (Art.  12).  Now,  as  we  suppose  I  the 


^»proxiinate  value  of  d,  so  tkat  the  differeoee  bctwcai  4 
and  B  is  leas  than  unity  (Art  8),  it  b  evident  diat  die  Taloe 
of  d  will  lie  between  the  two  numbere  i  and  '  ±  1;  (tk< 
upper  ngn  being  for  the  case,  in  which  the  apptosomate 
value  ^  is  less  than  the  true  one  d,  and  the  lower  aign  Ibr  the 
case,  in  which  i  is  greater  than  d),  and,  conscquentlj,  that 
the  yalne  cf  dd+  w^  will  also  be  contained  bet^ 
two,  d}  +  a',  and  d{i  ±  1)  +  a',  that  is  to  saj,  batt 

1  1 

between  these  two  limits  -j-r,     .   ,  ^^  ;  whence  wcnvf 

c 
judge  of  the  degree  of  approximation  of  the  (ractoon  -p. 

14.  In  general,  we  shall  have, 

A   ,     1 


B»         b'(b'c+a') 

_  c  1 

""""    C'"'"c'(c'd+B') 

'^  ^  A 

«  =  .j  -  ittt; — :5\»  *""  ^  o"- 
d'     D'(D'f+cy) 

Now,  if  wc  suppose  that  the  approximate  values,  c,  ß,  y^ 
&c.  arc  always  taken  less  than  the  real  values,  these  numbers 
will  all  bepo&itive,  as  well  as  the  quantities  6,  r,  </«  8cc.  { Art.!.) 
and,  con8C(]uently,  the  numbers  a',  b',  c',  &c.  will  be  likewise 
all  positive  ;  whence  it  follows,  that  the  dificfencca  between 

ABC 

the  quantity  a,  and  the  fractions  —7,   --p,    --j,  81c  will  be 

idtcmatelv  positive  and  negative  ;  that  is  to  say,  those  finac^ 
tions  will  "be  alternately  less  and  greater  than  tHe  quantity  o. 
Farther,  as  A  7  /?,  r  7  r,  d  7  ^  &e.  by  hypoiÂinêf  we 
have  6  7  B*,  (b'c  +  a')  7  (bV  +  aO,  and  also  7  c**, 
(c'd  +  B^  7  (c*^  +  B^,  and  therefore  7  n',  &c.  and  as 
6  Z.  (/5  +  I ),  f  z  (y  +  1  ).  d  z  (^  +  1),  we  have  6  z  (a»  +  IX 

♦  For  since  c  7  yt  therefore  Wc  7  n'y;  and,  consequeatlv, 
(sc  +  a')  7  (a'y  +  a')  which  is  V  i\  because  n'y  +  a'  =  1', 
pajge  47c.  Ana  it  is  exactly  the  Muiie  with  tJic  (>ther  quan- 
tities.    D. 


CHAP.  I.  ADDITIONS.  461 

(b'c  +  a)  Z  (B'(y  +  1)  +  a')  l  (d  -f  b'),  also 

(dd  +  b')  z  {d{i  +  1)  -h  b')  z  (D*  +  c*),  &c   so   that  the 

ABC 

errors  in  taking  the  fractions  -7,  —7,  -j,  &c.  for  the  value 

111 

of  a,  would  be  respectively  less  than  —jn,  -7-7»  -r7>8cC'but 

greater  tha^^;^^^,  ^^^^,  _L_,&c.^hich8hew 

how  small  those  errors  are,  and  how  they  go  on  diminishing 
from  one  fraction  to  another. 

ABC 

But  farther,  rince  the  fractions  — j,  —jr-*  —r»  8lc«  are  al- 

A         B         C 

temately  less  and  greater  than  the  Quantity  a,  it  is  evident^ 
that  the  value  of  that  quantity  will  always  be  found  between 
any  two  consecutive  fractions.  Now,  we  have  already  seen 
(Art.  12),  that  it  is  impossible  to  find,  between  two  suoh 
fractions,  any  other  fraction  whatever,  which  has  a  denomi- 
nator less  than  one  of  the  denominators  of  those  two  frac- 
tions ;  whence  wc  may  conclude,  that  each  of  the  fractions 
in  question,  express  the  quantity  a  more  exactly  than  any 
other  fraction  can,  whose  denominator  is  less  than  that  of  the 

c 
succeeding  fraction  ;  that  is  to  say,  the  fraction  -y,  for  ex- 
ample, will  express  the  value  of  a  more  exactly  than  any 

ffi 

other  fraction  — *,  in  which  n  would  be  less  than  d'. 

n 

15.  If  the  approximate  values  a,  /3,  y,  &c.  are  all,  or 
partly,  greater  than  the  real  values,  then  some  of  those  num-, 
Ders  wiU  necessarily  be  negative  (Art.  8),  which  will  also 
render  negative  some  terms  of  the  series  a,  b»  c,  &c.  a',  b',  c', 
&c.   consequently,  the   differences   between   the  fractions 

ABC 

-J,    -J-,  -y.  Sec,  and  the  quantity  a,  will  no  longer  be  aU 

tcrnately  posiüve  and  negative,  as  in  the  case  of  the  pre- 
ceding articles  :  so  that  those  fractions  will  no  longer  nave 
the  advantage  of  giving  the  limits  in  pliùs  and  minus  of  the 
quantity  a  ;  an  advantage  which  appears  to  me  of  very  great 
importance,  and  which  must  therefore  in  practice  make  us 
always  prefer  those  continued  fractions,  in  which  the  de- 
nommators  arc  all  poritive.  Hence,  in  what  follows,  we 
shall  only  attempt  an  investigation  of  fractions  of  this  kind. 

1 1 


488  ADDITIOMS.  CUMW.  U 


16.  Let  us,  thcrefare,  connder  the  aeries  — ^   -jp  ->  t. 

&c.  in  which  the  fractions  are  alternately  less  and  greater 
than  the  quantity  a,  and  which  it  is  evident,  we  may  diTide 
into  these  two  series  : 

B         D         F 
T*   V*   7' 

of  which  the  firbt  wiU  be  composed  of  fractions  all  leia  thoa 
Oy  and  which  go  on  increasing  towards  the  quantity  a  ;  the 
second  will  be  composed  of  fractions  all  greater  than  a,  but 
which  go  on  diminisliing  towards  that  same  quantity.  Let 
us  thereibrc  examine  eacli  of  thoiie  two  series  sefntatriy  ;  ia 
the  ürst  we  have  (Art.  10,  and  12), 

V.  A  Y 

K  C  • 

«■■  —    ^z  -  -■        ^1* 

and  in  the  second  we  have, 

B  D  ^ 

V"""i7^  bV 

I)  F  Ç 

1)  F  i/k 

Now,  if  the  nunilK-rs  y,  ^,  t,  &c,  wcrc^nll  c*<jiinl  to  unitv,  wr 
might  prove,  as  in  Art.  152,  llmt  Ik^iwcvii  any  twocousi^cutive 
fractions  of  cilher  <»f  the  pre«.-!»!!!!!^  siTirs,  then*  c^niKl  never  be 
found  any  other  frac*tioii,  \ih<)se  denominator  would  be  Icaa 
than  the  (k  nominators  of  those  tmo  traction^;  hut  it  will  doI 
be  the  same,  ^hen  the  nuiiil)ers  y,  J,  r,  ficc.  are  greater  than 
unity  ;  tt>r,  in  that  ca>e,  we  may  insert  iKtutvn  the  fractions 
in  question  as  luany  inienneiiiate  iVactions  a»  there  are  units 
in  the  numlx'rs  y  —  1,  J  -  1,  t  -  1,  &:e.  and  tor  this  pnv- 
pose  we   hliali  only  ha\e  ti»  ^ub^titute,  Mieiv^^ively,  in  the 

values  of  c  and  r,  (An.  10),  the  numlKTs  1,^,3, y,  in» 

stead  of  y  ;  and,  in  the  valui*s  of  n  and  u',  the  Dumber» 
1,  12,  3, i,  inülead  of  o,  and  !>o  on. 

17.  Snpix>si*,  for  example,  tlwt  y  =  4,  we  have  c  .=^4a-^A 
and  c'  :=  4b'  -f-  a\  and  wc  uiay  insert  iK'twcen  the 

A  C 

*  ,  and     ,,  three  intermediate  fractions,  nhich  will  lie 


V  HAT.  i.  ADDlTICIKt*  468 

B+A        gjl-f  A         8B-f  A 

b'+a"   2b'+a"   3b'+a'' 

Now,  it  is  evident^  that  the  denominators  of  these  fraction* 
form  an  increasing  arithmetical  series  fron  a'  to  c'  ;  and  we 
sliall  see  that  the  fractions  themselves  also  increase  con- 

A  C 

tinually  from  —  to  -y  ;  so  that  it  Would  now  be  impossible 

to  insert  in  tlie  series 

A      ^"^^      8b -Ha       8b  -f  A      4b  ^- A  c 

T"  ¥TI"  ^b'W  aS^TT"  4b' + a''  ^'  7' 

any  fraction,  whose  vahre  would  fall  between  the  values  of 
two  consecutive  fractious,  and  whose  denominator  also  would 
be  found  between  the  denominators  of  the  same  fractions. 
For,  if  we  take  the  difference»  of  the  above  fractions,  since 
ba'  —  ab'  =  1,  we  have, 

B-f  A  A  1 


*       H 


b'+a'  a'  a'(b'  +  a') 

2B-hA  b-Ha  1 


2b' +a'  B'-f  a'  ""  (b'  +  a')x  (2b'  +  a') 

Sb  +  a        Sb+a  I 


8b'  + a'       2b'+a'  ""  (2b' -Fa')  x  (Sb'+a') 

c'     '*'  3b'+a'""(3b'+a'>c'' 
whence  we  immediately  perceive,  that  the  firactâoàs 

— ;.  -7 r.  ficc.  conUnually  increase,  since  thâr  difiértuoes 

a'^  b'+a'*  ^ 

are  all  positive  ;  then,  as  thotfe  differences  are  equal  to  unity,  if 
dividea  by  the  product  of  the  two  denominators,  we  may 
prove,  by  a  reasoning  analogous  to  that  which  we  employed 

(Art.  12),  that  it  is  impossible  for  any  fraction,  —,  to  fall  be- 

I 

tween  two  consecutive  fractions  of  the  preceding  àeriéâ,  ii 
the  denominator  n  fall  between  the  denominators  of  thoa» 
fractions  ;  or,  in  general,  if  it  be  less  than  the  greater  of  the 
two  denominators. 

Farther,  as  the  fractions  of  which  we  cipeftk  are  all  greaMr 

than  the  real  value  of  a,  and  the  fractimi  y  is  kft  than  it,'il 

is  evident  that  each  of  those  fractions  will  appnuKnatHtto  In- 
wards the  value  of  the  quantity  a,  so  that  the  difference 

1  1  2 


484  ADDITIONS.  •  CUAF.  1. 

will  be  lem  than  that  of  the  same  fractioii  and  the  fmctiao 
—7;  now,  we  find 


A 

"7" 

B  +  A 

B             1 

B»  "aV 
B                     I 

8»  + a' 

Sb+a 

b'  ~   (b'  +  aV 

B                   1 

88»+ a' 
8b + A 

B»  ~  (2b'+a')b' 

B                     1 

8b'  +  a'       b' ^(Sb'  +  aV 

C  B  1 

Therefore,  nnce  these  diiTerenees  are  also  equal  to  unrtj 
divided  by  the  product  of  the  denominators,  we  ma^  ^pplj 
to  them  tnc  reasoning  of  Article  1ft,  to  prove  that  no  mctioo» 

— I  can  fall  between  any  one  of  the  fractions 

— r*  -7-: — 7*  rn — n  ^c.  and  the  fraction  —r.  if  the  denomi* 

nator  n  be  less  than  that  of  the  same  fraction  ;  whence  it 
follows,  thot  each  of  those  fractions  approximates  towards 
the  quont'itv  a  nearer  tlmn  any  other  fraction  li'ss  than  <7,  and 
having  a  less  denominator;  that  is  to  say,  expressed  in 
simpler  terms« 

18.  In  the  preceding  Article,  we  have  only  conhidered  the 

AC 

intermediate  fractions  between   --,and-7  ;  but  the  same  will 

r 

be  found  true  of  the  intermediate  fractions  between  -, ,  and 

c 

-  „  between  -:  and  —,  &c,  if  t ,  ij,  &c.  are  number»  irrcater 

than  unity. 

We  may  also  apply  what  we  have  just  said  w  iih  respect  to 

the  first  series     .,  -. ,  &c.  to  the  Dther  scries  -^   —,   -j ,  Sec. 

so  that  if  the  numlieri  ^  X^  are  greater  than  unity,  we  may 

1  1     ^.      •         B        ,  I)       n        -    F 

msert  lK*tween  the  Iraction»  —  and    7,     -r  and   -  :,âcc.  dit- 


CH^P.  I.  ADDITIONS.  485 

ferent  intermediate  fractions,  all  greater  than  a,  but  which 
Trill  continually  diminish,  and  will  be  such  as  to  express  the 
Quantity  a  more  exactly  than  could  be  done  by  any  other 
fraction  greater  than  a,  and  expressed  in  ampler  terms. 
Farther,  ifß  is  also  a  number  greater  than  unity,  we  may 

likewise  place  before  the  fractions  —,  the  fractions 

-q— ,    — a— ,    — Ô—  ,  8cc.  as  far  as  — r— ,  that  is  -,    and 

1X0  p  B 

these  fractions  will  have  the  same  properties  as  the  other  in- 
termediate fracüons. 

In  this  manner,  we  have  these  two  complete  series  of 
fractions  converging  towards  the  quantity  a. 

Fractions  increasing  and  less  than  a.  - 

A         B+A         2b -i- A  8b  +  A  yB+A 

1"  VTïJ'  2î?TT''   Sb'+a"  ^^*  7?n" 

C         D  +  C         2d4-C  3d  +  C  ÉD-hC 

V^    ^njl^»    2d^+c"  8d'  -h  d'         WTd' 

JL       ^•^^^         ^F-f  E        8f+K 

H'  FT?'  äFTk"  Sf'-hk" 

Fractioms  decreasing  and  greater  than  a. 

A  +  1    «a -hi     Sa-I-I  /3a+1 

1    '       2    '        8      '     ^'      /3    ' 

B         C  4-  B        2C  +  B  ^C  +  B 

D  E-t-D       gK  -hD        8K-hD 

"^'    KNrS''   Äe'-Hd'^   8ä'+d" 

If  the  quantity  a  be  irrational,  or  transcendental,  the  two 
preceding  series  will  go  on  to  infinity,  since  the  series  of 

fractions  — ,,   -r,    -,,   &c   which   in  future  we  shall  call 

a'    b'      c' 

principal  fractions,  to  distinguish  them  from  the  intermediate 
fractions,  goes  on  of  itself  to  infinity.     (Art  10.) 

But  if  the  quantity  a  be  rational,  and  equal  to  any  fraction, 

v 

— ;,  we  have  seen  in  that  article,  that  the  series  in  question 
v* 

will  terminate,  and  that  the  last  fraction  ofthat  series  will  be 


486  ADDITIONS.  CHAr.  L 

V 

the  fnction  --p  itidf  ;  therefore»  thu  fraction  must  «lao  tv- 

niinate  one  of  the  above  two  scries,  but  the  other  aeries  viD 
go  on  to  infinity. 

In  fact,  suppose  that  ^  b  the  last  denominator  of  the 

continued  fraction  ;  then  --r  will  be  the  last  of  the  principal 

fractions,  and  the  scries  of  fractions  greater  than  a  will  be 

tenmnatcd  by  this  same  fraction  --j.  Now,  the  other  aeries 

of  fractions  less  than  a,  will  naturally  stop  at  the  fraction 

C  .  D 

--jy  which  precedes '--r  ;  but  to  continue  it,  we  have  only 

to  consider  that  the  denominator  s,  whidi  must  follow  the 
last  denominator  >,  will  be  =  oo  (Art.  3);   so  that  the 

fraction  —7,  which  would  follow  -^  in  the  setiea  of  principal 

00  D  ^^  C  D 

fractions,  would  be r-— r  =  —  •  ;  now,  by  the  law  of  m- 

ood'-|-c'        d'  '' 

termêdiak  fractions,  it  is  erident  that,  since  •  ss  œ ,  we 

r  E 

might  insert  between  the  fractions  --j  and  ~t,    an    infinite 

number  of  intrrmcdiaU  fraciions,  which  would  be 

D-f  <•      2i)+c      3i)4 1? 

c 
S<i  that  ill  this  case,  after  tlie  iVaction  -j,in  the  first  scries  of 

fractions  we  muy  also  place  the  intcrmedtati  fractions  vc 
•peak  of,  and  continue  tlicm  to  infinity. 

19.  Prvblvm.  A  fraction  exiiressi-d  by  a  ((n^at  number 
of  fijjures  being  given,  to  find  all  the  fractums,  in  lew  terms 
which  apiMTuach  ao  near  tlic  trutli,  that  it  is  imiKNublc  to 
ap|iroaen  nearer  without  employing  graiter  ones. 

^  liecausc  an  infinite  quantity  cannot  he  incri*a«ed  by  ad- 
dition ;  and  therefore  x  n  -f  r  rr  z  n,  und  x  d'  -f  c  s  z  i>  ; 
con»e(|uently, 

XI)  +  c__  ^'*  _  ji. 


XU'-fC         30D         d' 


9 

l'his  problem  will  be  oasily  resolved  by  the.tlicory  which 
we  liave  explained« 

We  shall  begin  by  reducing  the  fraction  proposed  fo  a 
continued  fraction  after  the  method  of  Art.  4,  omerving  to 
take  all  the  approximate  values  less  than  the  real  ones,  ki 
order  that  the  numbers  fiy  y,  l^  &c  may  be  all  positive  ; 
then,  by  the  assistance  of  the  numbers  found,  «,  /9,  y^  && 

we  form,  according  to  the  formulce  of  Art  10,  die  fractions 

» 

-7-,    •  r»   "T^j  &C'  the  last  of  which  will  noceasarilv  be  the 

a'       b       c  ^ 

same  as  the  fraction  proposed  ;  because  in  that  case  the  oon«- 
tinued  fracUon  terminates.  Those  fractions  will  alternately 
be  less  and  greater  than  tlie  given  fraction,  and  will  be  suc- 
cessively expressed  in  greater  terms  ;  and  farther,  they  will  be 
such,  that  each  of  those  fractions  will  be  nearer  the  given 
fraction  than  any  other  fraction  can  l)e,  which  is  expressed 
in  terms  less  simple.  So  that  by  these  means  we  shall 
have  all  the  fractions,  that  will  satisfy  the  conditions  of 
the  problem^  expressed  in  lower  terms  than  tlie  fraction 
proposed. 

If  wc  wish  to  consider  separately  the  fractions  which  arc 
less,  and  those  which  are  greater,  than  the  given  fraction,  we 
may  insert  between  the  above  fractions  as  many  irUerniediaie 
fractions  as  we  can,  and  form  from  them  two  series  of  con- 
verging fractions,  the  one  all  less,  and  the  other  all  greater 
than  the  fraction  proposed  (Art.  16,  17,  and  18)  ;  each  of 
which  series  will  have  separately  the  same  properties,  as  the 

ABC 

series  of  principal  fractions  -7-,    -;,  -~,  &c.  for  the  frac- 

A  A  O 

tions  in  each  scries  will  be  successively  expressed  in  greater 
terms,  and  each  of  them  will  approximate  nearer  to  the 
value  of  the  fraction  proposed  than  could  be  done  by  any 
other  fraction  whether  less,  or  greater,  than  the  given  frac- 
tion, but  expressed  in  simpler  terms. 

It  may  also  happen,  that  one  of  the  inUrmedicUe  fractions 
of  one  series  does  not  approximate  towards  the  g^ven  fracuon 
so  nearly,  as  one  of  the  fractions  of  the  other  series,  although 
expressed  in  terms  less  simple  than  the  former;  for  this 
reason,  it  is  not  proper  to  employ  intermediate  fractions,  ex- 
cept when  we  wish  to  have  the  fractions  sought  either  ali 
less,  or  all  greater,  than  the  ^ven  fraction. 

SO.  Example  1.  According  to  M.  de  la  Caille,  the  solar 
year  is  QßS'^.  5^  48'.  49**,  and,  consequent^,  longer  by  6^ 
49.  49^  than  the  common  year  of  2ßo'^.   It  this  difierence 


4B8  ADDITIONS.  CHAP.  I. 

ware  exactly  6  hours,  it  would  make  one  day  at  the  end  of 
fiMir  common  years  :  but  if  we  wish  to  know,  exactly,  at  the 
end  of  how  many  years  this  difference  will  {ntxluoe  a  certain 
number  of  days,  we  must  seek  the  raüo  between  24^,  and 
B^.  itV.  49*,  which  we  find  to  be  It^x^i  so  that  at  the  end 
of  86400  common  years,  we  must  intercalate  S09S9  days,  in 
order  to  reduce  them  to  tropical  years. 

Now,  as  the  ratio  of  86400  to  20929  is  expressed  in  Tcry 
high  terms,  let  it  be  required  to  find  ratios,  m  lower  terms, 
as  near  this  as  possible. 

For  this  purpose,  wc  must  reduce  the  fraction  t S^-it  ^  * 
continued  fraction,  by  the  rule  ^ven  in  Art.  4,  which  u 
the  same  as  that  by  which  tlie  greatest  common  divisor  of 
two  given  numbers  is  found.     This  will  give  us 

S09S9)86400(4  =  a 
83716 


2684)20929(7  =  ß 
18788 

2141)2(iH4(l  =Y 
2141 

548)2141(3  ^ 
1629 

1 

jiy>r>4.j( 

512 

1  -^  . 

.'Jl  ) 

512(1(5  =  ; 
19G 

lü)fJl(l  =  r 
1() 

1.>)1(hI  ^  9 
15 

l)l*)(|j  =  , 
15 

0. 

NoH,  as  wc  kiitrw  all  the  (|uoticnl.s  a,  ßy  y,  &c.  we  earùly 

furiu  from  tliciu   the  m.tks     ,,    -  , ,  ^c.  iu  the  fuUuniu): 

A  If 


CHAF.  I.  ADDITIONS.  469 


manner  : 

4-1     7,      I,       3,        I,         16,  1,  I,  15. 

4  *9       33   lag    i6l   «704   2865   5569   864-00 

the  last  fraction  being' the  same  as  the  one  proposed. 

In  order  to  facilitate  the  formation  of  tnese  fractions,  we 
first  write,  as  is  here  done,  the  series  of  quotients  4,  7, 1,  &c. 
and  place  under  these  coefficients  the  fractions  ^,  V»  V'  ^^ 
whicn  result  from  them. 

The  first  fraction  will  have  for  its  numerator  the  number 
which  is  above  it,  and  for  its  denominator  unity. 

The  second  will  have  for  its  numerator  the  product  of 
the  number  which  is  above  it  by  the  numerator  of  the  firsi;, 
plus  unity,  and  for  its  denominator  the  number  itself  which 
is  above  it. 

The  third  will  have  for  its  numerator  the  product  of 
the  number  which  is  above  it  by  the  numerator  of  the 
second,  plus  that  of  the  first;  and,  in  the  same  manner, 
for  its  denominator,  the  product  of  the  number  which  is 
above  it  by  the  denominator  of  the  second,  plus  that  of  the 
first. 

And,  in  general,  each  fraction  will  have  for  its  numerator 
the  product  of  the  number  which  is  above  it  by  the  nu- 
merator  of  the  preceding  fraction,  plus  that  of  the  second 
preceding  one  ;  and  for  its  denominator  the  product  of  the 
same  number  by  the  denominator  of  the  preceding  fraction, 
plus  that  of  the  second  preceding  one. 

So  that  29  =  7x4  +  1,  7  =  7;  83  =  1x29  + 4, 
8  =  1x7  +  1;  1^  =  3x83  +  29,  81.=  8x8  +  7, 
and  so  on;  which  agrees  with  the  formulae  of  Art.  10. 

Now,  we  see  from  the  fractions  4>  V>  V>  ^^-  ^^^  ^® 
simplest  intercalation  is  that  of  one  day  in  four  common 
years,  which  is  the  foundation  of  the  Julian  Calendar;  but 
that  we  should  approximate  with  Qiore  exactness  by  inter- 
calating only  7  days  in  the  space  of  29  common  years,  or 
eight  in  the  space  of  33  years,  and  so  on. 

It  appears  farther,  that  as  the  fractions  4^,  y,  y ,  &c«  are 
alternately  less  and  greater   than  the  fraction  I-S^It»  ^^ 

24*» 
Kb  jtQ/  /Lai9  ^^  intercalation  of  one  day  in  four  years  would 

be  too  much,  that  of  seven  days  in  twenty-nine  years  too 
little,  that  of  eight  days  in  thirty-three  years  too  much,  and 
so  on  ;  but  each  of  these  intercalations  will  be  the  most 
exact  that  it  is  possible  to  make  in  the  same  space  of  time. 
Now,  if  wc  arrange  in  two  separate  series  the  fractions 


40D  AnPITIOWS.  CHAT.  I. 


that  arc  lesa,  and  thoec  that  arc  greater  than  the 

fraction,  we  may  also  insert  difTerent  secondarT  fn 

to  complete  the  series  ;  and,  for  thm  purpose,  we  AM  follow 
the  same  process  as  before,  but  taking  succcsMvelj,  instead 
of  each  number  of  the  upper  scries,  all  the  integer  numhm 
less  than  that  number,  when  there  are  any. 

So  that,  consdering  first  the  increasing  fraction» 

I.       I,  I,  13, 

4        3J       'lOt        186f        1 6400 

we  see  that,  «nee  unity  is  above  the  second,  the  third,  and 
the  fourth,  we  cannot  place  any  inlermoHate  fraction,  either 
between  the  first  and  tne  second,  or  between  the  second  and 
the  third,  or  between  the  third  and  the  fourth  ;  but  as  the 
last  fraction  stands  below  the  number  15,  we  may  place, 
between  that  fraction  and  the  precedini^,  fourteen  tniar^ 
mediate  fractions,  the  numerators  •  of  whidi  will  form  the 
arithmeûcal  progression  S8S0  +  5569,  %65  f%x  55G9> 
9865  +  3  X  5569,  &c.  tlieir  denominators  will  also  form 
the  arithmetical  progression  694  +  1849,  694  +  Se  x  1SI9, 
«94  f-  3  X  1349,  6tc. 

So  that  tite  complete  series  of  increasing  fractions  will  be 

4    11    lAl    »t6S    t4l4    lA'^Ol         I9f?l    S1t4l 
IO71O   J^2T9   4tt  4i   ♦7  4I7    llVl-i   Stiff 

r4rfT>    irfi  »    loiTT^  rrrr«»  Tai-rp  -nnrr^* 

A4I34        6<>6';|        7t:^»        t-::tli         l>440'> 
•  MTV»     1  '  t.  iT  X  »      I  -  1  r  1  »     I  Tf  •  I  '      i  -    /  i  T* 

And,  as  the  la^t  traction  i'^  the  same  as  the  given  Iraction,  tl 
is  evident  that  this  scries  cannot  Im  carried  tarlher.  Hcnci% 
if  we  di<K)se  to  admit  those  intercalations  only  iu  which  the* 
crn»r  is  l(x>  miicli,  the  simplest  and  most  e\:ict  will  be  tlioM: 
of  one  day  in  four  years,  or  of  eiijht  davb  iu  lliirly-llirec 
years,  or  of  thirty-nine  in  a  hundred  anil  sixty-one  years« 
and  so  on. 

Let  us  now  consider  the  dicre;Lsinfij  fractions, 

T.       3.        \t\,  I. 

ay        Ilk       s*      4       S^^v 
7    »       T  1    »       /.t-T    »     1  !♦  ;  • 

And  fir>t,  on  account  of  the  numlK?r  7,  which  is  alxne  the 
lir>t  traction,  we  may  place  six  others  Ik-tore  it,  the  nume- 
rators of  which  will  tonn  the  arithmetical  pn)gression, 

4-f  1,  2  X  4+  1,  3  X  4+  1,  ^4:. 
and  tlie  denominators  of  which  will  form  tlu*  progrc  saion 

•  liecauie;;;;   is  tlie  principal  fraction  iKlHCxn    i*/^  ,  and 
îmif  as  is  found  in  the  foregoing  terie«.     Sec  page  485.     U. 


CHAP.  U  ADDITIONS;  401 

1,  2»  8,  &€;  *  ;  alao,  oq  account  of  the  number  8,  we  may 
place  two  ifnUrmediaU  fractions  between  the  first  and  tlie 
second';  and  between  the  second  and  the  third  we  may 
place  fifteen»  on  account  of  the  number  16  which  is  above  the 
third;  but  between  this  and  the  last  we  cannot  insert  any, 
because  the  number  above  it  is  unity. 

Farther,  we  must  remark,  that,  as  the  preceding  serietis 
not  terminated  by  the  given  fracüon,  we  may  continue  it  as 
far  as  we  please,  as  we  have  shewn.  Art  18.  So  that  we 
shall  have  this  series  of  decreasing  fhictions, 

s        9        13        17       ft>        «S       %9       6ft       95        1^8 
T>T>     T*     T>     T  y      €9     T  9   TT>    "m     TT  > 

S  8  9       4  5  0      6  I  I       77»       93  »       i  094       i  »  5  S        I  ♦  i  6 
TV  9   TCB^f    TTT»    TT7>    TT^>     TTT  >     T5T  >     TXT  > 

1577       1738       I  899       »060       %%%  i       XS8»       *S*3 
TTTf     TIT»     TTÛ  »     TTT»     T3T  >     TTT  >     TTff  > 

»704       5569       91969       178369       »64769       35ii69 
'STT  9   TTT5">    TïrTï»     TTî"©";  J     -»Triir  >      gJOgS  > 

♦  3  7  5  6  9      «yp 

which  are  all  less  ttum  the  fraction  proposed,  and  approach 
nearer  to  it  than  any  other  fractions  expressed  in  simpler 
terms. 

Hence  we  may  conclude,  that  if  we  only  attend  to  tlie 
intercalations,  in  which  the  error  is  too  small,  the  simplest 
and  most  exact  are  those  of  one  day  in  five  years,  or  or  two 
days  in  nine  years,  or  of  three  days  in  thirteen  years,  &c. 

In  the  Gregorian  calendar,  only  ninety-seven  days  are  in- 
tercalated in  four  hundred  years;  but  it  is  evident,  from 
the  preceding  series,  that  it  would  be  much  more  exact,  to 
intercalate  a  hundred  and  nine  days  in  four  hundred  and 
fifty  years. 

But  it  must  be  observed,  that  in  the  Gregorian  reforma- 
tion, the  determination  of  the  year  given  by  Copernicus  was 
made  use  of,  which  is  865''.  ff".  4§.  W  :  and  substituting 
this,  instead  of  the  fraction  |:I4^|^,  we  shall  have  fg^gg,  or 
rather  -f^  ^  whence  we  may  find,  by  the  preceding  method, 
the  quotients  4,  8,  5,  3,  and  from  them  the  principal 
fractions, 

Ati     8f       b%        3. 

4       3  3        f  69        540 
T>      T  >      TT  >    TTT» 

which,  except  the  first  two,  are  quite  différent  from  the 
fractions  found  before.  'However,  we  do  not  perceive 
among  them  the  fraction  ^  adopted  in  the  Gregorian 
calendar;  and  this  fraction  cannot  even  be  found  among 
the    intermediate   fractions,   which    may  be    inserted,  in 

*  See  page  485. 


40S  ADDITIONS.  CHAP.  1. 

die  two  scries  f,  '/,^9  and  y ,  fr?  ^  for  it  is  evident^  that  it 
oould  fall  only  between  those  last  fractions,  between  wliich, 
on  account  of  the  number  B,  which  is  above  the  fraction  -{ ft, 
there  may  be  inserted  two  intermediate  fractions,  which  will 
be  W>,  and  y^'  ;  wiiencc  it  appears,  that  it  would  have 
been  more  exact ,  if  in  the  Gregorian  reformation  they  had 
only  intercalated  ninety  days  in  the  space  of  three  hundred 
ana  seventy^ne  years. 

If  we  reduce  the  fraction  Vt*»  «oas  to  have  for  its  nu- 
merator  the  number  86400,  it  will  become  Jct^?,  which 
estimates  the  tropical  year  at  365  ^  5^.  A^.  1^. 

In  this  case,  the  Gregorian  intercalation  would  be  quite 
exact;  but  as  obserxations  make  the  year  to  be  shorter 
by  more  than  ^\  it  is  evident  that,  at  the  end  of  a  certain 
period  of  time,  we  must  introduce  a  new  intercalation. 

If  we  keep  to  the  determination  of  M.  de  la  Caille,  as 
the  denominator  97  of  the  fraction  y^?  lies  between  the  de- 
nominators of  the  fifth  and  sixth  principal  fractions  already 
found,  it  follows,  from  what  we  have  demonstrated  (Art.  14>, 
that  the  fraction  *^  will  be  nearer  the  truth  than  the  fnc» 
tion  \^°  ;  but  as  astronomers  arc  still  dirided  with  regard 
to  the  real  length  of  the  year,  we  shall  refrain  from  givioff  a 
decisive  opinion  on  this  subject  ;  our  only  object  in  the 
above  detail  is  to  facilitate  the  means  of  understanding  ooo* 
tinned  fractions  and  their  application:  with  this  view,  we 
shall  also  add  the  following  example. 

21.  Examph'  îi.  We  nave  already  given,  in  Art.  8,  the 
continued  fraction,  which  expresses  trie  ratio  of  the  circum- 
ference of  the  circle  to  the  diameter,  as  it  results  from  the 
fraction  of  Ludolph  ;  so  that  we  have  only  to  calculate, 
according  to  the  manner  taught  in  the  i)receding  example, 
the  Si'ries  of  fractions,  ix>n verging  towards  that  ratio,  which 
will  be 

:J,     7.      15,      L        'J<i2,  I.  I, 

I        IS         lit         \  s  %         ir;v,i         I41<i%         10^141 

If    7  »    1 1  f,^    r  I Î »     1  1 1  .  X  »     1 1 X I  r  ♦    '. f. rr T  » 

I«  .•«  >«  J  %  If 

|i:^«kV         «II'IV  11*^4'"'»  4i:i>4t  14IVI1I 

0  *  1  Î  i  »  1  '  «  T  5  «  ♦   r  /.  *  *  I"  Î  >  I  I  ',  .  «  i  -  »  I  7  »!  w  1  1  > 

U,         '2,  1.  I, 

I  îTi  iîlx»   !i746ivT>   7liï6îTv»  iTiû^x»76^ 
o  o  O 

l'^«V^(%|-^0  »14V4VI'7«  AlÄr'/?<*4<4 

Ï4N.»',  trii'  iitsi|4it*         liéMiv',  :r» 


•  I 


I.  HV. 


I4<ft11'i>lr<t:  Xl«ftl4i|4l  I.'AIIAAXI'.  tti 

471II4T'.  ti>       rrriirriTT'      xerrirf.  re  vi  ac  t  » 


CHAP.  I. 


ADDITION'S. 


49S 


2, 

t 58778S776aOj 

I» 

8958937 768937 
T8  5  iTiSY^  i  Mi» 


3, 

4>a8aa»S9  3  3  »93  O» 
k3g368fti 1761 i 7> 

I, 
6  I  3  »899  S  as»!  7045 

TTTTTTTTTnr  rgTTnrr» 
2, 

6  6  6a74'»5  5  9a8  S  8  8  8  7 
-iiioa  i74.6l31flS  t  g7> 


ö> 


a  6  4-  6  6  93ia5i393  04'  14-5 
T^^TH  85  87*16513  atT  > 


I, 
537li5l99a734> 
I  7O^g0O7  7g4  8'3> 

15, 

13  9  7  5  5  a  I  8  sa  6  7  8  9 
444.8  5467  7ölB  53  ' 

13, 

570  66749  3  a067 7 ♦ i 
TTTB4Ô  kô48  I  143  7lf» 

4-, 

30a46 173033 7  3  S  9  a  I 
TTaTTTTTTTïTTTTT  > 

6, 

4300|094659i069a43 
T3grygyj  54  6  7  M8  734<ry 

I, 

3076  7  o  4.  o  7  173  O  3  7  3  S  8  8 
TT5^r*TTTTTjm^  öTTT  • 


These  fractions  will   therefore  be  alternately  less  and 

freater  than  the  real  ratio  of  the  circumference  to  the 
iameter  ;  that  is  to  say,  the  first  4  ^ill  he  less^  the  second 
Y  greater,  and  so  on;  and  each  of  them  will  approach 
nearer  the  truth  than  can  be  done  by  any  other  fraction  ex- 
pressed in  simpler  terms  ;  or,  in  general,  having  a  deno- 
minator less  than  that  of  the  succeeding  fraction  :  so  that  we 
may  be  assured  that  the  fraction  4  approaches  nearer  the 
truth  than  any  other  fraction  whose  denominator  is  less  than 
7;  also  the  fraction  y  approaches  nearer  the  truth  than 
any  other  fraction  whose  denominator  is  less  than  106  ;  and 
so  of  others. 

With  regard  to  the  error  of  each  fraction,  it  will  always 
be  less  than  unity  divided  by  the  product  of  the  deno- 
minator of  that  fraction,  by  the  denominator  of  the  following 
fraction.     Thus,  the  error  of  the  fraction  |  will  be  less  than 

4^,  that  of  the  fraction  V  will  be  less  than  = — r;^,  and  so 
^  ^  7x100 

on.  But^  at  the  same  time,  the  error  of  each  fraction  will 
be  greater  than  unity  divided  by  the  product  of  the  de- 
nommator  of  that  fraction,  into  the  sum  of  this  denominate»*, 
and  of  the  denominator  of  the  succeeding  fraction;  so 
that  the  error  of  the  fraction  4  ^1  he  greater  than  ^^ 

that  of  the  fraction  V  greater  than  = =-n,,  and  so  on 

^   ®  7  X  113 

(Art.  14). 

If  we  now  wish  to  separate  the  fractions  that  are  less  than 
the  ratio  of  the  circumference  to  the  diameter,  from  those 
which  are  greater,  by  inserting  the  proper  intcrmecUaie 
fracûons,  we  may  form  two  series  of  fractions,  the  one  in- 


404  ADDITIONS.  CSAT.  I. 

creasing,  and  the  other  dccrea«nff,  towards  the  true  ratio  m 
question  ;  in  this  manner  we  shall  have 

Fractions  lesê  than  the  ratio  of  ike  drcuKffirenee  êo  ike 

diameter. 

1   »S   47   69   9t    111    lis   lS7   l7f 
T»  T»  TT>    IT»  T^^      TZ  y     TTf  >  TO»  TT» 

lot   1»]   »4S   »67   9t9   III    131   6  t  8 
TT»  TT»  TT»  TT»  Vi»  TT»  "il5"S>  YTT» 

I  O  ♦  Î   I  1»t   IT»  I   »  I  o  •   t  4. 4  I  fc^ 
TTl  >  TÏT»  TTT»  ïTï»  m  »  ***^ 

JViocfiofW  greater  Ûian  the  ratio  of  the  eircumftrence  io  the 

diameter. 

♦   7   lO   «ï   i6   19   »»   Iff   ■  o»i ♦ < 
Yfl»  T»  T»  T»  TT»   T»  T-rn  TTî"ïT» 

3  I  >6 19   114640t    S4I93SI   •)  »61 »Of    l0t7O  7 O* f 
T7TT1  »  T-îTTTr»  iTnrOTT»  TTYTTITT»  TtTTWTTJ  ^ 

4tvSS79t7   i4to  f»4>  8  1   g*^ 

TTnröiT7T>    TTnirry^T»^*^* 

Each  fraction  of  the  first  series  approaches  nearer  the 
truth  tlian  any  other  fraction  whatever,  expressed  in  sioipier 
tennsy  and  the  error  of  which  consists  in  bang  too  somU  ; 
and  each  fracûon  of  the  second  scries  likewise  approadM» 
nearer  the  truth  than  any  other  fraction,  which  b  ex[ 
in  simpler  terms,  and  the  error  of  which  consists  in  its 
loo  large« 

These  series  would  become  very  long,  if  we  were  to 
tinue  thetn  as  fur  as  we  have  doiio  that  of  the  principal 
fractions  Ix'fore  pvcn.      The  liiiiits  of  this   work  do   not 

Errait  us  to  insert  them  at  full  leng;th  ;  but  they  mav  be 
und,  if  wanted,  in  Chap.  XI.  of  Widlis's  Algebra.  (Oper. 
Mathemat.). 

S(  iior.irM. 

2âé  The  first  solution  of  this  problem  was  given  i)y  Wallis 
in  a  »mall  treatihc,  which  he  added  to  the  |N>5thuiiK>us  works 
of  Horrox,  and  it  is  to  l>e  found  in  his«  Algebra  a^  nuoted 
above;  but  the  method  of  this  author  in  indiri*i*t,  and  very 
Ial)orious.  That  whidi  wc  have  given  l>eIongs  to  Huygens, 
and  is  to  Ik'  eonsideretl  as  one  of  the  princi|>al  discoveri«*^  of 
that  great  nialheinatician.  The  cniiist motion  oé'  his  pla- 
netary auti>maton  at)|K'ars  to  liave  UhI  him  ti>  it  :  for«  it  is 
evident,  that,  in  onler  to  renresi*nt  the  motions  and  periods 
of  the  planets  exactly,  we  snouid  employ  wheels,  in  which 
the  tcvth  are  prcciiiclv  in  the  same  ratios  with  n^spect  to 
DunilKT,  as  the  periocis  in  (|uostion  ;  hut  as  teetli  cannot  be 
multiphcd  beyond  a  certain  hmit,  depending  on  tlie  sijc  of 


CHAP.  II.  ADDITIONS.  49fi^ 

t 

the  wheel,  and,  besddes,  as  the  periods  of  the  planets  «re  in« 
oommensurable,  or»  at  least,  cannot  be  represented,  with  any 
exactness,  but  by  very  lai^  numbers,  we  must  content  our- 
selves with  an  approximation  ;  and  the  difficulty  is  reduced 
to  finding  ratios  expressed  in  smaller  numbers,  which  ap- 
proach  the  truth  as  nearly  as  possible,  and  nearer  than 
any  other  ratios  can,  that  are  not  expressed  in  greater 
numbers. 

Huygens  resolves  this  question  by  means  of  continued 
fractions  as  we  have  done;  and  explûns  the  manner  of 
forming  those  fractions  by  continual  divisons,  and  then 
demonstrates  the  principal  properties  of  tlie  converging 
fractions,  which  result  fnnn  them,  without  forgetting  even 
the  intermediate  fractions.  See,  in  his  Opera  Posthuma,  the 
Treatise  entitled  Descriptio  Automati  PUmetarii, 

Other  celebrated  mathematicians  have  since  considered 
continued  fractions  in  a  more  general  manner.  We  find 
particularly  in  the  Commentaries  of  Petersburgh  (Vol.  IX. 
and  XI.  of  the  old,  and  Vol.  IX.  and  XI.  of  the  new). 
Memoirs  by  M.  Euler,  full  of  the  mostprofound  and  ingénions 
researches  on  this  subject  ;  but  the  theory  of  these  fractions, 
conndered  in  an  arithmetical  view,  which  is  the  most 
curious,  has  not  yet,  I  üiink,  been  cultivated  so  much  as  it 
deserves;  which  was  my  inducement  for  composing  this 
small  Treatise,  in  order  to  render  it  more  familiar  to  mathe- 
maticians. See,  also,  the  Memoirs  of  Berlin'for  the  yearn 
1767,  and  1768. 

I  have  only  to  observe  farther,  that  this  theory  has  a 
most  extensive  application  through  the  wliole  of  arithmetic; 
and  there  arc  few  problems  in  mat  science,  at  least  among 
those  for  which  the  common  rules  are  insufficient,  which  do 
not,  directly  or  indirectly,  depend  on  it. 

John  Bernoulli  has  made  a  happy  and  useful  applicatioo 
of  it  in  a  new  species  of  calculation,  which  he  devised  km 
facilitating  the  construction  of  Tables  of  proportional  parts. 
See  VoL  f.  of  his  Jtecueilpour  les  AêtronowèCê. 


CHAP.  II. 

Solution  qfsome  curious  and  new  Arithmetical  Problems. 

Although  the  problems,  which  we  are  now  to  connder,  are 
immediatdy  connected  with  the  preceding,  and  depend  on 


406  ADDITIONS.  CHAP.  U. 

the  same  pripciplcs  it  will  be  proper  to  treat  of  them  io  a 
direct  manner,  without  supposing  any  thing  of  what  haa  ban 
before  demonstrated:  by  which  means  we  shall  haTC  the 
satisfaction  of  seeing  how  necessarily  these  subieda  lead 
to  the  tiieorv  of  Continued  Fractions.  Uesides,  this  theory 
will  be  rendered  much  more  evident,  and  receive  froiD  it  a 
greater  degree  of  perfection. 

23,  Probiem  1.  A  positive  quantity  a,  whether  rational  or 
not,  being  given,  to  find  two  integer  positive  numbers,  p  and 

5,  prime  to  each  other  ;  such,  that  p  —  oq  (abstracting  froo 
^e  sign),  may  be  less  than  it  would  be,  if  we  assignea  Io  p 
and  q  any  less  values  whatever. 

In  order  to  resolve  this  problem  directly,  we  shall  begin 
by  supposing  that  we  have  already  found  values  of  p  anclf, 
wnich  have  the  requisite  conditions  ;  wherefore,  assuming  for 
r  and  «,  any  integer  positive  numbers  less  than  p  and  f ,  the 
value  of  p  ^  a^  must  be  less  tlian  that  of  r  —  as,  abstract* 
ing  from  the  signs  of  these  two  quantities  ;  that  is  to  «y, 
taking  them  both  {)usitive  :  now,  if  the  numliem  r  and  s  be 
such,  tliat  ps  ^  qr  =  ±  I,  (the  ui)|kt  siiçn  applying  when 
p  —  aq  \s  a,  positive  number,  and  the  unaer,  when  p  -^  eg 
IS  a  negative  number)  we  may  conclude,  in  general 
that  the  value  of  the  cxpres:ùon  y  ^  az  will  alwaya  be 
greater  (abstracting  from  the  sign)  than  that  of  p  —  of,  as 
long  as  we  give  to  z  nnd  y  only  integer  values,  less  than 
those  of  p  and  9,  we  may  hence  draw  the  following  con- 
clusion. ^    &t<. 

First,  it  is  evident,  that  >ye  may  supjx^se,  in  general, 
y  ^  pt  4-  rii,  and  z  =  y^  -|-  fw,  i  and  u  Ix'ing  two  unknown 
quantities.     Now,  by  the  resuTution  of  tlie^e  equations,  we 

have  t  =  -^ ,  u  =: —  ;  and  therefore,  since 

]\s  —  </r  qr  -  ps 

ps  ^  qr  -^  +  l^  /  =  ;  (sj/  -  r:;),  and  u  =  ±  (qt/  —  pz]  ; 
whence  it  is  evident,  that  /  and  u  will  always  l)e  intep.T  num- 
bers, since  /),  y,  r,  .t,  y,  and  .•:  are  su|)|H)stHl  to  Ik»  intcgvrs. 

ThiTcf-)re,  since /and //are  integer  numl)ersand />,  y,  r,  s 
intt'«^er  noMtivc  nunilKTs,  it  iscviiicnt,  in  order  that  tlic  value» 
of  ;/  ana  ^  may  1r'  Irss  than  those  ofy;  and  /y,  that  the  nuuv» 
bers  (  and  u  njust  neix*ssarily  have  clilit-Tcnt  Mp)s. 

Now,  I  say,  that  the  value  of  r  —  //.*  >mII  al>o  ha\e  a  dif- 
ferent sign  from  that  of /i  —  /ly;  for,  niakin«;  p  —  *.//  =  r, 

I)  v     r  a 

and  r  —  rM  —  u,  we  >hall  have      =  'i  -]-    ,        --  «  -4-      ; 

q  q     9  s 

but  the  equation,  i;.f—  qr        ^    1,  uivcs     —   -    t   —  ; 
^  '  '  '^  q     .s  i/A 


rUAP.  II.  ADDITIONS.  497 

PR  I 

wherefore :r  H ;  and.  since  we  suppose  the  doubc- 

q      9       -  qê  *^^         . 

ful  sign  to  be  taken  conformably  to  that  of  the  quantity 

p      a 
p  —  ay,  or  ?,  the  quantity must  be  positive,  if  i»  be 

positive  ;  and  negative,  if  p  be  negative  :  now,  as  «  Z  y,  and 

R      P 

a  7  P  (Ayp.))  it  is  evident  that  -7->  (abstracting  from 

8    q 

p     a 
the  sign)  ;  therefore,  the  quantity will  always  have 

a  • 

its  sign  different  from  that  of  —  ;  that  is  to  say,  from  that 

of  a,  since  è  is  positive  ;  and,  consequently,  p  and  a  will  ne- 
cessarily have  different  signs. 

This  being  laid  down,  we  shall  have,  by  substituting  the 
above- values  of  y  and  r, 

y  —  oz  =  (l?  —  at^t  +  (r  —  ai)u  =:  p<  +  au. 

Now  t  and  u  having  different  signs,  as  well  as  p  and  r,  it  is 
evident,  that  p^  and  Rt^  will  be  quantiües  of  like  signs; 
therefore,  since  t  and  u  are  integer  numbers,  it  is  clear  that 
the  value  of  v  —  az  will  always  be  greater  than  p  ;  that  is 
to  say,  than  tne  value  of />  ~  ao,  abstracting  from  the  àgns. 

But  it  remains  to  know  whether,  when  the  numbers  p  and 
q  are  given,  we  can  always  find  numbers  r  and  %  less  than 
those,  and  such  that  p«  —  ?^  =  ±  ^9  the  doubtful  simis  being 
arbitrary;  now,  this  follows  evidently  from  the  tneory  of 
continued  fractions  ;  but  it  may  be  demonstrated  directly, 
and  independently  of  that  theory.  For  the  difficulty  is  re- 
duced to  proving,  that  there  necessarily  exists  an  integer  and 
positive  number  less  than  p,  which  being  assumed  fiir  r, 
will  make  cr  ±  1  divisible  by  p.  Now,  suppose  we  sue» 
oessively  substitute  for  r  the  natural  numbers  I,  S,  S,  &&  as 
far  as  0,  and  that  we  divide  the  numbers  y  ±  1,  ^  ±  If 
3y  +  1,  &c.  jpy  Hh  1  by  fy  we  shall  then  have  p  remainders 
less  than  p,  which  will  necessarily  be  all  different  from  one 
another  ;  since,  for  example,  if  fiy  +  1,  and  ny  ±  1  (m  and 
n  being  distinct  integer  numbers  not  exceeding  p),  when  di- 
vided by  p,  give  the  same  remainder,  it  is  evident  that  their 
difference  (m  —  n)y,  must  be  divisible  by  p  ;  now,  this  is  im- 
possible, because  q  is  prime  to  p,  and  fit  —  fi  is  a  number 
less  than  f?. 

Therefore,  since  all  the  remaindeninquestioilireiiileter, 
positive  numbers  less  than  p,  and  diffisfut  ^  ^tter, 


408  ADDITIONS.  CHAP.  II. 

and  are  p  in  number,  it  is  evident  that  0  must  be  mvaang 
ibose  remainders,  and,  consequently,  that  there  is  one  of  the 
numbers  y  ±  1,  2jr  +  1,  %  +  l^kc.pq  ±  1,  which  is  di- 
visible hyp.  Now,  It  is  evident  that  this  cannot  be  the  last  ;  so 
that  tliere  is  certainly  a  value  of  r  less  than  p,  which  will 
make  rq  ±  \  divisible  by  p  ;  and  it  is  evident,  at  the  moe 
time,  that  the  quotient  will  be  less  than  q  ;  therefore  there 
will  always  be  an  integer  and  positive  value  of  r  less  than  p^ 
and  another  similar  value  of  s,  and  less  thou  9,  which  will 

satisfy  the  equation  s  = ,  or  ps  —  qr  ^±  1. 

24.  The  question  is  therefore  now  reduced  to  this;  to  find 
four  positive  whole  numbers,  p,  9,  r,  #,  the  last  two  of  which 
majr  be  less  than  the  first  two  ;  that  is,  r  z  p,  and  ê  /,  q^  and 
such,  that  ps—qr  =^±.1;  fartlier,  that  the  quantities  p — «f , 
and  r  —  asy  may  have  different  signs,  and,  at  the  some  time, 
that  r--  as  may  be  a  quantity  greater  than  p-^aq^  abstract- 
ing from  the  siçns. 

In  order  to  simplify,  let  us  denote  r  by  //,  and  «  by  f',  so 
that  we  have  7«^  —  grp'  =  +  1  ;  and  asq  7  q  (^  vp.),  fet  ^  be 
the  quotient  that  would  be  produced  by  the  division  off  by 
9^,  and  let  the  remainder  be  q**,  which  will  consenuently  hie 
/  cf  ;  also,  let  fif  be  the  quotient  of  the  division  ot  jf^  by  f\ 
and  q^  the  remainder,  which  will  be  z  ^  ;  in  like  manner, 
let  fjJ*  be  the  ciuotient  of  the  di\  ision  of  r'  by  7"',  and  q*""  the 
remainder  z  a*^,  and  so  on,  till  there  ..  im  remainder;  in 
this  way,  we  shall  have 

q    =  ^  ç'  +  r/ 

q'^   =  a"^  f  q" 

y"  =  uTq'^  \.  q\  ^c. 

where  the  numbers  /i,  ft',  a'',  Su:.  will  all  be  integer  and 
positive,  and  the  nunilxTs  ;>,  7',  <f^  7",  See.  will  alâu  be  in- 
teger  and  ])ositive,  and  will  form  a  series  decreasing  to 
notliin|(:. 

In  like  manner,  let  us  sup|x>se 

pf  =a'p'^  +;,- 
p"  =  /;r  -h  p- 
jr  =  a>'^  +  p\  ^C. 

And  as  the  nunil>ors  p  and  //  are  eonsiderod  hen*  ns  givt*n. 

ns  wiil  a>  \hr  innnl)'  r  ,  >i\  \  \i.  \m'  nay  (littTmiiie  fnmi 
tlu'H'  rijiiation.  til«'  nuniK«  r«»  p\  ;/\  />  ,  \e.  uhieli  will 
evuleiuiy  be  all  iiiU^ger. 


CITAP.   If.  ADDITIONS.  499 

Now,  as  we  must  have  /?y'  —  qp^  rü  4:  1,  we  shall  also 
have,  by  substituting  the  preceding  values  of  p  and  q^  and 
effacing  what  is  destroyed,  y^*  —  j'y  =  ±  1.  Again,  sub- 
stituting in  this  equation  the  values  of  j^  and  ^^  there  will  re- 
sult y'g^'"  —  y'y  =  Hh  1,  and  so  on  ;  so  that  we  shall  have, 
generally, 

p^  -  7P'  =±  1 
f^^  5^jp'»=+  1 

fq"''-  q^p^=+  1,  &c. 

So  that,  if  q*^,  for  example,  were  =  0,  we  should  have 

—  jV  =  ±  1  ;  also,  q^  =  1,  and  //"=+!:  but  if  y'''  were 

=  0,  we  should  have  —  y'^p*^  =:  :p  1  ;  therefore  j"'  =  1,  and 

p'""  =:  ±1;  so  that,  in  general,  if  je  =  0,  we  shall  have 

çe—^  =  1  ;  and  then  pe  =  ±  1,  if  p  is  even,  and  j»e  =  T  1> 

if  f  is  odd. 

Now,  as  we  do  not  previously  know  whether  the  upper,  or 
the  under  sign  is  to  take  place,  we  must  succesâvely  sup^ 
pose  pi  =  1,  and  =  —  1  :  out  I  say  that  one  of  these  cases 
may  at  all  times  be  reduced  to  the  other  ;  and,  for  this  pur- 
pose, it  is  evidently  sufficient  to  prove,  that  we  can  always 
make  the  ^  of  the  term  j?,  whicn  must  be  nothing»  either 
even,  or  odd,  at  pleasure. 

For  example,  let  us  suppose  that  q'"  =  0,  we  shall  theo 
have  q'^  =  1,  and  q'^  7  1,  that  is  y"  =  2,  or  7  2,  because 
the  numbers  9,  ^,  ^\  &c.  naturally  form  a  decreasing  series  ; 
therefore,  since  ç"  1=  ^t?f*  +  g'^  ;  we  shall  have  d^  =  jx",  so 
that  jut"  rz  or  7  2  ;  thus,  if  we  choose,  we  may  dimmish  /x^by 
unity, without  that  number  being  reduced  to  nothing,  and  then 
q^^i  which  was  0,  will  become  1,  and  ^^=0  ;  for  puttmg  ft''— 1, 
instead  of  /x",  we  shall  have  y*'  =  (/t"  —  1)^"  +  ç*^;  but 
g"  =  jx",  j'"  zz  1  ;  wherefore,  q"^  zz\\  then  having 
q^  zz  ijJ^q'^  -h  q%  that  is,  1  =  jx'"  +  q\  we  shall  necessarily 
have  [jJ"  zz  1,  and  q"^  zz  0. 

Hence  we  may  conclude,  in  general,  that  if  ^  =  0,  ve 
shall  have  qr~^  zz  1,  andjpe  =  +  1^  the  doubtful  sign  being 
arbitrary. 

Now,  if  we  substitute  the  values  of  0  and  a,  ^ven  by  the 
preceding  formulas,  in  /?  —  oj,  those  of  pi  ana  5S  in  //  —  aj', 
and  so  of  others,  we  shall  have 

p  ^aq  =nt,{ff  ^a^  )  -\-f  ^aq* 
pi  -^a^  =z  (Jiff  -a^  )'k-  j/"  ^  aq^ 
/  -  ag^  =  itP{jfl-af)  +/^'*^  —  aq'" 

whence  we  find 


500  AODHTION«.  CHAP.  IL 


at/'  -f  ^  p  -aq 


f*        M  it      T  «  H 


Now,  as  by  hjrpothesis  the  quantities  p  —  aq^  and  p-^a^f 
are  of  different  signs  ;  and  farther,  as  fl  —  a^  (abatracdng 
from  the  signs)  must  be  greater  than  p  —  ay,  it  foUovi 

that  ^j~^  will  be  a  negative  quantity,  and  less  than  umtr. 

Therefore,  in  order  that  ju,  may  be  an  integer,  positiTe  num- 

bcr,  as  it  must,  it  is  evident,  that    7^     \  must  be   a  po- 

âtive  quantity  greater  than  unity  ;  and  it  is  obvious,  at  tlie 
same  time,  that  /t  can  only  be  the  integer  number,  that  is 

immediately  less  than  J'^       ;  that  is  to  say,  coDtahied  be- 
tween the  limits  ^ — •--  and  — ^i  -  1  ;  for  ânce 

p  —  ag  a(f — // 

—  r; •  /  7  0,  and  l  1,  we  shall  have  /t  i  —: -j  and 

Also,  since  we  have  seen,  that    J^     ,  must  be  a positirc 

quantity  greater  than  unity,  it  follows  tliat  ^ -jz  will  be 

a  negative  quantity  less  than  unity,  (I  say  less  than  unitj, 
abstracting  from  the  sign).     Wherefore,  in  order  that  fi'  may 

i_  •  .  I-       aq'^-'p'^  - 

be  an  integer,  positive  number,  ~ -z  must  be  a  positire 

quantity  m-eater  than  unity,  and  con!HM)uentlv  the  number  pi! 
can  only  be  the  integer  number,  which  will  be  immediately 

below  the  quantity  -^^   ^-^. 

In  the  same  manner,  and  from  the  consideration,  that  ^* 


CHAP.  U.  ADDITIONS.  501 

must  be  an  integer,  positive  number,  we  may  prove,  that  the 
quantity  Zm  __    Jk  "^^  necessarily  be  positive,  aïid  greater 

than  unity,  and  that  [u^  can  only  be  the  integer  number  im- 
mediately below  the  same  Quantity  ;  and  so  on. 

It  follows,  Ist,  that  the  quantities  p  —  aq^  p'  —  oö', 
p^  —  aq*'y  &C.  will  successively  have  different  signs  ;  that  is, 
alternately  poâtive  and  negative,  and  will  form  a  series  con- 
tinually increasing.*  ^V,  that  if  we  denote  by  the  sign  Z 
the  integer  number  whicn  is  immediately  less  than  the  value 
of  the  c^uantity  placed  after  that  sign,  we  shall  have,  for  the 
determination  or  the  numbers  /x,  /uu',  [/J'y  &c. 

p'-og' 

Now,  we  have  already  seen,  that  the  series  g,  y*,  y'',  â(c. 
must  terminate  in  0  ;  and  that  then  the  preceding  term  will 
be  1,  and  the  term  corresponding  to  0  in  the  other  series 
Pi  p',  fPy  &c.  will  be  =  ±  1  at  pleasure. 

Tor  example,  let  us  suppose  that  q^  =^  0,  we  shall  then 
have  5^  =  1,  and  p*''  =  1  ;  therefore 

jf"  —  a^  =z  fl"  —  ûf  and 

therefore  j^  —  a  must  be  a  negative  quantity,  and  less  than 
1,  abstracting  from  the  sign  ;  äat  is,  a  —  jr  must  be  7  0, 
and  Z  1;  so  «that  jf  must  be  the  integer  number  im- 
mediately below  a  ;  we  shall  therefore  know  the  values  of 
these  four  terms, 

;?i^  =  1  îT  =  0 

p/ff  ^  a  Z'  =1 

by  means  of  which,  going  back  through  the  former  formul«^ 
we  may  find  all  the  preceding  terms.  We  shall  first  have 
the  value  of  (jJ'f  then  we  shall  nave  pi*  and  g^,  by  the  formulae. 


jp/'  =:  fi?jf  +  p^^f  and 


from  which  we  shall  get  ft',  and  then  pi  and  ^  ;  and  so  of  the 
rest. 

In  general,  let  ge  =:  0,  then  we  shall  have  ;e~S  and 
pî  =zl;  and  shidl  prove,  as  before,  that  p^-*'  can  mly  be  the 


502  ADDITIONS.  CMAF.  Il 

integer  number  immediately  below  a  ;  so  tbat  we  nhall  Iwre 
I  these  four  terms, 

p?  =  1  7?  =  0 

we  shall  then  have 

agt—pt       ^         1 

f^^""^^       « ^ 


and  so  on. 

In  this  manner^  therefore,  we  may  go  back  to  the  first 
terms,  p  and  q  ;  but  it  must  be  observed,  that  all  the  sue 
ceeding  terms,  j/,  ^j  p''^  <fy  &c.  possess  the  same  properties» 
and  serve  equally  to  resolve  the  problem  proposed.  For  it 
if  evident,   m  the   preceding  formulœ,  tnat  tiie  nuroben 

fy  f^y  P'^f  ^^*  ^°^  9>  9^9  ^y  ^^  ^^  ^  inte^r  and  positive, 
ana  form  two  series  continually  decreasing;  the  first  of 
which  is  terminated  by  unity»  and  the  second  by  0. 

Farther,  we  have  seen  that  these  numbers  are  such,  that 
jjy'  —  Ç//  =  +  1,  p/^  —  ^pf  =  +  1>  &c.  and  that  the  quan- 
tities p  —  fly,  //  —  a^f  p'  —  flj",  &c.  are  alternately  ponÜTc 
and  negative,  and  at  the  same  time  form  a  series  continually 
increasing.  Whence  it  follows,  that  the  »aine  condition« 
which  exist  amon^  the  four  numlxTs  /;,  y,  r,  ^,  or  y>,  7,  //,  </ , 
and  on  which,  as  we  have  seen,  tlie  solution  of  the  pn>nlcin 
depends,  etjually  exist  anion^  the  nuinl)ers  //,  r/',  /.",  r/",  aixl 
among  these,  /? ,  y'',  /;"',  r/^',  and  so  on. 

Therefore,  beginnini^  with  the  last  terni:^  />»  and  yv,  and 
going  back  always  by  tne  formula*  we  have  just  found,  mo 
shall  successively  have  all  the  values  of />  and  q  that  can  re- 
solve  the  question  pn)|M>seil. 

25.  As  the  values  of  the  terms />;,  /v~',  &c.  7.,  9;—*,  iwc. 
are  indejK*nilenl  of  the  exjxment,  c,  we  may  ahMniti  from  it, 
and  denote  the  terms  of  theî»c  two  increasing   si»rit*s  thus 

P'y  P\  /,  f^  P'\  ^<^'  fy  7.  7'»  7^1  7'%  ^<--- 

BO  that  we  shall  have  the  follow  in  «r  results. 
ff    -  \  7"  =  0 

y/    =  /ÜU  q'    =    1 

,/    ^f.>'    f    I  y'  =  fiJ 


;,-  =  ^•//   +  ,/ 

-  /*"'/  i  y 

,,"  =  u.-,r  *  V 

7 

\c. 

\c. 

CHAP.  II.  ADDITIONS.  508 

Then 

ft    Z.  a 


a^  — ^      a— jut. 
„       ad  "  fl 

Where  the  sign  Z.  denotes  the  int^er  number  imnaie- 
diately  less  than  the  value  of  the  quantity  placed  after  t^at 
sign. 

ThuSy  wc  shall  successively  find  all  the  values  of  p  and  q 
that  can  satisfy  the  problem  ;  these  values  being  only  the 
correspondent  terms  of  the  two  series  /)",  //,  p",  p"',  &c.  and 
<f,  (jf,  /,  f,  &c. 

26.  Corollary  1.     If  we  make 

~  f-a^ 

we  shall  have,  as  it  is  easy  to  perceive, 

a— j* 

1 
c  =^ 


6— ft' 
1 


&c. 


and  [f.  L  a^\>}  L  6,  fc"  L  c,  ft'"  Z.  d,  &c.  therefore  the  num- 
bers ft,  ft',  ft",  &c.  will  be  no  other  than  those  which  we  have 
denoted  by  a,  /3,  y,  &c.  in  Art.  3  ;  that  is  to  say,  these 
numbers  will  be  the  terms  of  the  continued  fraction,  which 
represents  the  value  of  a  ;  so  that  we  shall  have  here 

ft" 
Consequently,  the  numbers  ;/,  jf^T^^  &c.  will  be  the  nu* 


£04  ADDITION«.  VUMT.  il. 

meraton,  and  9^,  ^,  9*,  &c.  thedenominmlonof  thefinMtioBi 
converging  to  a,  fraclions  wiiich  wc  liavc  already  depoCcd  bj 

So  that  the  whole  is  reduced  to  converting  the  value  of  m 
into  a  continued  fraction,  havinc;  all  its  terms  positive; 
which  may  be  done  by  the  methods  already  explained«  P>t>- 
vided  we  are  always  careful  to  take  the  approximated  vaJiies 
too  small  ;  then  we  shall  only  have  to  form  the  series  of 
principal  fractions  converging  towards  a,  and  the  teims  of 
each  of  these  fractions  will  give  the  values  of  p  and  f» 

which  will   resolve  the  problem  proposed;  so  that  ^eai 

only  be  one  of  these  fractions. 

27.  CoroUarjf  2.  Hence  results  a  new  property  of  tbt 

(Tactions  we  speak  of;  calling  ^  one  of  theprinci/Ni/finac- 
tions  converging  towards  a,  (provided  they  are  deduced 
from  a  continued  fraction,  all  the  terms  of  which  are  positive), 
the  nuantity  p  —  a^  will  always  have  a  less  value  (abstract- 
ing from  the  sign),  than  it  would  have,  were  we  to  suhstitute 
in  the  room  ofp  and  a  any  other  smaller  numbers. 
88.  Problem  2.     The  quantity 

Ap"  -f  BfT^^q  +  cp''*~^q^  +,  &c.   +  vy", 

being  proposed,  in  which  a,  b,  c,  &c.  are  given  intcprs 
positive  or  negative,  and  p  find  q  unknown  numlH*r>,  which 
must  be  integer  and  poMtive;  it  is  re(|uired  to  determine 
what  values  wc  must  give  to  />  and  9,  in  order  that  the 
quantity  pro|x>sed  may  become  the  lea^l  possible. 

Let  a,  ß^y.   Sec.   be   the    real    rot)ts,   and  .«^  ±  "  \'  —  I, 
*  ±  f  V—  If    &c.   the   imaginary    roots   of  the   eciuatioo 

AX*  +  BX"^»    -h  CX'-- ^     r  ,  \C.   +  V  =  0, 

then  we  shall  have,  by  the  theory  of  eij nations, 
Ap"*   f-  B/>'^'y  4-  vp'^-q-  -|-,  &c.    -H  vy*  = 

a(p  —  aq)  X  ( j9  —  ßq)  x  (p  -yq) x 

(p  '  (H'  +  y   x/-l)7)    X  (/;  -  Ot  -  r  ,^  ^  \)q)  x 
(p-i^  +  f  ^^-l)y)x  (,, -(r-ev^-  \)q)....= 
a(p  —  a9)x   (p  -   ßq)  X  (/>  — 77) x 

Up- Hi)'"\->'r)  >^  ( (/> - "v)'  +  f'vo • . . . 

♦   BccauKe  (p  —  (ft  -f  r  v'—  1  )y)  x  (  ;>  -  (ft  -  "  \/ -  I  V) 
—  p"  —  'ZpiJLtf  +  fu  7*  -f  v*7*  =  (  /)  —  fß^)*  +  ^V,  and  the  heme 
wiib  the  others.     B. 


CHAP.  II*  ADDITIONS.  506 

Therefore  the  question  is  reduced  tp  making  the  product 
of  tlie  quantities  p  —  «ç,  p  —  jSç,  p  —  yy,  &€•  and 

(  p  -  MY  +  y'q\  (  p  -  *?)*  +  fq\  &c 

the  least  possible,  when  p  and  q  are  integer,  positive  numbers* 
Now,  suppose  we  have  found  the  values  of  p  and  q  which 
answer  to  tiie  minimum  ;  and  if  we  substitute  other  smaller 
numbers  for  p  and  9,  the  product  in  question  must  acquire 
a  greater  value.  It  will  therefore  be  necessary  for  each  of 
the  factors  to  increase  in  value.  Now,  it  is  evident,  that  if 
a,  for  example,  were  negative,  the  factor  p^^aq  would 
always  diminish,  when  p  and  q  decreased  ;  the  same  thing 
would  happen  to  the  factor  (p  —  Fj)*  + ''"?%  if  ft  were 
negative,  and  so  of  the  others;  whence  it  follows,  that 
among  the  simple  real  factors  none  but  those  where  the  roots 
are  positive,  can  increase  in  value  ;  and  among  the  double 
imaginary  factors,  those  only,  in  which  the  real  part  of  the 
imaginary  root  is  positive,  can  increase!  Farther,  it  must 
be  remarked,  with  regard  to  these  last,  that  in  order  that 
(p  —  fty)*  -f  y'g«  may  mcrease,  whilst/)  and  q  diminish,  the 
part  (p  —  jxy)*  must  necessarily  increase,  because  the  other 
term  v^q*  necessarily  diminishes  ;  so  that  the  increase  of  this 
factor  will  depend  on  the  quantity  p  --  y-q\  and  so  of  the 
others. 

Therefore,  the  values  of  p  and  j,  which  answer  to  the 
minimum^  must  be  such,  that  the  quantity  p  ^^  aq  may  in- 
crease, by  giving  less  values  to  p  and  17,  and  taking  for  a  one 
of  the  real  positive  roots  of  the  equation, 

AX»*  4-  Bx"^*  +  ex**-«  -f ,  &c.  -f  V  =  0, 

or  one  of  the  real  posidve  parts  of  the  imaginary  roots  of  the 
same  equation,  if  there  be  any. 

Let  r  and  s  be  two  integer,  poâtive  numbers  less  than  p 
and  q;  then  r  —  as  must  oe  7  (p  —  aq),  abstracting  from 
the  sign  of  the  two  quantities.  Let  us  therefore  suppose^  as 
in  Art.  23,  that  these  numbers  are  such,  thatp«  —  y  =  ±  1, 
the  upper  sign  taking  place,  when  p  —  aq  is  positive  ;  and 
the  under,  when  p  —  o^  is  negative  ;  so  tnat  the  two  quan- 
tities p  -  aq^  ana  r  — -  09,  become  of  different  signs,  and  we 
shall  exactly  have  the  case  to  which  we  reduced  the  pre- 
ceding problem,  Art  24,  and  of  which  we  have  already 
given  the  solution. 

Hence,  by  Art.  26,  the  values  of  p  and  q  will  necessarily 
be  found  among  the  terms  of  the  principal  fractions  con- 
verging towards  a  ;  that  is,  towards  any  one  of  the  quantides^ 
which  we  have  said  may  be  taken  for  a.  So.  that  we  must 
reduce  all  these  quantities  to  continued  fraetions;  wipch 


506  AbDITlOKS.  CIIAJ*.  tt. 

may  easily  be  done  by  the  methods  elsewhere  taucht,  and  the:: 
deduce  the  converging  fractions  required  :  after  wnich,  wemuiC 
successively  make  p  equal  to  all  the  numerators  of  these 
fractions,  and  g  equal  to  the  corresponding  dcooaiinatons 
and  of  these  suppositions,  that  which  shaU  give  the  kaK 
value  of  tlie  pro{X)sed  function  will  necessarily  answer  hke- 
wise  to  the  minimum  required. 

09 -  Scholium  1.  We  liavc  supposed  that  the  numbers /> 
and  q  must  lx)th  be  positive  ;  it  is  evident  that  if  we  were  to 
take  them  both  negative,  no  change  would  result  in  the 
absolute  value  of  the  formula  proposed;  it  would  «mly 
change  its  sign  in  the  case  of  the  exponent  m  being  odd  ;  anä 
it  would  remain  quite  the  same,  in  the  case  of  the  expomtit 
m  being  even  :  so  that  it  is  of  no  consequence  what  signs  wc 

S've  the  numbers  p  and  7,  when  we  suppose  them  both  cf 
e  same  kind. 

But  it  will  not  be  the  same,  if  we  give  different  signs  to  p 
and  7  ;  for  then  the  alternate  tenns  of  the  equation  propoMd 
will  change  their  signs,  which  will  also  change  tlie  signs  ai 
the  nx)ts  a,  /3,  y,  &c.  /^  ±  »^  \^—  1>  *  ±  f  %^—  If  ^P-  » 
that  those  of  the  quantities  a,  6,  7,  &c.  a,  v,  &c.  which 
were  negative,  and  consequently  useless  in  the  first  case,  will 
become  ]K)sitive  in  this,  and  must  be  employed  instead  of  thi- 
other. 

Hence,  I  conclude,  generally,  that  when  we  investigate  the 
minimum  of  the  pn)jx>sed  formula,  without  any  oiliir  n*- 
slrictioii,  than  that  of  /;  and  y  being  wliole  numbi.T2s  wc 
muNt  siictvssivc'ly  take  for  a  all  tho  real  nK)t'*  a,  0,  7,  ike. 
and  all  the  real  parts  ,«.,  r,  i\c.  of  the  ima«^nary  nxns  of  the 
ecjuation  ax*  +  hx"— »  ^-  ex"--'  +,  \-c.  -f-  v  :='();  abstract- 
ing  from  the  signs  of  these  (juantilies  ;  hut  then  wo  inu-^l 
give  the  same  signs,  or  different  signs,  to  1;  and  q,  acconiin^ 
as  the  (juantity  we  have  taken  for  a,  had  originallv  tin- 
positive,  or  the  negative  sign. 

*M.  Scholium  ii.  Wlien  anumg  the  real  n>ot»  a,  o,  y,  \c. 
there  are  some  connnenMirahle,  then  it  is  evident  th.1l  tht* 

(|uantity  pro|)<)si'd  will  Invonie  nothing,  by  making  '     ti)ual 

to  one  of  thesi'  root«  ;  m)  that  in  this  cast»,  pro|)erlv  sjHMkinc. 
there  \\\\\  Iv  no  tniriimurn.  In  all  the  «»tiler  cases,  it  uill  In» 
im|)OHMhle  for  the  (quantity  in  t|ue>tion  to  iM.'come  0,  whiUt 
p  and  q  are  whole  nmnlKTs.  Now,  as  the  iXK-tHcienls  .%, 
»,  c,  \c.  are  also  whole  niiinl)ers,  ////  hi/jfotfusi^,  this  quan- 
tity ^üll  aluays  Ih*  Miual  to  a  \\lu»le  nuniIxT  ;  anil,  ct»n- 
>c<|Uentl>,  It  can  ne\er  U-  Ics.^  than  unity. 


CHAP.  IT.  ADDITIONS.  507 

If  we  had,  therefore,  to  resolve  the  equation 

Ap"^  +  Jip'^^q  +  cp*-«y«  +,  &c.  +  VjT  =  +  1, 

in  whole  numbers,  we  must  seek  for  the  values  of  j?  and  q  by 
the  method  of  the  preceding  problem,  exœpt  in  the  case 
where  the  equation 

AX*"    -I-  BX*»-!   -I-  Cx"*-*  -h,  &C.    -f-  V  =  0, 

had  roots,  or  any  divisors  commensurable  ;  for  then,  it  is 
evident,  that  the  quantity 

A/?"*  -I-  Bp"*-^y  +  cp"^^q'^  + ,  &c. 

might  be  decomposed  into  two  or  more  similar  quantities  of 
less  degrees  ;  so  that  it  would  be  necessary  for  each  of  these 
partial  formulae  to  be  separately  equal  to  unity,  which  would 
give  at  least  two  equations  that  would  serve  to  determine  p 
and  q. 

We  have  elsewhere  given  a  solution  of  this  last  problem 
{Mémoires  pour  F  Académie  de  Berlin  pour  F  Année  1768); 
but  the  one  we  are  going  to  explain  is  much  more  simple  and 
direct,  although  both  depend  on  the  same  theory  of  con- 
tinned  fractions  *. 

31.  Problem  3,  Required  tlie  values  of  p  and  y,  which 
will  render  the  quantity  a;?*  -f  mpq  -|-  cq^  the  least  possible, 
supposing  that  whole  numbers  only  are  admitted  for  p  and  q. 

This  problem  evidently  is  only  a  particular  case  of  the 
preceding  ;  but  it  may  be  proper  to  consider  it  separately, 
because  it  is  capable  of  a  very  simple  and  elegant  solution  ; 
and,  besides,  we  shall  have  occasion  afterwards  to  make  use 
of  it,  in  resolving  quadratic  equations  for  two  unknown 
quantities  in  whofê  numbers. 

According  to  the  general  method,  we  must  begin,  there- 
fore,  by  seeking  the  roots  of  the  equation  ax*  -|-  bx  -f-  c  =  0, 

!_•  i_        I  1      — b±V(b*-4ac) 

which  we  know  to  be, 7: . 

'  2a 

1st,  If  B*  —  4ac  be  a  square  number,  the  two  roots  will 
be  cx)mmensurable,  and  there  will  properly  be  no  minimum, 
because  the  quantity  Ap^  +  Bpq  +  cy*  will  become  0. 

2d,  If  B^  —  4ac  be  not  a  square,  then  the  two  roots  will 
be  irratipnal,  or  imaginary,  according  as  b'  —  4ac  will  be 
7»  or  Z.  0,  which  makes  two  cases  that  roust  be  considered 
separately  ;  we  shall  begin  with  the  latter,  which  it  is  most 
easy  to  resolve. 

First  casey  when  b*  —  4ac  z.  0. 

32.  The  two  roots  being  in  this  case  imaginary,  we  shall 

^  Sec  also  Le  Gendre's  Essai  sur  la  Theorie  des  Nombres» 
page  169. 


508  ADDITIONS.  CHAT.  IL 

—  B 


bave  -^  for  the  whole  real  part  of  these  rooU,wUdi  must 
sequently  be  taken  for  a«   So  that  we  shall  only  hare  to 

_  B 

the  fraction  —,  abstracting  from  the  sign  it  may  hav^  to  a 

continued  fraction,  by  the  method  of  Art.  4,  and  then  deduce 
from  it  the  scries  at  converging  fictions  (Art«  10),  which 
will  necessarily  terminate.  This  being  done,  we  shall  suc- 
cessively try  for  p  the  numerators  of  these  fractions»  and  the 
corresponding  denominators  for  9,  taking  care  to  fp^ep  and 

—  B 

7  the  same,  or  different  ngns,  according  as -3-   is  a  positiics, 

or  negative  number.  In  this  manner,  we  shall  find  the 
values  of  p  and  q,  that  may  render  the  formula  psoposed  a 
minimum. 

Example.   Let  there  be  proposed,  for  example,  the  quantity 

49p*  -  9aSpq  +  29O9'. 

Here,  we  shall  have  a  =  49,  b  =  -  238,  c  r=  5t90; 
wherefore  b«  —  4ac  =  -  196,  and  ^  =  VV  =  V-  Work- 
ing with  this  fracüon  according  to  the  method  of  Art.  4,  we 
shall  find  the  quotients  2,  2,  3  ;  by  means  of  which,  we  shall 
form  these  fractions  (see  Art.  20), 

O      Q      'I 

««•,        Ar,       %Ja 
I  1  117 

<.»     i  »     »»    7  • 

So  that  the  numln^rs  to  try  with  will  Ik?  1,  2,  5,  17,  for  p, 
and  0,  1 ,  2,  7,  for  7.  Now,  denoting  the  quantity  proposed 
by  1»,  wc  shall  have 

/;  7  p 

1  0  M) 

2  1  10 
5                 2  5 

17  7  49; 

whence  we  perceive,  that  the  least  value  of  p  is  5,  which 
resultH  fnmi  tlu^se  sup|)OMtions  ;;  =  5,  and  7  =  2  ;  so  that 
we  may  ctmclude,  in  general,  that  the  given  formula  can 
never  Inrome  It'»«  than  5,  while/;  and  y  are  whole  number»; 
so  that  the  minimum   will  take  place,  when  /i  =  5,   and 

,=2. 

Second  cajft;  xchrn  b*  —  4ai*  7  0. 
33.  As  in  the  present  case,  the  equation  ak^  +  b*  -^  i  =  0, 


CHAP.  II.  ADDITIONS.  509 

has  two  real  irrational  roots,  they  must  both  be  reduced  to  con. 
tinued  fractions.  This  operation  may  be  performed  with  the 
greatest  ease  by  a  method  which  we  have  elsewhere  explained, 
and  which  it  may  be  proper  to  repeat  here,  since  it  is  na- 
turally deduced  from  the  formulae  of  Art.  25^  and  likewise 
contains  all  the  principles  necessary  for  the  complete  and  ge- 
neral solutiod  ot  the  problem  proposed. 

Let  us,  therefore,  denote  the  root  which  is  to  be  thrown 
into  a  continued  fraction  by  a,  which  we  shall  suppose  to  be 
always  positive  ;  at  the  same  time,  let  b  be  the  other  root, 

B  C 

and  we  shall  evidently  have  a  -f  é  = ,  and  a6  =  —  ; 

whence  a  —  6  = ;  or,  for  the  sake  of  abridg- 

ment,  making  b*  —  4ac  =  e,  a  —  ft  = ,  where  the  ra^ 

^^ 

dical  v/  ^  niAy  be  poâtive,  or  negative  :  it  will  be  positive, 
when  the  root  a  is  the  neater  of  the  two,  and  negative,  when 
that  root  is  the  less  ;  uierefore 

• 

— B-f-\/E     -  —B—  VE 

"=       2a       '*  =  — it-- 

Now,  if  we  preserve  the  denominations  of  Art.  ^,  we  shall 
only  have  to  substitute  for  a  the  preceding,  value,  and  the 
difficulty  will  only  consist  in  determining  the  integer,  ap- 
proximate values,  |x',  [/f,  yu^^  &c. 

To  facilitate  these  determinations,  I  multiply  the  numerator 
and  the  denominator  of  the  fractions, 

^T^'  ""^^^  <î^  *'•  '^p«^^^»y  by 

aW  -  if).  A(p'  -  isO>  A(6y*  -  f),  &c. 
and  as  we  have 

k{f—a^)  X  (p®  -  6}°) = A 

a(p''  -  af)  X  (p"  —  btf)  =  Ap*  —  A{a  -f  6)p*/  +  aoaj*  = 

u  u 

Ap*  +  Bp^ç*  4-  cq\  &c. 

k{p^-af)x  (69'-p^=-,tA-iB-i  ^E, 


510  ADDITIONS.  IVAP.  IL 

and  so  on.     Now,  in  order  to  abridge,  let  us  make 

P"=  A 

P'  =  Ap^  +  "P'  9'  +  C?* 

u  u 

P"  =  A//-  +   B//^  +  ^'7* 

q"  =  |B 
*    u'    ZZ  A(ß»  -|-  *  B 

«•  =  A///  +  ;b(;/7"  +  9'/)  +  a,Y 

Because 
/V»/  -  yV  =:  1,  f/'^"  -  q'p"  =  -  1,  p"9*  -  T"/»*  =  1,  &c. 
we  slinll  Imvc  the  following  values, 


i^'/. 


Now,  i!*  in  the  expression  i)f  u**  we  put,  for  \y*  and  <y", 

tluir  valuo,  ay/  -f"  1»  ^"*'  ."'^  »^  ^^^"  Iji-^^*»'"«^"  .'-'•'i''  +  u'  ;   «Im», 
if  wi'  Mil)>titulc*  in  llu*  cxpres>i()n  of  q'",  for  p"  anil  y^,  ihiir 

values  /xV+y/,  and   f* V  +  V''    *^   ^»"   '*^*  ehangixj    into 
'i"i*"  -    u",  and  so  on  ;  so  thai  wc  sliall  have 

u'  z:  ,x  p"  T  u" 
u'  =fx'  r'   -H  u 

Likev%ise,  if  wf  ^nl)«»tiluto  the  \ahics  of/?",  and  y\  in   t!:c 

e\j»rr  sum  «1  1',  it  \\\\\  iHtonu*  a  r  +  -^V*^  "^"  -^  \   «uhI  if  «r 
•'Ul»''tiliite  tlu*  vahi«'-  of />"'.  and  q'\  ni  iht-  iNprrssion  ol   \^\ 


p" 

-«' 

1 

p' 

x/K 

-.1" 

X    t 

—i" 

'  ^  1 

X 

x^i: 

CHAP.  H.  ADDITIONS.  511 


it  will  become  fuF^  -f  Sa^Q"  H-  p',  and  so  on  ;  so  that  we 
shall  have 

p'    =  |tt«P®  -f-  2/A  Q**  +  c 

p"  =  |i,V  +  V  q'  +  P° 

tu 
piv^  |xV  +  2f^'V  +  p",  &c. 

By  means  of  this  formulae,  therefore,  we  may  continue  the 
several  series  of  numbers,  fi.,  (x',  fjJ'  ;  q®,  q',  q",  and  p°,  p!,  p", 
&c.  to  any  length,  which,  as  we  see,  mutually  depend  on 
each  other,  without  its  being  necessary,  at  the  same  time^  to 
calculate  the  numbers  p^y  p',  //',  &c.  and  ^,  y',  q',  &c. 

We  may  also  find  the  values  of  p',  P',  P",  &c.  by  more 
simple  formula»  than  the  preceding,  observing  that  we  have 

Q«  -  P'  =  (11/ A  +  4b)«  -  A(ft«A  +  /1b  +  C)  =  ;5:B*  -  AC, 

Q*  -  P'P^  =  (^V  +  qV  «  p'dlv  +  V^'  +  a)=  a*  -  AP*, 
and  so  on  ;  that  is  to  say, 

Q«  _    pOpf    -.   ^j. 

Q»  —  p'p»  =  '  E 


Whence  we  get 


/// 

tt»  -  pffpW  =  JE,  &C. 


p/  —  ^      ^ 


p« 
// 

I 

The  numbers  ju,,  |x',  jx",  &c.  having  thus  been  found,  we 
have  (Art.  26),  the  continued  fraction, 

P-  ^i-  +  ,&c. 
/-' 
and,  in  order  to  find  the  nUrnmum, ctli  iln 


518  ADDITIONS.  CM  if.  ft 

Ap^  +  Bpq  +  cq*f  we  shall  only  have  to  calculate  the  man- 
hersp',  ff,p\  p^,  &c.  and  f,  y^,  q\  q^,  &c  (Art.  25),  attd 
then  to  try  them  instead  of  p  and  q  ;  out  this  opermtîon  wêêj 
likewise  be  dispensed  with,  if  we  connder,  that  the  quantities 
p°,  p',  p^,  &c.  arc  nothing  but  the  values  of  the  formula  io 
question,  when  we  successively  make  p  =  (/*,  i/,  jfy  &c.  and 
q  zz  ^^  ^^  (fy  &c.  We  have,  therefore,  only  to  ootmdcr 
which  is  the  least  term  of  the  series  p**,  p',  p'',  &c.  which  we 
calculate  at  the  same  time  with  the  series,  ^  ft',  f&',  &c.  and 
that  will  be  the  minimum  required  ;  we  shall  then  find  the 
corresponding  values  of  p  and  q  by  means  of  the  fomulc 
above  quoted. 

84.  Now  I  say,  that  continuing  the  series,  p**,  p',  p^,  4e. 
we  must  necessarily  arrive  at  two  consecutive  terms  with  dif- 
ferent signs  ;  and  tliat  then  the  succeeding  terms,  ahn,  will 
all  have  different  signs  two  by  two.  For,  by  the  preceifing 
Article,  we  have 

P^  =  A(p^  -  aç")  X  [fP  -  bif), 
p'  =  A(p^  ^ai)   X  ([/  ^bqf\&c. 

And,  from  what  we  demonstrated  in  Problem  2,  it  follows, 
that  the  quantities  //*  —  ay**,  pf  —  a^,  jf^^ao^  &c.  must 
have  alternate  signs,  and  go  on  diminishing  ;  therefore,  1st, 
if  6  is  a  nqrative  cjuantity,  the  quantities  fP  —  bqf^j  p  —  éy, 
&c«  will  all  be  positive  ;  conseciuently,  the  numbers  p',  p\  V^ 
will  all  have  alternate  Mgns  ;  î^dly,  if  À  is  a  ix>sitive  quantitv, 
as  the  quantities  //  —  «//,  //  —  </</",  &:c.  and  inucli  more  ihtr 

quantities -^  —  a,  ,,- — «,  fomi  a  series,  decreasing  to  in- 
finity, we  shall  necessarily  arrive  at  ont*  of  these  last  quan- 

,  ,  if  ,         . 

titles,  as  -,;^  —  a,  which  will  be  Z  {a  —  A),  abstracting  from 

the  sign,  and  then  all  the  following,  — ;^.  —  a,  -' a,  will 

be  so  likewise  ;  so  that  all  the  quantities 

//'                             //* 
a  ^  b   t     ,,  —  rt,  a  —  A  -f- a,  &c.  will  nece&sari)\  have 

the   same  sign  iis  the  quantity   a  —  />  ;  eunsiijucntly,  the 

if  i/^ 

«jtmntitiis  — :;^  — /;,     —,    — A,    &c.    and    these    //' — bq^^ 

p**  —  />«'*,  Sec.  to  infiriity,  ^^ill  all  havi*  llie  same  sig;)  ;  therv- 
forv,  all  llu"  nuinh'  r>  r  ',  r*  ,  uill  liavi-  aittriiati'  signs. 

SupiMMc  now,  in  gt>neral,  that  wc  ha\o  arrived  at  termes 
with  aiteriuite  signr,  in  the  series  p',  r",  p\  &c.  and  that 


CHAP.  It.  ADblïloXs.  513 

Px  is  the  first  of  those  terms,  so  tliat  all  the  terms  Px,  p^+  S 
px+2^  &c.  to  infinity,  are  alternately  positive  and  negative; 
I  say  that  none  of  those  terms  can  be  greater  than  E.  if,  for 
example,  p%  p**',  p%  &c.  have  all  alternate  signs,  it  is  evident 
that  tne  products,  two  by  two,  p'V%  p^'^p  ,  &c.  will  neces- 
sarily be  negative;  but  (by  the  [H*eceding  Article),  we  have 

iv  V 

Q«  —  p'^p'*'  =  E,  g*  —  p*'p^'  =  F.,  &c.  wherefore  the  positive 
numbers,  —  p'''p*%  —  p'^p',  will  all  be  less  than  e,  or  at  least 
not  greater  than  e  ;  so  that,  as  the  numbers  p^,  p'',  v^^  &c. 
must  be  integers,  the  numbers  p'^,  p'"",  8ec.  and,  in  general, 
the  numbers  p>^,  p'^  +  ^,  &c.  abstracting  from  their  signs,  can 
never  exceed  the  number  e. 

Hence  it  follows,  also,  that  the  terms  q''',  q%  &c.  and,  in 
general,  q^+^,  q^  +  2^  &c.  can  never  be  greater  than  v^e. 

Whence  it  is  easy  to  conclude,  that  the  two  series  t\ 
px+ij  px  +  2,  &c.  and  q^+S  Q^+2,  &c.  though  carried  to  in- 
finity, can  never  be  composed  but  of  a  certain  number  of 
different  terms,  those  terms  being,  for  the  first,  only  the  na- 
tural numbers  as  far  as  e,  taken  positively,  or  negatively  ; 
and  for  the  second,  the  natural  numbers  as  far  as  ^/e,  with 
the  intermediate  fractions  4^,  |-,  -I»  ^c-  likewise  taken  posi- 
tively, or  negatively  ;  for  it  is  evident,  from  the  formulée  of 
the  preceding  Article,  that  the  numbers  q',  q",  q'",  &c.  will 
always  be  integer,  when  b  is  even  ;  but  that  they  will  each 
contain  the  fraction  4»  when  b  is  odd. 

Therefore,  continuing  the  two  series  p',  p'',  p"^,  &c.  and 
^9  Q!'f  q''^  &c.  it  will  necessarily  happen,  that  two  correspond- 
ing terms,  as  p^  and  Qt,  will  return  after  a  certain  interval 
of  terms,  the  number  of  which  may  always  be  supposed 
even  ;  for,  as  the  same  terms,  p«  and  q«,  must  return  to- 
gether an  infinite  number  of  times,  because  the  number  of 
difilTent  terms  in  both  series  is  limited,  and  consequently 
also  the  number  of  their  difi*erent  combinations,  it  is  evident, 
that  if  these  two  terms  always  returned,  after  the  interval  of 
an  odd  number  of  terms,  we  should  only  have  to  consider 
their  returns  alternately,  and  then  the  intervals  would  all  be 
composed  of  an  even  number  of  terms. 

Denoting^,  therefore,  the  number  of  intermediate  terms  by 
2f,  we  shaU  have  p*  +  î^f  =  P«,  and  Q«+2tf  =  q«,  and  then  all 
the  terms  p»,  p«+*,  p'+^,  &c.  q«,  q«+^  q*+^,  and  ft», 
|x«+  Ï,  ]w.if  +  2,  &c.  will  also  return  at  the  end  of  each  interval 
of  2(>  terms.  For  it  is  evident,  from  the  formulie  given  in 
the  preceding  Article,  for  the  determination  of  the  numbers, 
fjjf  y.\  Jul'",  &c.  q',  q'',  q'',  &c.  and  p',  p'',  p"',  &c.  that,  since  we 
shall  have  p»  +  2j  ~  p»^  and  a*+^Ç  =  Q*',  we  shall  also  have 


814  AOOITIOMS.  CHAP.  IL 

|ui«-i-sif  =  f^«,  then  Q«+2f+i  =:q»+i,  and  f»+%^*  =  IP**'; 
whence,  abo,  |x»+2'e+*  =  1^^*%  and  ao  on. 

So  that,  if  n  is  any  number  equal,  or  greater  than  «v  ^^ 
m  denotes  any  integer  positive  number,  we  ahall  have,  m 
general, 

therefore,  by  knowing  the  v  +  Sf  leading  terms  of  each  of 
the  tliree  series,  we  shall  likewise  know  all  the  succeeding, 
which  will  ]ye  only  the  2^  last  terms  repeated,  in  the  ttme 
order,  to  infinity. 

Fn>m  all  this  it  follows,  that,  in  order  to  find  the  least 
Talue  of  p  =  A/i^  -f  Bpq  +  cq^f  it  is  sufficient  to  continue 
the  series  p%  p,  p",  N.c.  and  q%  q',  q'',  &c.  until  two  cor- 
responding terms«  as  P'  and  q^  appear  again  together,  after 
an  even  numl)er  of  intermediate  terms,  so  that  m*e  mav  ha«e 
P»-»-«?  _=  pc,  and  <i»  +  *<'c  =  Q' ;  then  the  least  term  of  the 
aeries  p^,  p',  p",  &c.  p»+'^s  will  be  the  minimum  required. 

35.  Corollary  1.  If  the  least  term  of  the  series  p^,  p,  p^, 
&c.  p'  +  '-'e  is  not  found  before  the  term  y,  then  that  term 
will  be  repeated  an  infinite  numlier  of  times  in  the  same 
aeries  infinitely  prolonged  ;  so  that  we  shall  then  have  an 
infinite  number  of  values  of  o  and  q  answering  to  the  »tili- 
mtint,  and  all  discoverable  by  the  formula?  of  Art.  25«  by 
continuing  the  series  of  the  numbers  /x',  a',  /u.",  &c.  beyoou 
the  term  fi,'^:-*-'  by  the  repetition  of  the  same  terms  ft»**, 
/yL»"*-'-^,  as  wo  have  already  said. 

In  this  case  we  may  likewise  have  general  formula?  reprr- 
aenting  all  the  values  of  p  and  q  in  question  ;  but  an  rx- 
planution  of  the  method  for  arriving  at  this,  would  carry  roe 
too  far;  for  the  present,  I  shall  c»nly  refer  to  the  Met.okrtM 
de  Berlin  already  quoted,  ann.  17f)H,  page  123,  «kc.  mhere 
will  Ik»  found  a  general  and  new  theory  of  periodical  con- 
tin  uihI  fractions. 

.'56.  CoroUartf  2,  We  have  demonstrated  (Art.  34),  that, 
by  continuing  the  series  p',  p^,  p"',  &.c.  we  ought  to  find  cim- 
secutive  terms  wiih  different  signs.  Let  us  supi^oM*,  tlu-rtv 
fore,  for  example,  that  p"  and  p"  are  the  first  two  tenns  %iith 
this  projKTty.  We  shall  nece>sarily  have  the  two  quantities 
p*  —  bq\  and /i'*  —  /'^'  ,  with  ihe  same  signs,  In-caus«*  the 

3uantitic^  //'  —  aç***,  and  />"  —  aq'\  have  frtmi  their  nature 
iflerent  signs.  Now,  by  putting  in  the  quantities />^  —  4ç', 
p"'  -  bq^\  Ücc.  the  values  of  />%  //',  &c.  q\  q\  Ckc.  (Art. 
X5),  we  shall  have 

p'  ^  bq'  =  ^•'(/>"  -  bq'')  -k-  p'^  -  bq^ 

p^'  -  hq''  =  K(;i»    -  bq^)   f  p'^  -  bq\  &r. 


CHAJP.  U.  ADOITIOWS.  515 

Whence,  becauae  f^*^,  jub^,  &c  are  posidv«  numbers,  it  u 
endent  ihat  all  .the  quantities  p^  —  b^^  p^  ~  bq"^,  &c  to  in* 
finity,  will  haye  the  same  si^^  as  the  quantities  i/"  —  Ajf^, 
and  p^^  —  bq^*;  consequently,  all  the  terms  t^,  jr%  p^,  ac. 
to  infinity,  will  alternately  have  the  signs  plus  and  minus. 

From  the  preceding  equations,  we  diall  now  have 


f*^  = 


f^^br^    p^^bq' 
^  "  p-'  —  bq'''    py^—bq''^'^ 

where  the  quantities,    ^^ ,  j^,    -^ — ^ ,  &c.are  all  positive. 

Wherefore,  since  the  numbers  /x%  |Lt%  ft^*,  &c  must  be  all 

^ g^.„,  ^j  ..j^^^,^„^  „,^  ^ ^^j    .- — ^j;   must 

be  positive,  and  7  1  ;  so  also  must  the  quantities 
^v  _  iq.  >    j^ri_^vi>  *^c-  wherefore  the  quantities 

v^hnv  ,    '\i_^vi»  ^^'  ^^  "^  poritive,  and  less  than  unity  ; 

so  that  the  numbers  f^%  f^^*,  &c.  can  only  be  the  int^^ 
numbers,  which  are  immediately  less  than  the  values  ç£ 

also  be  equal  to  the  integer  number,  which  is  inunediatdy 

pv — bqv 

less  than  the  value  of  *^ r--.,  whenever  we  have 

p^  —  oq^^ 

ff  —  bf 
p^  —  bq^ 

Thus,  we  shall  have 


Zl. 


!▼ 


av  •  -C -2-. 

^    ^   p^—bf' 

]*'•    L   ^ î-r,  &C. 


516.  ABMTlOllt.  CHAP.  ffl. 

the  ngn  L  JP'^'^  ^^  ^®  ntimben  mF»  f!^^  ^%  Ik:  d»- 

aoCiiig  as  bcme,  the  integer  numbers  «hkh  are  uinnedinld|f 

uder  the  qiiantitiet  whidi  follow  that  lane  «gn. 

Now,  by  rednctMNit  nmilar  to  tboie  of  Art  M^  it  b 

10  tnuufbrm  the  quantité  ^—^,  f-hf^   *^ 
*i»«e.      }.    \        y   *  <»•    Farther,  the  condition  ii 
gL_^Zl  may  be  reduced  to  thie, -p;- z ^— ^  ; 

wUdi,  becauie  'i/rz^  '^  ^'  ^"^  certainly  take  plaoe^ 
-^  s  or  z  1  ;  wherefore  we  dball  have 

^•-z — ^,if—  =or  zl. 

^^^ p— »«tc. 

Gxnbining  now  these  formulae  with  thoie  of  Art.  SS^ 
which  contain  the  law  of  the  aeries  ^^  r^,  p^,  &&  and  çl^  çf^ 
aP,  be.  we  shall  easily  see,  that,  if  two  corresponding  terms 
of  tlieae  two  scries  he  supposed  to  be  given,  the  tank  of 
which  is  higher  than  S,  we  may  go  back  to  the  preoeding 
terms,  as  far  as  r^''  and  q%  and  even  to  the  terms  r^  and  a", 

if  the  condition  of  — ^^  ==  or  z  1  takes  place  ;  so  that  aD 

these  terms  will  be  absolutely  determined  by  those  which  we 
have  supposed  to  be  given. 

For  example,  knowing  p''^  and  q'*,  we  shall  immediately 

know  p''  from  the  equation  v*  —  p>**  =  {b;  then^harii^ 
a*"  and  p\  we  shall  find  the  value  of  u.'*  ;  by  means  of  which, 
we  shall   next  find   the  value  of  Ql*  from  the  equation 

Q^  =  p^p"  +  Q».     Now,  the  equation  q«  —  p*V  s  Je,  will 

-p^ 
givep^;  and  if  we  previously  know,  that -— must  be  a  or 

/  1,  we  shall  flnd  f^**;  after  which,  we  shall  have  a**  finni 


CHAF.   II.  ADDITIONS.  517 

the  equation  d"  =  fj^^'f^"  +  ^'%  *od  then   p*"  from  this. 

Whence  it  is  easy  to  draw  this  general  conclusion,  that  if 
p\  and  p^+  *  are  the  first  terms  of  the  series  p',  p",  p"',  &c. 
which  are  successively  found  with  different  signs,  the  term 
p^-t-  S  and  the  following,  will  all  return,  after  a  certain  number 
of  intermediate  terms,  and  that  it  will  be  the  same  with  the 

term  p\  if  we  have  — — :  =  or  Z  1. 

For  let  us  imagine,  as  in  Art.  34,  that  we  hare  found 
p»f2?  =  pT,  and  Q'^+5^  =  QT,  and  suppose  that  via  7^ 
that  is  to  say,  «•  =  X  +  v  ;  wherefore  we  may  go  back,  on 
the  one  hand,  from  the  term  p»  to  the  term  p^+  J,  or  pa,  and 
on  the  other,  from  the  terra  p'  +  ^e  to  the  terra  p^+ä^+i^  or 
px+'if  ;  and,  as  the  terms  from  which  we  set  out  are  equal 
on  both  sides,  all  the  terms  derived  from  them  will  likewise 
be  respectively  equal  ;  so  that  we  shall'have  p^+2e+ir=p^+l, 

.-»  ±PX  ,  - 

or  even  p^+ç  =  px,  if  -; — -  =  or  ^  I. 

We  may,  therefore,  judge  beforehand  of  the  beginning  of 
the  periods  in  the  series  p  ,  p',  p'',  p*",  &c,  and  consequently 
in  the  other  series  also,  q°,  q',  q",  q"V  &c«  i^i  /*'>  /^^  /^"j  &c. 
but  as  to  the  length  of  the  periods,  that  depends  on  the 
nature  of  the  number  £,  and  entirely  on  the  value  of  that 
number,  as  I  could  demonstrate,  were  I  not  afraid  of  being 
led  into  too  long  a  detail. 

37.  Corollary  3.  What  we  have  demonstrated  in  the 
preceding  coroUary,  may  serve  to  prove  the  following  theo- 
rem :  Every  eqtuUion  qfiheßyrm  p*  —  xq*  =  1,  (in  whick 
K  is  a  positive  integer  number^  Out  not  a  square,  and  p 
and  q  tzco  indeterminate  numbers)  is  resolvtble  in  integer 
numbers. 

For,  by  comparing  the  formula  p*  —  Ky^  with  the  general 
formula,  Ap*  -f  Bpq  +  cq%  we  have  a  =  1,  b  =  0,  c  =  —  k  ; 
wherefore  e  =  b*  —  4ac  =  4k,  and  -Jv'b  =  a/k  (Art.  88). 
Wherefore,  p°  =  1 ,  q"  =  0  ;  likewise  ft  z  v'k,  q!  =  /«.,  and 
p'  =  ft*  —  K  ;  whence  we  see  ßrstj  that  p'  is  negative,  and 
consequently  has  a  different  sign  from  p^;  secondly^  that 
—  p'  is  =  or  7  1,  because  k  and  ft  are  integer  numben; 

so  that  we  shall  have 7  =   or    z  1  ;  whence  we  shall 

—  p' 

find,  fjrom  the  preceding  Artidet 


618  ABùnums. 

m  thtt  hj  oontibuioff  the  series  r^,  r^,  r%  Iw.  the 
r^  s:  1,  will  necemarfly  return  after  a  certain  «rtearal  of 
terms  ;  oonscquently»  we  may  always  fiml  an  infinile  ■«■• 
ber  of  values  for  p  and  f  ,  whidi  \vill  render  the  Ibnnuk 
fl*  —  Kf*  eq^  to  unity. 

88.  CoroÜaru  4,  We  may  likeirise  demuoeUrtc  tkis 
iheorem:  ^ib  eauaikm  p*  ^  ij*  s±b  Af  rteokfiekim 
jnlijgfrr  mmbers,  m  nçipofffy  k  a  mriihe  mwefcr, 
jficerf,  ofid  H  a  ;ioM/iiw  futMftfr,  JSrs»  iMii  ^Kf  Ar 


p««lq««.<fe««rA,  <Aa<-P  ^i«o.^^lA«prindH 


Let  us  suppose  that  the  upper  sign  mnst  take  pleoe^  so 


Jlrueeioms  €onverginf  to  ike  wme  £^\/k. 

sign 
that  p^  *-  z^'sz  H  ;  wherefore^  we  soIbII  hare 

n  .  p  n 

Now,  let  us  seek  twobttt^er  ponôve  numbers,  r  and  «,  lev 

than  0  and  7,  and  such,  that  pf  —  ^  =  1,  which  is  alwsp 

posnble»  as  we  haye  demonstrated  (Art*  ÎS),  and  we  sfaaD 

»        r        1 
hare  ^ =  —  ;  subtracting  this  equation  fion  the  pe^> 

coding«  we  shall  hare 

r                          Ml,, 
v^K  = ;  so  that  we  have 

H 

r  -  *  v'K  =  — ( — -  1). 

Now,  an  «^  7  %^K,   and   11  ^v'>'^>    '^    ^^   widenl,   that 
will  be  z  ;  ;  whence  p  —  ry^'K  will  be  z 


y 
whtTcfore,  ^ will  much  mort'  lie  I  ',  since  #  ^  e  ; 

7(^  -f  ,  K) 

Ml  tluu  r  -  «  ,  K  Will  k*  a  m-ji^iitivi*  f|uantity,  which  ukirti 


CHAP.  II.  ADDITION».  519 

positively,  will  be   7  5-,  because  that  1  —  7 1. 

So  that  we  shall  have  the  two  quantities,  p  —  q  \/K,  and 
r  —  #  v/K  ;  or  rather,  making  a  =  -v/k,  p  -^  aq^  and  r  —  a«  : 
which  will  be  subject  to  the  same  conditions  as  we  hate 
supposed  in  Art.  24,  and  irom  which  we  shall  draw 
similar  conclusions:  tJierefore,  &c.  (Art  26),  if  we  had 
^  —  xq^  =  —  H,  then  it  would  be  necessary  to  seek  the 
numbers  r  and  s  such,  that  p«  —  ^r  =  —  1,  and  we  should 
have  these  two  equations, 

H 

y\/K  —p  = 


*  v'K  —  r  =  — ( 1). 

^  y(^''+f  ) 

As  H  z  \^\j  and  ^  Z  ^,  it  i»  evident,  that 


will  be  Z  1  ;  so  that  the  quantity  s^k  —  r  will  be  negative. 
Now,  I. say  that  this  quantity,  taken  positively,  will  be 
greater  than  qy/K  — p\  to  prove  which,  it  must  be  demote 

strated,  that  —  (l )  7 


H(l+  J-)        . 
or  rather,  that  1 7 ;  that  b  to  say, 

? 
-/K+  —  7H  +  — ;  but  HZ  \/K(Ayp.);  '^  i»  therefore 

sufficient  to  prove,that-^  7 ,  or  that  p  7  *\/  k  ;  which  is 

evident,  because  the  quantity  «v/k  —  r  being  negative, 
we  must  have  rysy/K,  and[  much  more  pye^/iL^  since 
pir. 

Thus,  the  two  quantities,  p  —  9  \/i,  and  r  —  «v^k,  will 
have  different  signs»  and  the  iBOir^  ^  be  greater  than  the 


SaO  AilÜlTlOK».  CUAf.  1)L 

first  (alwlnictiug  f'ruui  tlie  »igu«),  as  iu  the  {irecedîiif  cht  ; 
therefore,  &c. 

So  that  when  w«  have  to  resolve,  in  integer  numberii,  ao 
equation,  of' the  form,/?*  —  x^^  a  +  h,  where  HZ  ^  &,  we 
have  only  to  follow  the  same  process  as  in  Art.  S3»  making 
A  =  1,  B  =  0,  and  c  =  —  K  ;  and,  if  in  the  series  r^,  r, 
r*«  T^9  &c.  P'-f-^r,  we  find  a  term  =  ±  h,  we  shall  have  the 
solution  rrauired;  if  not,  we  may  be  certain  that  the  given 
equation  aomits  of  no  solution  in  integer  numbers. 

S9.  Scholium.  We  have  considered  (Art  S3)  only  one 
root  of  the  equation  A"*  +  b"  +  c  =  0,  which  we  have  sop 
posed  positive  ;  if  this  equation  have  both  its  roots  positive, 
we  must  take  them  successively  lor  a,  and  perform  tne  same 
operation  with  both  ;  but  if  one  of  the  two  roots,  or  both, 
were  negative,  then  we  should  first  change  them  into  positive, 
by  only  changing  the  sign  of  b,  and  should  proceed  as  be- 
fore :  but  tlicn  we  should  take  tiie  values  ot  p  and  q  with 
contrary  signs  ;  tliat  is  to  say,  the  one  positive,  and  the  other 
negative  (Art.  29). 

In  general,  therefore,  we  shall  give  the  ambigtioua  sign 
+  to  the  value  of  b,  as  well  as  to  ^^k  ;  that  is  to  say,  we 
hhall  make  q!  =  '-Ç  [b,  und  let  us  put  +  before  ^'c,  and 
we  must  take  these  signs,  so  that  the  nM>t 

U   =. 

A 

uiav  be  iMsitivc,  uliicii  niay  aUvuys  Ik-  (ioiii*  in  tvici  diffi'mit 
wuvs:  tne  upper  sign  of  n  will  imlirale  a  (K>^itive  riMit  ;  in 
which  case,  we  mu^t  take  Ixnh  p  and  ^  with  the  same  Mgn»  ; 
on  the  cuntrury,  the  lower  sign  of  ii  will  iiuiicate  a  lu^gativt- 
riH>t  ;  in  whieh  case,  the  values  of/;  and  q  nui!«t  be  taküi 
with  lonlrarv  ^ii'ns. 

•K),  J\,vafnpit;     HL*(|uiretI  wliat  integiT  nunilH.r<  mu>t  Ix* 
taken  lor  /i  and  '/,  in  order  that  the  c|uantity, 

\)p-  -  IKs/-^  -t  :>7Hv- 
nia\  Ikx^oiiic  tik-  ieiLst  |)«»>Mble. 

C'4>ni|juring  till*«  ciuantity  ^itli  the  gimenl  loriiiula  ul' 
rrohieni  :),  He  shall  havi"  a  -  t),  B  =  —  ll\  «  =  :J78; 
wherelore,  B*  —  4.\c  =  îiKî;  nhemv  vie  see  tli.it  this  cb*c 
lH*longii  to  tliat  of  Art.  !kJ.  We  shall  tlitn-fon*  make 
K  :  îil<î,  and  ,  Vï  --  \'7l),  uhere  we  at  oncv  i»!>ser\e,  that 
^^7!)  7  H,  and  «:  i);  so  that  in  the  formula*  of  whieh  we  sJiall 
only  have  to  tiiid  the  approximate  intt^ger  value,  we  mar 
innnetliately  take.  in**ti'a(i  of  v  79,  ihenuminT  N.orO,  accuni- 
ini(  as  th.it  ridind  shall  Ik*  adde<l,  or  <»uhtnu*tcii,  from  the 
other  nti'nNT'*  «ifilie  saine  formula. 


CHAI*.  11. 


ADDITION». 


52t 


We  shall  now  give  the  ambiguous  ngn  ±  to  b,  as  well  as 
to  \/£,  and  shall  then  take  these  signs  such,  that 

+69+^/79 


a  = 


may  be  a  positive  quantity  (Art.  39)  ;  whence  we  see,  that 
we  must  always  take  the  upper  sign  for  the  number  59  ;  and, 
that  for  the  radical  \/79,  we  may  either  take  the  upper,  or 
the  under.  So  that  we  shall  always  make  q^  =  —  ^b,  and 
^  £  may  be  taken,  successively,  p  its  and  minus. 

First,  therefore,  if  ^  ^e  =  v79  with  the  po^tive  sign,  we 
shall  make  (Art.  SS),  the  following  calculation  : 


4 

b: 


II 

II 


mm* 

II 
I 

X 
)G 

II 

I 
Of 


II 
Of 

X 

Oft 

I 

00 
II 


II 
I 

X 

o« 

-H 

II 
I 

OD 


^3 
II 


I 

00 

II 


II 
I 

-a 

X 

II 
I 

CA 


II 

CO 

X 

-a 

I 

Ol 

CO 


^o 


II 


CO 


^ 


II 


CO 


< 

II 


Ik 


Ol 


^ 


II 


II 


I    o« 


«o 


II 
I 


1. 

II 


fj 


oo 


I 

CO 


II 

Ol 


^ 

^ 


II 


CO 


^ 


II 
I 

CO 


II 


I 


to 


<o 


II 


I  « 


I 

3 


II      II 


o 


II 

<o 


I 

•»■ 
I    to 

«o 


0 


+ 


I 


II 


I 


I  'o, 


II 


OD 

+ 


II 

so 


I 


<^    CO 


I 
I 


CO 


II 

Ol 


00 


II      II 


Here  I  stop,  because  I  perceive  that 


I 

*>■ 

I    o 


+ 


II 


»vH 


q!,  and 


ADDlTIOlfft. 


CHAF.  IL 


p*<>  s  r\  and  that  the  diflcmioe  between  the  two  i 
1  and  7,  is  even  ;  whence  it  followt,  that  all  the  euoeevdi^f 
terms  will  likewise  be  the  same  as  the  preeeding;  ao  that  v« 
shall  have  q}^  =  4,  a^*;*  =  -  8,  a»«  =  7,  &c.  r^"  =  —7, 
P^üi  s  10,  &c.  so  that,  if  we  dioose»  we  may  continue  the 
above  series  to  infinity,  only  by  repeating  the  same  tcnniL 

Sccomifyt  let  us  take  tne  radical  %^79  with  n 
tign,  and  the  calculation  will  be  as  folkows: 


5* 

i 

4 

> 

2, 

« 

IC 

> 

4 

* 

5" 

% 

1 

^ 

4 

II 

II 

11 

II 

II 

II 

II 

u 

il 

il 

8P 

1 

CO 

1 

S 

1 

Ol 

1 

Ob 

O 

1 

P 

O) 

X 

*l 

X 

CO 

X 

o 

X 

X 

^ 

? 

X 

1 

X 

1 

X 
Ol 

CS 

1 

X 

1 

Ot 

1 

? 

+ 

1^ 

+ 

■ 

-f 

*l 

1 

s 

• 

O« 

II 

1 

Cd 

II 

X 

II 

H- 

4^ 

II 

II 

II 

1  w 

II 

OD 

II 

II 

II 

1 

J 

1 

M 

1 

1 

1 

\0 

4^ 

-1 

-J 

« 

«• 

? 

H 

^ 

4 

< 

w 

3 

•«. 

X 

•^ 

II 

II' 

II 

u 

II 

II 

II 

Il 

u 

Ii 

1 

1 

«9 

1 

1 

1 

o 

T 

1 

le 
1 

c-i 

5 
1 

1 

•s 

1 

«  1 

O 

II 

II 

II 

II 

II 

II 

II 

II 

es 

11 

Ol 

H» 

1 

>• 

1 

o 

1 

Ol 

1 

-« 

«1 

>• 

^ 

S^' 

i* 

m 

•F 

•p 

* 

T 

* 

3 

■p^ 

"P 

^ 

N 

• 

!\ 

■ 

* 

• 

"   N 

■ 

-1 

1 

4» 

1 

-l 

1 

!** 

^ 

*« 

ä 

Ol 

+ 

1 

1 

o 

1 
-1 

1 

C 

+ 

V 

\ 

»m 

1 

Ol 

+ 

1 

1 

w 

Ni 

« 

7 

ä 

à 

!-' 

•:^ 

ä 

-ä 

•i' 

;ä 

^ë 

II 

11 

Il 

II 

II 

'1 

1 

II 

II 

II 

c 

d 

l 

«• 

0 

- 

- 

« 

- 

»1 

• 

* 

•• 

■^ 

" 

c 

•• 

n 

Wf  may  Rtop  liere,  since  we  have  found  q"  =  q*,  and 
F'»  =  p'',  the  difference  of  the  indiceK  9  and  l\  being  cvm  ; 
for,  by  continuing  the  ;<*ne^,  we  >hould  only  find  the 
terms  that  wc  have  found  nireadv. 


CHAP.  II.  ADDITIONS.  52S 

Now,  if  we  consider  the  values  of  the  terms  f**,  p',  p",  p"', 
&c.  found  in  the  two  cases,  we  shaD  perceive  that  the  least 
of  these  terms  is  equal  to  —  3  ;  in  ttie  first  C(ise,  it  is  the 
term  f'',  to  which  the  values  p*^^  and  5^"  answer  ;  and,  in  the 
second  case,  it  is  the  term  p'^,  to  which  the  values  /?*^  and  ^^ 
answer. 

Whence  it  follows,  that  the  least  value,  which  the  given 
quantity  can  receive,  is  —3  ;  and,  in  order  to  have  the  values 
of  p  and  9,  which  answer  to  it,  we  shall  take,  in  the  first 
case,  the  numbers  jx,  /a',  /x",  namely,  7,  1,  and  1,  and  shall 
form  with  them  the  principal  converging  fractions  J-,  4,  V  ; 

the  third  fraction  will,  therefore,  be  — ;^,  so  that  we  shall  have 

//^  =  15,  and  ^"  =  2;  that  is  to  say,  the  values  required 
will  be  p  =  15,  and  9  =  2.  In  the  second  case,  we  shall 
take  the  numbers  fb,  pi',  ^i?,  [jJ",  namely,  5, 1,  1,  3^  which  will 
give  these  fractions,  f ,  4,  V ,  V  ;  so  that  we  shall  have 
p^'  —  39,  and  q^  =  7;  therefore, p  =  39,  and  y  =  7. 

The  values  which  we  have  just  found  for  p  and  9,  in  the 
case  of  the  minimum,  are  also  the  least  possible  ;  but  if  we 
choose,  we  may  likewise  successively  find  others  greater  :  for 
it  is  evident,  tnat  the  same  term,  — 3,  will  always  return  at 
the  end  of  every  interval  of  six  terms  ;  so  that,  in  the  first 
case,  we  shall  have  p""  n  —  3,  P*''  zi:  —  3,  .  p*^  =:  —  8, 
&c.  and,  in  the  second,  p»^=  -  3.  p'*  =  -3,  p*^*  =  —  3,  Stc. 

Therefore,  in  the  first  case,  the  satisfactory  values  of  0 
and  q  will  be  these  ;  j^",  9"',  p'*,  y",  p*%  y'^,  &c.  ;  and^  m 
the  second  case,  p*'',  q^'',  p%  g",  p"""',  y*^*,  &c.  Now,  the 
values  of  fx»,  jx',  ft'',  &c.  are  in  the  first  case  7, 1, 1,  5,  3,  2, 1  ; 
1, 1,  5, 3,  2,  1  ;  1,  1, 5,  3,  &c.  to  infinity,  because  itt'"  =  /x', 
and  /x^'"  =  p",  &c.  so  that  we  shall  only  have  to  form,  by 
the  method  of  Art  20,  the  fractions, 

7,    1,     I,      5,      3,       2,        1,  1,  I,  3, 

7        s        15        »3       »64       611        875        i486       »  Î  6  I        I  1  *9  i      fc/» 
T>    T>      T  >    TT>     TT  >      TT  >    TTg">      T5T  »      TTT  >      ITS*  >  **^' 

And  we  may  take  for  p  the  numerators  oî  the  third, 
ninth,  &c.  and  for  q  the  corresponding  denominators:  we 
àhall  therefore  havep  s  15,  f  -  2,  orp  ^  ^2361,  q  »  SIS, 
&c. 

In  the  second  case,  the  values  of  /tt',  ft",  /j&^,  &c  will 
be  5,  1,  1,  3,  5,  1,  1,  1,  2;  S,  6,  I,  1,  1,  2,  fee  be*, 
cause  (K.^,  ft/'',  ft""  s=  ft%  fee.  We  shall,  iherdbre,  form  these 
fractions, 

5,    I,      1,     3,      5,        1,         I,         I,         2,         3, 

5       6       II        39       106       X4$        451       696       \\\\       6ltS      Srr' 
TIT>     T>     r;     TT>     TT>     TT;    TTT>     TTT  I    Tl  fT>  ***• 


I 


5S4  ADDITION!.  CSAF.  O. 

And  the  fourth  fraction,  the  tenth,  be  will  ghre  tkc 
values  of /I  and  q  ;  which  will  therefore  be 

p  =  89,  7  =  7,  or  p  =  6225,  q  =  1118,  «rc. 

In  this  manner,  therefore,  we  may  regularly  find  «fl  the 
values  ofp  and  9,  that  will  make  the  given  formula  =  ^  S, 
the  least  value  it  can  receive.  We  might  even  have  a  ge* 
neral  value,  which  would  comprehend  all  these  valuea  of/ 
and  q.  Any  person  who  has  the  curiosity  may  find  it  bv  a 
method  which  we  have  elsewhere  explained,  and  whîdi  k» 
been  already  noticed  (Art.  85). 

We  have  just  found,  that  the  minimum  of  the  quanticj 

Kroposed  is  —  8,  and  consequently  negative  ;  now,  it  migbt 
e  proposed  to  find  the  least  positive  value,  that  the  tame 
Juantity  can  receive  :  wc  should  then  only  have  to  esamioe 
ie  series  p^  p',  p^,  p''',  &c.  in  the  two  cases,  and  we  ahouid 
see  that  the  least  positive  term  is  5  in  both  cases  ;  and  as  in 
the  first  case  it  is  p^,  and  in  the  second  p^,  which  is  5,  the 
values  of  jp  and  9,  that  will  give  the  least  positive  value  of 
the  quantity  proposed,  will  be  p'%  q^\  or  it*,  y*,  or  fcc.  in  the 
first  case,  ana  jr^  7*",  or  o**,  q^\  &c.  in  tne  second  ;  to  that 
we  shall  have,  from  the  above  fractions,  p  =  83,  ç  =  11  ;  or 
p  =  18291,  q  =  1762,  &c.  or  p  =  1 1,  y  =  2  ;  p  =  18«, 
q  =  881,  &c 

We  must  not  forget  to  observe,  that  the  numbers  f<^,  u,\ 
a%  &c.  found  in  the  above  two  cases,  arc  no  other  than  the 
terms  of  the  continued  fractions,  which  represent  the  two 
roots  of  the  equation  9x«  —  118x  +  878  =  0. 
So  that  these  roots  will  be, 

7+  r  .   . 

T^  r  I   I 

+1+4+,  &c. 

expressions  which  we  might  continue  to  infinity  merelv  by 
repeating  the  same  numbers. 

Thus,  we  perceive  how  we  are  to  st»t  alx>ut  reducing  to 
continui'd  fractions  the  roots  of  every  e(}uation  of  the  second 
degrei*. 

41.  Scholium.  In  volume  XI.  of  the  New  C'ommen* 
taries  of  Petersburg,  M.  Ki  i.kr  has  given  a  method  similar 
to  the  prtx:eiling;  but  deducetl  from  principles  somewhat 
different,  for  reducing  to  a  continueil  fraction  the  rcMH  of  any 
integer  number,  not  a  Mjuare,  and  has  addetl  a  Table,  in 
which  the   continued    tractions   are  calculated    for  all    the 


CHAP.  II.  ADDITIOXS.  525 

natural  numbers,  that  are  not  squares,  as  far  as  100. 
This  Table  being  useful  on  various  occasions,  and  par- 
ticularly for  the  solution  of  indeterminate  numbers  of  the 
second  degree,  as  wc  shall  afterwards  find  (Chap.  7),  we 
shall  here  present  it  to  our  readers.  It  will  be  observed» 
that  there  are  two  series  of  integers  answering  to  each 
radical  number  ;  the  upper  is  that  of  the  numbers  p',  —  p', 
p'',  — p'^',  &c.  and  the  under  that  of  the  numbers,  ft,  fx,',  /x*', 
IfJ",  &c. 


•  2 

1111  &c. 
12  2  2  drc. 

^  3 

1  2  1  2  1  2  1  &c. 
1   1  2  1  2  1  2  &c. 

- 

>/  5 

1  1    1   1  &c. 

2  4  4  4  &c. 

i/6 

1  2  1  2  1  2   1  &c. 

2  2  4  2  4  2  4  &c. 

x'  7 

1  o  2  3  1  3  2  3  1  &c. 

2  I    1   1  4  1    1   1  4&C. 

yf  8 

1  4  1  4  1  4  1  &c. 

2  1  4  1  4   1  4  &c. 

yio 

1   1   1   1  &c. 
3  6  6  6  &c. 

%/ll 

1  2  1  2  1  2  1  &c. 
3  3  6  3  6  3  6  &c. 

^12 

1  3  1  3  1  3  1  &c. 
3  2  6  2  6  2  6  &c. 

v/lS 

14334143341  &c. 
3  1   1   1   1  6  1   1   1   1  6&C 

v^l^ 

1  5  2  5   1  5  2  5  1  &c. 
3  1  2  1  6  1  2  1  6  &c. 

• 

-v/15 

1   6  1   6  1  6  1  &c. 
3  1  6  1  6  1  6  &c. 

^17 

1   1   1   1   1  &c. 

4  8  8  8  8  &c. 

v/18 

1  2  1  2  1  2  1  2  1  &Ç. 

448484848  &c. 

^19 

1352531352531  &c. 
4213128213128  arc. 

V20 

1  4  1  4  1   4  1  4  1  &c. 
428282828  &c. 

t/21 

1543451543451   &c. 
4  1    1  2  1    1  8  1   1  2  1   1  8  &c. 

/« 

IS3S361638S«!*« 
4I>43I8IS4«I8*C 

/» 

4  1  3  1  8  1  3  1  8  ftc 

•» 

1  8  1  >  1  8  1  *c. 

4  1  8  I  8  1  8  tic. 

•» 

1     1     1     1  *c. 
&  IV  10  [0  Ac 

•« 

12     18     18     1  »c. 
j  3  10  3  111  S  10  &c 

•88 

1  3  4  3     1  3  4  3     1  Ab^                                              I 
5  3  2  3  10  3  8  3  10  &c 

•« 

14354     I4&54     1*0. 
3  8  1   1  2  10  8  1  1  2  10  *c. 

•SO 

1  S     1  3     1  S     1  S     1  ftc. 
5  2  10  2  10  2  10  2  10  &c. 

•31 

lli53833C     leSfa. 
5  1   1  3  5  3  1    1   10  1    1  ftc. 

•Sî 

1  7  4  7     1/47     \  ta. 
3  1   1   1    10  1   1    1    10  &C. 

•SS 

18  3  8     18  3  8      1   &(;. 
3   12   1    10  1   2  1    10  &c. 

•« 

19  2  9     19  2  9     1   »C. 
3   1   4   1    10   1   4   1    lU  &C. 

•S5 

1   10     1   lO     1   10     1   10  &c. 
.1     1    10     1   10     1    10     1  &c. 

•37 

1      !      1      1      1   &L-. 
fi   12   12   12   12  &«;. 

•3« 
•3!l 

12      12     1   2     1   ftc. 
i;  6  12  ß  12  6  12  &c. 

fi  4   12  4   12  4   12  &1-. 

•  K. 

14      14      14      1   eti: 
li  3   12  3   12  3   12  Äf. 

•41 

13.-1     13  5     1  &c. 
fi  2  2   12  2  2   12  &i.. 

•« 
•43 

IS     1   fi     1   11     1   Kc. 
1)  2  12  2  12  2  12  &e. 

T  r  fi  3  9  2  9  3  fi  7"  1  7  6  *c        '      ^~ 
fi  1   1  3  I  5  1  3  1    1    18  1   1  ftc. 

-  — 

•" 

1  8  .-.  7  4  7  3  H     1  8  3  &C.                                       1 
fi  1    1    1  2  1    1    1    18  1   1  ftc.                                        1 

•45 

19  4  3  4  9     19^349     1  9  4  ll<c. 

fi  1  2  2  2  1   12  1  2  2  8  1   12  1  2  «rr. 

CHAP.  II. 


ADDITIONS. 


627 


v/46 


1  10  3  7  6  5  2  5  6  7  3  10     1  10  3  &c. 
6     13  112  6  2  113     1  12     1  3  &c. 


v/47 

-v/48 


1   11  2  11     1   11  2  11     1  &c. 
6     1  5 1    12     15     1   12  &c. 

f"l2     1   12     1   12  &c. 
6     1   12     1   12     1  &c. 


^50 


1      1     ]      1  &c. 
7  14  14  14  &c. 


v/51 


12     12     12  &c. 
7  7  14  7  14  7  ^c. 


v^52 


139493     139493     13  &c. 
7  4  1  2  1  4  14  4  1  2  1  4  14  4  Arc. 


^53 


-v/5* 


y/55 


^56 


^/57 


14774     14774     147  &c. 
7  3  1    1  3  14  3  I   1  3  14  3  1  &c. 


159295     159295     15  &c. 
7  2  1  6  1   2  14  2  1  6  1  2  14  2  &c. 


16  5  6     116  5     6  1   &c. 
7  2  2  2  14  2  2  2  14  2  &c. 


17     17     17     1  &c. 
7  2  14  2  14  2  14  &c. 


18  7  3  7  8     1  8  7  &c. 
7  1   1  4  1   1   14  1   1  &c. 


v/58 


1967769     196  &c. 
7  1   1   1   1   1   1    14  1   1  &c. 


^59 


1    10  5  2  5  10     1   10  5  &c. 
7     12  7  2     1    14     1  2  &c. 


^60 


1    11  4  11      1    11  4  &c. 
7     12     1    14     12  &c. 


4/61 


1   12  3  4  9  5  5  9  4  3  12     1   12  3  &c. 
7     14  3  12  2  13  4     1   14     1  4  &c. 


^62 


v^6J 


y/65 


^66 


-v/67 


4/68 


-v/69 


1   13  2  13     1    13  2  &c. 
7     16     1    14     1   6  &c. 


1    14     1    14     1   14  &c. 
7     1    14     I   J4     1   &c. 


1      1     1     1   &c. 
8  16  16  16  &c. 


12     12     1  &c. 
8  8  16  8  16  &c. 


13679  2  9763     136  &c. 
8  5  2  1   1  7  1    1  2  5  16  5  2  &c. 


14     14     1  4  &c. 
8  4  16  4  16  4  &c. 


15  4  113  114  5     1   5  4  Jkc. 
8  3  3     14     1  3  3  16  3  3  &c. 


AODITIO«. 


./n 

1  <  «  5  9  t     1  »  9  te. 
8  Î  1  8  1  J  1«  a  1  »c. 

■/" 

1  79  II  3  It  i7     1  7S  ac 
8  2  2     17     1  2  2  16  2  S  ic. 

•7« 

IS     18     1  8  «c. 
8  2  16  2  16  2  &c. 

1/75 

1983389     198  Ac. 

8  1   1  5  5  1    1    16  I   1  &c. 

.'7* 

1   III  7  7  1»    1   111  7  kc 
8     III     1   16     1  1  Ac. 

^i 

1   II  6  II     1  11  6  lie. 
8     11     1   16     1   1  >c. 

^70 

1   12  !>  8  9  3  1  3  9  8  S  II     1  11  3  »c 
8     12IIS45II2     116    12  &c 

W7 

1   Ii  4  7  4  13     1   13  4  kc                                         1 
8     13  2  3     1    16     1  3  «c 

^8 

1   14  »  14     1   14  3  Ac. 
8     14     1   16     1  4  &c. 

V^9 

1   Ii  2  Ii     1   16  2  tic 
8     17     1  IS     1  7  &c. 

•«0 

1   16     1   16     1   16  Ac. 
8     1   16     1  l(     1  Ice 

^88 

1     1     1     1  kc. 
9  18  18  18  Ac. 

v«3 

12     12     12  »c.                                                        1 
9  9  18  9  18  g  &c. 

^8J 

3  ;l     13     1  3  he. 
9  6   18  6   18  9  Ssc. 

<t/S5 

14  9  9  4     14  9  &L-. 
9  4   1    1   4   18  4    1   &c. 

^8« 

1  :i  1(1  ;  1 1  2  1 1   7  10  5     1  S  10  Ac. 
9  3     11      18     II     1  3  18  3     1  Ac. 

^87 

16     16     1  6  Ac 

9  3   IH  3   18  3  Ac. 

•8« 

17  9  8  9  7     1  7  9  ÄI-. 
9  2  1    1   1  2  18  2  1  Ac, 

«/BD 

1  8  i  S  8     1  1^  3  Ac. 
9  2  3  3  2  18  2  3  Ac 

vTW 

19       1  9     1  &c 
9  2     18  2   18  L^c. 

•01 
»"J 

1    10  9  3    14  3  9   III     1    10  9  Ac 
9     1    1  :•     13  1     1    18     1   1  Ac. 

1    11   8  7  4   7  8   11      1118  Ac 
9     112  4  2   1      1    IB     II   .%r 

CHAP. 

II. 

ADDITIONS.                                            5^ 

^93 

1 
9 

12  7  U  4  3  4  11   7  12     1   12  7  &c. 
1  1     1  4  6  4     1   I     1   18     1    1   &c. 

^^94. 

1 
9 

13  6  5  9*  10  3  15  2  15  3  10  9  5  6  13     1  &c. 
12  3   1     15     18     15     113  2     1    18   &c. 

V95 

1 
9 

14  5   14     1   14  &c. 
12     1   18     1  &c. 

v^96 

1 
9 

15  4  15     1   15  &c. 
1  3     1   18    .1  *c. 

^/97 

1 
9 

16  3   11  8  9  9  8  11  3  16     1   16  &c. 
15     11111     15     1    18     1   &c. 

^98 

1 
9 

17  2  17     1   M  &c. 
18     1   18     1  &c. 

-v/99 

1 
9 

18     1   18     1   &c. 
1   18     1  18  &c. 

Thus, 

and  SG 
An( 

for  example,  we  shall  have 

►  of  others. 

i,  if  we  form  the  converging  fractions, 

f       JL       PU      É.     9,n 
qO*      çl'     ^f'     gHi^^' 

according  to  each  of  these  continued  fractions,  we  shall  have 
(py  -  ^(fY  =  1>  f  -  «î'»  =  -  1, 


u  u 

p^  ^  2q^  ==  1,  &c. 


and  likewise, 


(P'Y  -  s(fy  =  1,  p«  -  s^^  =  -  2, 

//  u 

p*  -  Sc*  =  1,  &c. 


tSO  ADDITIONS.  CMAF.  HI. 


CHAP.    III. 

Of  the  Resdutfon,  in  Inte«r  Numbers^  ^EqudîoQS  çfAi 
first  Degree,  ctmtaintng  two  unknoum  QtiJUitîtksB. 

[appendix  to  chap.  I,] 

42.  When  we  have  to  resolve  an  equation  of  this  fbnB, 

ax  ^  bi^  ^  Cj 

in  which  a^  6,  c,  are  given  integer  numbers,  posâtÎTcv  or 
negative,  and  in  which  the  two  unknown  Quantities,  jr  aiicly, 
must  also  be  integers,  it  is  sufficient  to  Know  one  soiutioi, 
in  order  to  deduce  with  ease  all  the  other  solutions  that  art 
possible. 

For,  suppose  we  know  that  these  values,  x  =  «,  and 
y  zz,  ßy  satis^  the  conditions  of  the  eo  uation  proposed^  m  and 
ß  being  any  mteger  numbers,  we  sliall  then  have  acw  bfi^c  ; 
and,  consequently, 

ax  ^  bj/  ^  aa,  —  6/3,  or  a[x  -  a)  —  b{y  —  /5)  i=  0; 

JT  — a        b 
whence  we  find  ~  z:  — .      Let   us   reduce   the   fraction 

—  to  its  least  terms,  and  supjXKsing,  in  consequence  of  ihu 

reduction,  that  it  becomes  —,  where  h'  and  a'  will  be  pnme 
to  one  another,  it  is  evident  that  the  cf| uation, 

could  not  subsist,  on  the  suppasition  of  x  —  a,  and  y  —  ßy 
being  integers,  unless  we  have  .r  — a  =  ml/y  and  y — B  zz  ma\ 
m  l)eing  any   integer  numlKT  ;    ho   that   we  sliall  have,  in 

Îeneral,  x  zz  a  -k-  mUy  and  i^  zi  ß  -r  ma'  ;  m  being  an  i»- 
eterminate  integiT. 
Now,  as  we  may  take  m  either  }x>sitive,  or  negative,  it  » 
easy  tu  perceive,  that  we  may  always  determine  tlie  number 
m  m  such  a  manner,  that  the  value  of  x  may  m>t  be  gnsatrr 

than  --,  or  that  of  ^  not  greater  than    -^  (al)^tracting  from 

the  sigan  of  these  quantities)  ;  whence  it  follows,  that  if  the 


CHAP.  III.  ADDITIONS.  531 

r 

even  equation  ax  ^  b\f  "n  c^  is  resolvible  in  integer  num* 
rsy  and  we  successively  substitute  for  x  all  the  integer 
numbers,  positive  as  well  as  negative,  contained  between 

these  two  limits  —,  and  —5—»  we  shall  necessarily  find  one 

that  will  satisfy  this  equation  :  and  we  shall  likewise  find 
a  satisfactory  value  of  y  among  the  positive,  or  n^ative  ' 

whole  numbers,  contained  between  the  limits  ^,  and  -ô~* 

By  these  means  we  may  find  the  first  solution  of  the 
equation  proposed  ;  after  which,  we  shall  have  all  the  others 
by  the  preceding  formule. 

43.  But,  without  employing  the  method  of  trial,  which 
we  have  now  proposed,  and  which  would  sometimes  be  very 
laborious,  we  may  make  use  of  the  very  ample  and  direct 
method  explained  in  Chap.  I.  of  the  preceding  Treatise,  or  of 
the  followmg  method. 

Firsts  if  tne  numbers  a  and  b  are  not  prime  to  each  otlier, 
the  equation  cannot  subsist  in  integer  numbers,  unless  the 
given  number,  c,  be  divisible  by  the  greatest  common 
measure  of  a  and  h.  Supposing,  therefore,  the  division 
performed,  and  expressing  the  quotients  by  a*,  y,  c',  we 
shall  have  to  resolve  the  equation, 

dx  —  fy  zr  c^, 

where  d  and  V  are  prime  to  each  other. 

Secondly  y  if  we  can  find  values  of  p  and  q  that  satisfy  the 
equation,  dp  ^llq  zz  ±  1,  we  may  resolve  the  preceding 
equation  ;  for  it  is  evident  that,  by  multiplying;  these  values 
by  ±6^,  we  shall  have  values  that  will  satisfy  the  equation, 

dx  —:by'=.d\ 
that  is  to  say,  we  shall  have 

X  •=.  ±  pc\  and  y  zi  ±  qd. 

Now,  the  equation  dp  —  b'q  zz  ±:  \  is  always  resolvible 
in  integers,  as  we  have  aemonstrated.  Art.  23  ;  and,  in  order 
to  find  the  least  values  o£p  and  q  that  can  satisfy  it,  we  shall 

only  have  to  convert  the  fraction  -^ ,  into  a  continued  frac- 
tion by  the  method  of  Art  4,  and  then  deduce  from  it  a 
series  of  principal  fractions,  converging  to  the  same  fraction, 

-T,  by  the  formulae  of  Art.  10;  the  last  of  these  fractions 
will  be  the  same  fraction  ---j  ;  and  if  we  represent  the  last 


ABDlTlOVt.  CHAP.  Ill« 


but  one  by  --,  we  shall  bave»  by  the  law  of  thcae  firactiom^ 

(Art  12)  Jp  —  b'q  =  ±\;  the  upper  ngn  beioff  for  tbe 
case,  in  whicn  the  rank  of  the  fraction  b  even,  and  the  under 
for  that  in  which  it  b  odd, 

Theie  values  of /i  and  q  being  thuft  known«  we  shall  fine 
havejr  ssHh  pe',  and  y  ss±  qé,wad  then  taking  theae  values 
fer  a  and  /?,  we  shall  nave,  in  general,  (Art.  49), 

*  =  ±  P^  +  ^t  y  =  ±  J«'  +  "w^f 
expressions  which  necessarily  include  all  the  solutions  of  die 
given  equation  that  are  possible  in  intq;er  numbert. 

That  we  may  leave  no  obstacle  to  the  practice  of  tUs 
method,  we  shall  observe,  that  although  the  numbers  •  aad 
b  may  be  ponlîve,  or  negative,  we  may  notwithstamfi^g 
take  them  always  positive,  provided  we  give  contrary  aig 
to  Jr,  when  a  is  negative,  and  to  y,  when  b  b  ne«live 

44.  Example.  To  give  an  example  of  the  preceding  n 
tbod,  we  shall  take  that  of  Art.  14,  Cliap.  I.  of  the  pre- 
ceding  Treatise,  where  it  b  required  to  resolve  the  equatmai, 
99p  ^  B6q  +  11«  Changing/i  into  x,  and  q  into^,  we  shall 
have  Sftr  *  56y  =  11. 

So  that  we  shall  make  asS9,  i  =  56,andca  11;  «id 
as  56  and  39  are  already  prime  to  each  other,  we  shall  have 
il/  s:  39,  A^  =  56,  c'  =  11.    We  must  therefore  reduce  the 

fraction    -y  =  |^,  to  a  continued  fraction;  and,  for  thit 

purpose,  as  we  have  already  done  (Art.  80),  we  shall  make 
the  following  calculation  ; 

ä9)56(l 

17)S9(« 
34 

5)17(3 
15 

«)5(2 

4 

T)2(« 
S 

0. 


CHAP.  ni.  ADDITIONS.  533 

Then,  with  the  quotients  1,  S,  S,  &c.  we  may  form  the 
fractions, 


1,     2,     3,     2,     2, 

I  3  I o        %1        5  6 


and  the  last  fraction  but  one,  *|,  will  be  that  which  we  liavc 

P 
expressed  in  general  by  —  ;  so  that  we  shall  have  p  =  23, 

7=16;  and,  as  this  fraction  is  the  fourth,  and  consequently, 
uf  an  even  rank,  we  must  take  the  upper  sign  ;  so  that  we 
shall  have,  in  general, 

a:  =  23  x  11+  56m,  and 
^  =  16  X  11  4  39m; 

m  being  any  integer  whatever,  positive,  or  negative. 

45.  Scholium.  We  owe  the  first  solution  of  this  problem 
to  M.  Bachct  de  Meziriac,  who  gave  it  in  the  secona  edition 
of  his  Mathematical  Recreations,  entitled  Problèmes  plaisans 
et  delectabksy  &c.  The  first  edition  of  this  work  appeared 
in  1612;  but  the  solution  in  question  is  there  only  an- 
nounced, and  is  only  found  complete  in  the  edition  of  1624. 
The  method  of  M.  Bachet  is  very  direct  and  ingenious,  and 
cannot  be  rendered  more  elegant,  or  more  general. 

I  seize  with  pleasure  the  present  opportunity  of  doing 
justice  to  this  learned  author,  having  observed  tKat  the  ma- 
thematicians, who  have  since  resolved  the  same  problem,  have 
never  taken  any  notice  of  his  labors. 

The  method  of  M.  Bachet  may  be  explained  in  a  few 
words.  After  having  shewn  how  the  solution  of  equations 
of  the  form  ax  —  iy  =  c,  (a  and  b  being  prime  to  each 
c>ther),  may  be  reduced  to  that  of  oo:  —  ^  =  Hh  1,  he  ap- 
plies to  the  resolution  of  this  last  equation  ;  and,  for  this 
purpose,  prescribes  the  same  operation  with  regard  to  the 
numbers  a  and  A,  as  if  we  wished  to  find  their  greatest  com- 
mon divisor,  (and  this  is  what  we  have  just  done);  then 
calling  c,  d,  f ,  ^  &c.  the  remainders  arising  from  the  dif- 
ferent divisions,  and  supposing,  for  example,  that  f  is  the 
last  remainder,  which  will  necessarily  be  equal  to  unity  (be- 
cause a  and  b  are  prime  to  one  another,  by  hypothesis),  he 
makes,  when  the  number  of  remainders  is  even,  as  in  the 
present  case, 

-  T  «d±l       .   fc+1  yb±l      ^ 

lSa+1 


W4  AODlTlOMt.  CKAF.  pr. 

and  Uieae  laal  niunben  A  and  «,  will  be  the  IcMt  vahis  of 
xand^. 

If  the  number  of  the.  remainder»  were  odd,  g  for  inatanee 
being  the  laü  remainder  =  1,  then  we  must  make 

It  it  easy  to  aee  that  this  m«tbod  is  fundamentally  tbe 
same  as  that  of  Chap.  I.  ;  but  it  is  leas  convenient,  I 
it  requires  divisions.    Those  who  are  curious  in  sudi 
ladoosy  will  see  frith  pleasure^  in  the  woric  of  M.  BacfaeC» 
artifioes  which  he  has  employed  to  arrive  at  the  fijtqpjiag 
Rnle^  and  to  deduce  from  it  a  complete  solution  of  oqi 
of  the  form,  oat  ^  iy  s  e. 


CHAP.  IV. 


Gmrro/  meihodßw  nêcltoing^  m  Inleger  Numbev% 
lions  wiih  too  umkmmn  Quantities,  ^vMkk  am  âotêmai 
exceed  iheßrH  Degree. 

[APPENDIX   TO   CHAP.   III. 

46.  Let  the  general  equation» 

fl  +  Ax  +fy  +  </!■=  -f  ^jy  ^gx^jf  +/r»  +  Ax*  +  kxy^^  &€• 

,  s  0  l)c  prf)poeed,  in  which  the  coefficients  a,  i,  r.  Ice  are 
siven  integer  numbers,  and  x  and  y  two  indelennina&e  num- 
Ders,  which  must  also  be  integers. 

Dcdudog  tlie  value  of  y  from  this  equation,  wc  shall  have 
_        fl  -h  &r  -hrfj«  4-^  +*.r*+,  &c. 
*  c  +rx  -h^x«  +ÄX*  4- ,  fcc. 

M>  that  the  (Question  will  be  reduced  to  finding  an  integer 
numlier,  which,  when  taken  for  x,  makes  the  numenUar  of 
this  fraction  divisible  by  its  denominator. 
Let  us  suppose 

p=2a  V  bx  +  dx^  \'fx^  +  Ax*  +,  he. 
y  =  c  -I-  rx  >  gx^  +  A-x'  +»  &c 

and  taking  x  out  oflxuli  tiicM.*  equations  by  the  ordinary  rules 
of  Algebra,  we  shall  have  a  final  etjuation  of  this  form, 

^  +  V  +  <  ?  +  ï^r  +  ^P1  +  ^9'  +  ^P"  +•  &c.  a  O, 

where  the  riK*fKnciii<«  a,  b,  c,^c.  will  Ik*  rational  and  integer 
functions  of  the  numbers  a,  b^  r,  &c. 


CHAP.  IV.  AODITIOm;  5S5 


Now,  since  j^  =  —  — ,  we  shall  also  have  p  ^'^qy;  so 

that  by  substituting  this  value  ofp,  we  shall  get 

x^Byq  +  cq  +  DyY  -  lyy*  +  Fy«  +,  &c.  =  0, 

where  a)i  the  tenns  are  multiplied  by  q,  except  the  first,  a  ; 
therefore  the  number  a  must  be  divisible  by  the  number  q, 
otherwise  it  would  be  impossible  for  the  numbers  q  and  y  to 
be  both  integers. 

We  shall  therefore  seek  all  the  divisors  of  the  known  in* 
teger  number  a,  and  shaU  successively  take  each  of  these 
divisors  for  q  ;  from  each  of  which  suppositions  we  shall  have 
a  determinate  equation  in  x,  the  integer  and  rational  roots  of 
which»  if  it  have  any,  will  be  found  by  the  known  methods  ; 
then  substituting  these  roots  for  x,  we  shall  see  whether  the 

values  ofp  and  q,  which  result,  are  such,  that  -^    may  be  an 

integer  number.  By  these  means,  we  shall  certainly  find  all 
the  integer  values  of  J7,  which  may  likewise  give  integer 
values  o\  y  in  the  equation  proposed. 

Hence  we  see,  that  the  number  of  integer  solutions  of  such 
eouations  must  always  be  limited;  but  there  is  one  case 
which  must  be  excepted,  and  which  does  not  fall  under  the 
preceding  method. 

47.  Tnis  case  is  when  there  are  no  coefficients  e,  gj  k,  &c. 
So  that  we  have  simply, 

In  order  to  find  all  the  values  of  x,  that  mil  render  the 
quantity  a  -f  6ar  -f  dx'^-\-fa^  -f-  hx^  +,  &c.  divisible  by  the 
quantity  r,  we  must  proceed  as  follows.  Suppose  we  have 
already  found  an  integer,  n,  which  satisfies  tins  condition  ; 
it  is  evident  that  every  number  of  the  form  n  -^{1*0  will 
likewise  satisfy  it,  \l  being  any  integer  number  ;  farther,  if  n  is 

c 
7  -X-  (abstracting  from  the  signs  of  n  and  c),  we  may  always 

determine  the  number  jx,  and  the  sign  which  precedes  it  so, 
that  the  number  n  Hh  f^,  may  become  /.  -^  ;  and  it  is  easy 

to  perceive  that  this  could  only  be  done  in  one  way,  the 
values  of  n  and  c  being  ^ven  ;  wherefore,  if  we  express  by 

m'  that  value  of  n  +  jitc,  which  is  L  -q-,  and  which  satisfies 


5d()  AUDITIONS.  CHAT.  IW. 

tlie  condition  in  queütion,  we  shall  have,  in  general, 
n  =  f i'  +  fA-c,  fjL  being  any  number  whatever. 

Whence  I  concluue,  that  if  we  substitute  suooesaivelvt  in 
the  fonnulo,  a  +  6x  +  rfx*  -hfo^  +>  &c.  instead  of  x,  afl  the 

c  . 

integers  positive,  or  negative,  that  do  not  exceed  -3-,  apd  if 


denote  by  n\  vP^  vl",  &c.  such  of  those  numbers  as  will 
the  quantity,  a  +  &*r  -f  djc^  -f ,  &c.  divisible  by  r,  all  the 
other  numbers  that  do  the  same,  will  necessarily  be  indudrd 
in  the  formula-  n'  ±  /x'c,  «"  ±  \iPcy  «"  +  ^•"'0,  &c.  a',  11%  ^% 
&a  being  any  integer  numbers. 

Various  remarks  might  here  be  made  to  facilitate  the  fiodioi; 
of  the  numbers  n\  rr,  n'*',  &c.  but  it  is  the  more  unneoesiaanr 
to  enlarge  upon  this  subject,  as  I  have  already  had  oœaskxi 
to  treat  of  it,  in  a  Memoir  published  among  those  of  the 
Academy  of  Berlin  for  the  year  1768,  and  entitled  Nourctk 
MetJiode  poitr  résoudre  ks  Problèmes  indéterminés, 

48.  I  shall,  however,  say  a  word  on  the  method  of  de- 
termining two  numbers,  x  and  ^,  so  that  the  fraction 

r 

may  become  an  integer  numl)er,  as  this  investigation  will  be 
very  useful  to  us  in  tlie  sequel. 

JSii|);K?>ing  tliat^  and  x  must  be  prime  to  each  other,  and 
farllicr,  that  y  niu>t  ho  prime  to  r,  we  may  aiwavs  nuike 
X  ~  nif  —  cz\  n  and  z  being  indeterminate  numberi^;  tor. 
c»)nsKlering  ^,  ^,  and  r,  as  üiven  numl)ers  we  shall  have  «n 
etiuation  alway»  resolvihle  in  whole  numlx*rs  by  the  nu.'thod 
ol  Chap.  III.,  becau>e //  and  cliaveno  common  measure,  bv 
the  l)y|)olheMs.  Now,  if  we  substitute  this  expression  ol"  j 
in  the  quantity,  «>"'  ^  ^^''— '.r  -  Jj/'"--\r-  -f ,  ^:c.  it  wiU  lie- 
come, 

{a  4  hn  -  dir  V  fn'  \- .  Jfvc.)  if 
-'/>»+  Mdn  -^)}fh  •  + ,  .S:  e.  ^  rt/  •*-  •  i 
4    (d  -H  8/;i  ^  ,'  ive.)  r\i/'^-^z' 
~ ,  ice. 

and  It  i^  evident,  that  this  (piantity  could  not  lie  dixiMhle  hv 
r,  unless  the  first  term,  [a  -f-  f*n  -f-  dn'  +  Jh^  +*  &c.  »  v''  ^eir 
M>,  since  nil  the  oilier  terms  are  imiliiplietl  by  r.  Tiurc- 
fore,  as  r  and  7  are  snp|HKiti  to  Iv  prime  to  each  other,  the 
c|uniitity  //  •  '  ;/  -|-  (/;/*  +  ///'  -f- ,  \(\  must  itself*  be  divi^hW 
by  r;  m)  that  we  sliajl  «iiilv  have  to  Mtk,  hv  the  nu  thcxl  <»l* 
the  prtTetiing  Article,  all  the  values  of  u  that  ran  satisfy  this 


CHAP.  V.  ADDITIONS«  537 

condition,  and  then  we  shall  have,  in  general,  x  ^ny  ^  nz, 
X  being  any  integer  number  whatever. 

It  is  proper  to  observe,  that  although  we  have  supposed 
the  numbers  x  and  y  to  be  prime  to  each  other,  as  well  as 
the  numbers  y  and  c,  our  solution  is  still  no  less  general  ; 
for  if  X  and  y  had  a  common  measure  a,  we  should  only  have 
to  substitute  aaf  and  a^,  instead  of  x  and  y,  and  should 
then  consider  x  and  y  as  p^ime  to  each  other  ;  likewise  if 
y  and  c  were  a  common  measure  /3,  we  might  put  |^,  in- 
stead of  y,  and  consider  y  and  c  as  prime  to  each  other. 


CHAP.  V. 


A  direct  and  general  method  for  finding  ilie  values  of  x, 
that  mil  render  Rational  Quantities  of  the ^  form 
v/(a-}-  bx  +  ex*),  and  for  resolving ^  in  Rational  Num- 
bers, the  indeterminate  Equations  of  the  second  Degree, 
which  have  two  unknown  Quantities,  when  they  admit  of 
Solutions  of  this  hind» 

[APPliNDIX    TO    CHAP,    iv] 

49.  I  suppose  first  that  the  known  numbers  a,  h,  c,  are 
integers  ;  for  if  they  were  fractions,  we  should  only  have  to 
reduce  them  to  a  common  square  denominator,  and  then  it  is 
evident,  that  we  might  always  abstract  from  their  denomina- 
tor ;  but  with  respect  to  the  *  number  x,  we  shall  suppose 
that  it  may  be  integer,  or  fractional,  and  shall  sec,  in  what 
follows,  how  the  question  is  to  be  resolved,  when  we  admit 
only  integer  numbers. 

Let  then  */  (a  +  bx  •\'  ex')  n  y,  and  we  shall  have 
9£x  -h  Ä  —  ^/  (4cy^  +  Ô*  —  4ac)  ;  so  that  the  difficulty  will 
be  reduced  to  rendering  rational  the  quantity, 

50.  Let  us  sup|x>se,  therefore,  in  general,  that  we  have  to 
make  rational  the  quantity  >^(Ay  +  b)  ;  that  is  to  say,  to 
make  Ay^  +  b  equal  to  a  square,  a  and  b  being  given  integer 
numbers  positive  or  negative,  and^  an  indeterminate  num- 
ber, which  must  be  rational. 

It  is  evident  that  if  one  of  the  numbers  a,  or  b,  were  1, 
or  any  other  square,  the  problem  would  Ix;  resolvible  by 
the  known  methods  of  Diophantu?,  which  are  detailed  in 


£88  ADDITIONS. 

Chap.  IV.  ;  we  ahaU  therefore  abetact  frooi  Ums» 
rmther  we  shall  endeavour  to  reduce  all  the  rest  to  thenJ 

Farther,  if  the  numbers  a  and  a  were  divisible  br  aav 
square  numbers,  we  might  likewise  abrtrad  from  'those 
divisors  ;  that  is.  to  say,  suppress  them,  only  by  tskinr  tat  a 
and  B  the  quotients,  which  we  should  have,  after  divwng  the 
given  values  by  the  greatest  squares  possible  ;  in  fàet,  sop. 
posing  A  =  aV,  and  ß  =s  0*b',  we  shall  have  to  make  the 
number,  aV^  +  t/ß^  a  square;  therefiMe^  dividing  by  ß*, 

and  making  -^s  y  ;    we  shall  have  to  determine  the  un- 

II        I 
known  quantiUr  t/  ;  so  that  a^*  +  B  may  be  a  square. 

Whence  it  follows  that,  when  we  have  found  a  value  of  jf 

that  will  make  Ay*  +  b  become  a  square  (rejecting  in  tlie 

S'ven  values  of  a  and  b  the  souare  factors  a^  and  ^,  which 
ey  might  contain),  wc  shaJl  only  have  to  multiply  the 

value  found  for  y  by  — ,  in  order  to  have  that  whidi  answers 

to  the  quantity  proposed. 

51.  Let  us,  tticrefore,  consider  the  formula  Ay^  -f*  *«  îa 
which  A  and  b  are  given  integer:»,  not  divisible  by  any  square  ; 
and,  as  we  suppose  that  y  may  be  a  fraction,  let  us  make 

y  =  -^y  p  and  q  being  integers  prime  to  each  other,  in  order 

that  the  fraction  may  be  reduced  to  its  least  terms  ;  we  shall 

Ayr 
therefore  have  the  quantity  -  r -J- h,  which  must  be  a  square: 

wherefore,  a/>*  +  wy-  must  be  a  square  also  ;  lo  that  we 
shall  have  lo  n^solve  the  iHjualion,  A/r  +  b^*  =  s*,  gup- 
]iosing  /),  7,  and  :,  to  hv  intogir  nun)lM:rs. 

Now,  I  îwiy  that  q  nui.st  Ik»  prime  to  a,  and  p  prime  to  ?  ; 
for  if  q  and  a  hail  a  common  divi^tr,  it  is  evulent  that  the 
tenn  hq-  would  Ix?  divihihie  by  the  j^ciunre  of  that  divii^ir  ; 
and  the  term  Ay/*  would  only  hv  cliviMulr  hv  the  fir^l  |vtmcr 
of  the  Nune  (liMM)r,  iKtaiiNi»  p  ami  q  nrv  jiriini'  lo  lach  other, 
and  A  is  Mipjjoscd  not  to  n»iitain  any  >qiiare  Taetor:  mliert- 
fore  the  nunilxT  Ay>*  +  vq'  ucuild  only  he  omr  divisible  by 
thecommon  divisor  of  7  and  a  ;  eon^t'ijuentlvjit  would  beim» 
»wsihle  for  that  nuniher  to  ))e  a  9(|uare.  tu  the  NUiie  man- 
ner, it  may  be  pn»vetl,  that  p  and  b  can  have  no  comoHiD 
divisor. 


eu  A  F.  V,  ADDITIONS.  539 

Resolution  qf  the  Equation  Ap*  +  Bq*  =  z*  in  integer 

Numbers, 

52.  Supposing  A  greater  than  b,  the  equation  will  be 
written  thus, 

A/?«  =2«  —  BÇr«, 

and  as  the  numbers  p^  q^  and  z  must  be  integer,  z^  —  bç^ 
must  be  divisible  by  a. 

Now,  since  a  and  q  are  prime  to  each  other  (Art.  B\\  we 
shall,  according  to  the  method  of  Art.  48,  make 

n  and  çf  beipg  two  indeterminate  integers  ;  which  will  change 

the  formula,  z^  —  Bq^,  into  (n- —  B)g* — ^uAq^-^A'^q^  in 
which  n*  —  b  must  be  divisible  by  a,  taking  for  n  an  integer 

number,  not  7  tt- 

2 

We  shall  try  therefore  for  n  all  the  integer  numbers  that 

do  not  exceed  -zr.  and  if  we  find  none  that  makes  n*  —  b 

2' 

divisible  by  A,  we  conclude  immediately,  that  the  equaticm 
Ap*  =  2*  —  By*  is  not  resolvible  in  whole  numbers,  and 
therefore  that  the  quantity  xy^  +  b  can  never  become  a 
square. 

But  if  we  find  one  or  more  satisfactory  values  of  n,  we 
must  substitute  them,  one  after  the  other,  for  n,  and  proceed 
in  the  calculation,  as  shall  now  be  shewn. 

I  shall  only  remark  farther,  that  it  would  be  useless  to 

give  n  values  greater  than  -5-,  for  calling  «',  n",  n"',  &c.  the 

values  of  n  less  than  -5-,  which  will  render  n^— b  divisible  by 

A,  all  the  other  values  of  n  that  will  have  the  same  effect  will 
be  contained  in  these  formulœ,  n'  ±  jx'a,  n"  +  f^^A,  n^  ±  /x'^a, 
'&c.  (Chap.  IV.  47).     Now,  substituting  these  values  for  n, 

in  the  formula,  (n* —  b)^*  —  2nAq^  +  A*y*,  that  is  to  say, 
(nq  —  A^O*  —  By',  it  is  evident  tnat  we  shall  have  the  same 
results,  as  if  we  only  put  n',  n",  n^y  &c.  instead  of  n,  and 
added  to  y' the  quantities  +fi''y,  Ti^^?»  ^f^^q»  &c«  so  that, 
as  y'  is  an  indeterminate  number,  these  substitutions  would 
not  give  formulas  different  from  what  we  should  have,  by  the 
simpe  substitution  of  the  values  n',  n'^,  n"^,  &c. 

53.  Since»  th»t^~*-  »•  —  b  must  be  diviûble  by  a,  let  a' 


540  AOOITlON'il.  C'HAr.  V. 

be  the  quotient  of  this  divinon,  so  that  aa'  =  n*  ^  b,  and 

the  equation, 

A^«  =  z'  -  B7*  =  (n*  -  B)g^  -  2nAyy'  +  a^, 
being  divided  by  a,  will  become 

p^  ==  aY  -  W  +  A<r, 

where  V  will  neces^uirily  be  Icsh  than  a,  because 

,       n«  —  B        ,  -  A 

a'  =  ,  and  B  Z.  A,  and  n  not  7  7; . 

A  SS 

i^îr«/»  if  a'  Ix^  a  scjuare  number,  it  is  evident  this  onuatioo 
will  be  resolvible  by  the  known  methods;  and  the  simple»! 
solution  will  be  obtained,  by  making  7^  s  0,  9  =  1,  mad 
p=  v^a'. 

Secondly,  if  a'  be  not  a  square,  we  must  ascertain  whether 
it  be  less  than  a,  or  at  least  whether  it  bo  divisible  bv  aov 
square  numl)er,  so  that  the  quotient  may  he  leas  tlian  a, 
abstracting  from  the  »igns;  then  we  must  multiply  the 
whole  equation  by  a',  and,  because  aa'  —  «*  r=  —  b,  wc 

shall  have  a'/'*  =  (a'ç  —  w/)*  —  bç*;  so  that  By*  —  a/j* 
must  be  a   hquaix*  ;   hencv,   dividing  by  /i*,  and    oiakii*j; 

^  =  y,  and  a'  =  c,  wc  shall  have  to  make  a  square  of  the 
P 

formula  n^'  -\-  f,  which  cviilently  resembles  that  of  Art.  o'i. 
Thus,  if  (•  contains  a  sîjuare  factor  y%  we  may  sunnn.*s*»  it, 
by  multii)lvin|j:  the  value  which  we  shall  find  for  y  bv  y,  in 
order  to  nave  ils  true  val':e;  and  we  ^hall  have  a  fnnuuU 
similar  to  that  of  Art.  ol,  but  with  this  diüerence,  that  ûw 
coeflicients,  11  and  c  ol*  our  last  will  Ik*  It^s  than  the  «"à- 
eflieients,  a  and  11,  oï  the  other. 

54.  Ihit  it*  a'  hv  not  less  tiian  r,  nor  Iktouics  so  when  di- 
vided by  llie  j;reatesl  S4|uare,  wliicli  niea.sun's  it,  ilun  ue 
must  make  r/  :^  »7  -\-  (f  \  and,  Md)Mituting  this  value  in  the 
ctjuation,  it  will  liecome 


U  I 

p    -zi  \q  -  J.Vr///  ..-  Ay-, 


\ihere  >i'  iz    $t   —  >a'. 


I 


and  a'  r=  A^r*—  Mut  f  \  n»    ^    . 
We  n>u»t  determine  the  uhule  nunilKT  y.  which  is  alw^\% 

|M>^silile,  Ml,  tli.it  u    \\\i\\  nnl  Ik*    7    ^^  ,  :ilMraetiii;;  fnm:   \\w 


CHAP.  V,  ADDITIONS.  541 

signs,  and  then  it  is  evident,  that  a"  will  become   L  a',  be- 

cause  a"  =  — p-,  and  b  =,  or  Zl  a,  and  n  =,  or  ^  5-. 

We  shall  therefore  apply  the  same  reasoning  here  that  we 
did  in  the  preceding  Article  ;  and  if  a'^  is  a  square,  we  shall 
have  the  resolution  of  the  equation  :  but  if  a''  is  not  a  square, 
and  Z  B,  or  becomes  so,  when  divided  by  a  square,  we  must 
multiply  the  equation  by  a',  and  shall  thus  have,  by  making 

"5;  ==y»  ^^^  ^"  ~  ^9  ^^^  formula  b^^  +  c,  which  must  be  a 

square,  and  in  which  the  coefficients,  b  and  c,  (after  having 
suppressed  in  c  the  square  divisors,  if  there  are  any),  will  be 
less  than  those  of  the  formula  Ay*  4-  b  of  Art,  51.  But  if 
these  cases  do  not  take  place,  we  shall,  as  before,  make 
q'  =  y^(jf^  -f-  g'^',  and  the  equation  will  be  changed  into  this, 

///  //  //  /// 

p"  =  Ay»  —  2n"q"f'  +  A^S 

where  n^  zz  n'  —  ti'a", 

u 


and  a'"  =  aV  -2nV  +  a'  = 


n'  — b 


We  shall  therefore  take  for  v'  such  an  integer  number,  that 

a" 
n!'  may  not  be   7  -^,  abstracting  from  the  signs  ;  and,  as  b 


H 

n*—  B 
is  not  7  a''  (hyp.),  it  follows,  from  thé  equation,  a*" = — |p  , 

A, 

that  a"'  will  be  z  a"  ;  so  that  we  may  go  over  the  same 
reasoning  as  before,  and  shall  draw  from  it  similar  con- 
clusions. 

Now,  as  the  numbers  a,  a',  a'',  a'^,  &c.  form  a  decreasing 
series  of  integer  numbers,  it  is  evident,  that,  by  continuing 
this  series,  we  shall  necessarily  arrive  at  a  term  less  than  the 
given  number  b  ;  and  then  calling  this  term  c,  we  shall  have, 

as  we  have  already  seen,  the  formula  bj/*  +  c  to  make  equal 
to  a  square.  So  that  by  the  operations  we  have  now  ex- 
plained, we  may  always  be  certain  of  reducing  the  formula, 

Ay^  4-  B,  to  one  more  simple,  such  as  b^^  -|-  c  ;  at  least,  if 
the  problem  is  resolvible. 
55.  Now,  in  the  same  manner  as  we  have  reduced  the 


ABMTIUM«  CBAV«  V» 


ftrDuh,  Ay*  -h  Bf  to  ty*  +  c,  we  might  lednoe  this  ImC  id 

If 
cy  +  D,  whore  d  will  be  lets  than  c,  and  to  on  ;  and  na  the 

numbers  a,  a,  c,  d,  &c.  form  a  decreasing  series  of  intcgcn» 
it  is  evident  that  this  saies  cannot  go  on  to  infinitj,  and 
therefore  the  operation  roust  always  terminate.  If  the  ques- 
tion admits  m  no  scJution  in  rational  numben,  we  shall 
arrive  at  an  impossible  condition  ;  but»  if  the  questioo  is  n* 
solvible,  we  shall  always  be  brought  to  an  equation  Eke  thai 
of  Art  5S»  in  which  one  of  the  coeflkients»  as  a\  will  be  a 
square;  so  that  the  known  methods  will  be  appBcnhle  lo  it: 
this  equation  bong  reaolvcd,  we  may,  by  mvcitiiy  lbs 
operation,  suooessiTdy  resolve  all  the  preceding  cqnatiBai^ 
up  to  the  first  Ap*  +  a^  =  m\ 

We  will  iUustrste  this  method  by  some  examplea. 

Sß.  EiPompU  U  Let  it  be  proposed  to  find  a  nliaMl 
value  of  X,  such,  that  the  formula,  7  +  l&r  -f- 19^1  nmy 
become  a  square  *. 

Here,  we  shall  have  a  rr  7,  i  r=  15,  e  =  IS  ;  and  thcie» 
fere  4c  =:  4  X  19^  and  6*  —  4ae  =:  -  189;  so  that  calE^ 
the  root  of  the  square  in  question  y,  we  shall  have  the 
formula  4  x  ISy  —  199»  which  must  be  a  aqiiare.  We 
shall  also  have  a=:4x  13,  andB=-  139,  «rhete  it  will 
at  once  be  observed,  that  a  is  divisible  by  the  square  4  ;  so 
that  we  must  reject  this  s(]uare  divisor,  and  nmply  suppoic 
A  =:  13;  but  we  must  then  divide  tlic  value  found  fer  jr  by 
S,  as  is  shewn,  Art.  50. 


Making,  therefore,  jr  =:  -^^  we  shall  have  the  equatioBp 


9 
I3p'  -  ISO?-  =  s";  or,  because  139  is  7  IS,  let  us  make 

q 

^  =  -^,  in  order  to  have  —  \S9p^  +  ISq-  s  ««,  an  equation 

which  we  may  write  thus,  — 139/?*  =  i*  —  13fl^, 

We  shall  now  make  (Art.  53)  z  ^  nq  ^  139g^»  and  must 
take  for  n  an  integer  number  not  7  '  ^*,  that  is  to  aay, 
Z  70  such,  that  n*  —  13  may  be  divisible  by  139.  As- 
suming now  n  =  41,  we  have  m^  7  13  =  1668  =139 x  IS; 
so  that  by  making  the  subsititutiun,  and  then  dividing  by 
—  139,  we  shall  have  the  e(]uation,  , 

/!«=:  —  12y-  +  2  X  *\q^  -  139y«. 

Nov,  as  —12  is  not  a  s(]uare,  this  equation  has  not  the 
•  8ee  Chap.  IV.  Art.  57,  of  the  preceding  Treatise. 


CHAP.  T.  ADDITIONS.  54S 

requisite  conditions;  since  IS  is  already  less  than  13,  we 
shall  multiply  the  whole  equation  by  —12,  and  it  will  be- 
come -l^p«  =  (-  Igy+elj')*— 13y»;  so  that  13^«  - 1%?« 

à       t 
must  be  a  square;  or,  making  —  =^,  13^*  —  12  must  be 

so  too.     Where,  it  is  evident,  we  should  only  have  to  make 

^  =  1  ;  but  as  we  have  got  this  value  merely  by  chance,  let 
us  proceed  in  the  calculation  according  to  our  method,  until 
we  arrive  at  a  formula,  to  which  the  ordinary  methods  may 
be  applied.  As  12  is  divisible  by  4,  we  may  reject  this 
square  divisor,  remembering,  however,  that  we  must  mul- 
tiply the  value  of  y  by  2;  we  have  therefore  to  make  a 

/  .       I        r 

square  of  the  fcxmula  13y*  —  8  ;  or  making  j^n  — ,    (sup- 

posing  r  and  s  to  be  integers  prime  to  each  other  ;  so  that 
the  fraction  —  is  already  reduced  to  its  least  terms,  as  well 

as  the  fraction  --),  the  formula  13r*— Äf«  must  be  a  square. 

P 

Let  the  root  be  a/,  which  gives  13r*=5J^-f  3*^;  and,  making 
z'  :=  ms  —  13y,  m  being  an  integer  not  7  V>  ^^at  is,  Z.*^ 
and  such,  that  it»*  +  3  may  be  divisible  by  13.  Assuming 
«71  =  6,  which  gives  m*  -}-  3  =  39  =  13  x  3,  we  have,  by 
substituting  the  value  of  sf,  and  dividing  the  whole  equation 

by  13,  r'  =  3*«  —  2  X  fo/  +  13*«.  As  the  coeffident  8  of 
s^  is  neither  a  square,  nor  less  than  that  of  ^,  in  the  pre- 
ceding equation,  let  us  make  (Art.  54),  *  z:  fi^  +  ^,  and 
substituting,  we  shall  have  the  transformed  equation, 

r*  2=  3/*  -  2(6  — 3ft)y'y  +  (3|x«  -  2  X  ft*  +  ISy  ; 
and  here  we  must  determine  jx  so,  that  6  — •  S/x  may  not  be 
74,  and  it  is  clear  that  we  must  make  ft  =  2,  which  gives 

6  —  3|x  =  0  ;  and  the  equation  will  become  r*  =  3**  -f  ^, 
which  is  evidently  reduced  to  the  form  required,  as  the  co- 
efficient of  the  square  of  one  of  the'  two  indeterminate 
quantities  of  the  second  side  is  also  a  square.  In  order  to 
have  the  most  simple  solution,  we  shall  make  j"  z=  0,  y  =  1, 


544  ADDlTlQlfft. 

and  r  =:  1  ;  therefore,  #  =  i^  =:  8,  heaccj/  =  —  =  4  ;  bil 

ve  know  that  we  must  multiply  the  value  of  y  faj  S  ;  ao  that 
we  shall  have  y  =  1  ;  whererore,  tradng  back  me  atqM,  «e 

obtùn  —  =:  1  ;  whence  ^  zip\  and  the  equation 

-  12^*=(-12y+4l80«- isjf  wUl  giro 
(-12j+41/iV=:|f; 

that  b,  — IS7  +  it\pzzp\  so  that  IS7  rr  40|p ;  thcrafin; 

q 
y  =  -^  =:  ^^  rr  ■/  ;  but  as  we  must  divide  the  vahie  of  jr 

hj  S,  we  shall  have  y  =  4-  «  which  will  be  the  root  of  the 
given  formula,  7  +  l&r  +  lär*;  so  that  making 
7  +  15j:  +  ISx^  =  V,  we  ^^^  ^^t  ^J  resolving  the 
eauation,  that  26r  +  15  =r  +  ^;  whence,  x  =  ^  {\^  or 

—  •^  T* 

We  might  have  also  taken   ^12^.f.41p  =^^  and 

q 

should  have  had  3  zz  -^  rr  y  ;  and,  dividing  by  %  y sf4  • 

then  making  7  +  15r  +  l&r'  =:  (\\)\  we  shall  find 
8&r  +  15  =:  +  J  ;  whence,  x  =  -  ;|,  or  =  —  i. 

If  we  wished  to  have  other  values  of  x,  we  should  only 

have  to  seek  other  solutions  of  the  equation  r^  z=  Ss*  4  #\ 
which  is  rt*8()Ivible  in  gi^neral  by  the  methods  that  are  known  ; 
but  when  we  know  a  single  value  ofx,  we  may  immediatriy 
deduce  from  it  all  tlie  other  satisfactory  values,  by  the 
method  explained  in  Chap.  IV.  of  the  preceding  Treatise. 

57.  Scholium.  Suppose,  in  general,  that  tlie  quantity 
Û  4-  ^  -Î"  ^-r*  becomes  «{ual  to  a  square  ff\  when  x  =^  to 
that  we  have  a  +  bf-^  cf*  =  ff*  ;  then  a  =  £^'  —  bf^  ip\ 

I,  it  win  1 


substituting  this  value  in  the  given  formula, 
g«  +  h{x  ^f)  +  r;x*  -,/*•).     Now,  let  us  take 
g  -T  mix  — [/*)  for  the  root  of  this  ciuantitv,  (m  being  an  in- 
determinate nunilx-r),  and  we  shall  Imve  the  equation, 
^-  +        A(x    -y-)  +     r(x-  -y*)  = 
/ri   f  «myirtx  -/)  +  w*(x    -./I« 
that  is,  expunging  ^  on   Ixrth   sides,  and  then  dividing 
by  X  -— ^  we  have 

b  +  c{x  ^Yf)  =  2m/r  +  m«(x  -^1; 

whence  we  lind  x  zu  ^, .     And  it  w  evidctu, 

•a'— e 


CHAP,  V.  ADDITIONS.  545 

on  account  of  the  indeterminate  number  m,  that  this  ex- 
pression of  X  must  comprehend  all  the  values  that  can  be 
g'ven  to  Xj  in  order  to  make  the  formula  proposed  a  square  ; 
r  whatever  be  the  souare  number,  to  which  this  formula 
may  he  equal,  it  is  eviclcnt,  that  the  root  of  this  number  may 
always  be  represented  hy  g  -{-  m(x  — y),  giving  to  m  a 
suitable  value.  So  that  wnen  we  have  found,  by  the  method 
above  explained,  a  sinffle  satisfactory  value  of  Xy  we  have 
only  to  take  it  for^  and  the  root  of  tne  square  which  results 
for^;  and,  by  the  preceding  formula,  we  shall  have  all  the 
other  possible  values  of  jr. 

In  the  preceding  example,  we  found  ^  =  4-9  and  x=  »4^  ; 
so  that,  making  g  =  -f,  and y*  =z—  *^  we  shall  have 

_  19- 10m -2m" 

^  -      3(//i«-18)    ' 

which  is  a  general  expression  for  the  rational  values  of  x, 
by  which  the  quantity  7  +  15a:  +  ISjt*  may  be  made  a< 
square. 

58.  Example  2,     Let  it  also  be  proposed  to  find  a  rational 
value  of  y,  so  that  23y*  —  5  may  be  a  square. 

As  ^  and  5  are  not  divisible  by  any  square  number, 
we  shall  have  no   reduction  to  make.      So  that  making 

P 
^y  =   — ,  the  formula  28/?*  —  5q^  must  become  a  square,  2*; 

so  that  we  shall  have  the  equation  28p*  =  «'  +50^» 

We  shall  therefore  make  z  =  nq  -^  23^',  and  we  must 
take  for  n  an  integer  number,  not  7  V»  such,  that  n^  '\-  5 
may  be  divisible  by  2S.  I  find  n  =  8,  which  gives 
fi^  +  5  =  2S  X  8,  and  this  value  of  n  is  the  only  one  that 
has  the  requisite  conditions.  Substituting,  therefore,  8;— SS^', 
in  the  room  of  z,  and  dividing  the  whole  equation  by  28,  we 

shall  have  p^  =  89'  —  2  x  8qq'  -h  28a^  in  which  we  see 
that  the  ooefiicient  8  is  already  less  tnan  the  value  of  b, 
which  is  5,  abstracting  from  the  sign.      Art  52. 

Thus,  we  shall  multiply  the  wnole  equation  by  3,  and 

shall  iiave  3p^  z=  (89  —  87T  +5^*;  so  that  making 
-^  zzy,  the  formula  —5^*  +  8  must  be  a  square,  the  co- 
efficients 5  and  8  admitting  of  no  reduction. 

I       r 
Therefore,  let  y  =  — (r  and  s  being  supposed  prime  to 

N  K 


646  ASDinovfr  cbak  v. 

each  other,  whereas  ^  and  p  camioi  be),  and  we  riiall  have 
to  make  a  square  of  the  quantity  — 5f^  -f  Si*;   ao  thai 

calling  the  root  j/,  we  shall  have  — 5r*  +  Sf^  s  2*,  and 

thence  -5r>  s  s«  -  Si». 

We  shall,  therefore,  take  ji/  r:  au  «f  fi#,  and  in  bbihi  In 
an  inteaer  number  not  74,  and  sudi,  that  as*  -  8  naj  bs 
divisible  by  5.  Now,  this  is  impossible  ;  for  we  can  oàj 
take  ffi  =  1,  or  m  =  2,  whidi  gives  ai*  ->  8  =  —  ji;  or  si. 
From  this,  therefore,  we  majr  cooclucfe  that  the  ptohfaa  it 
not  resolvible  ;  that  is  to  say,  it  is  impossible  for  the  fbrmiik 
9äy^  —  5  ever  to  become  a  square,  whatever  number  vc 
suDstitutc  for  y  *• 

£9.  CoroUary.  If  we  had  a  quadratic  equation,  with 
two  unknown  quantities,  such  as 

m-k-bx  ^  cy  -^dx^  ^exy  +ff  =:  0,  and  it  were  pro- 
posed  to  find  rational  values  of  x  and  y  that  would  satiiff 
the  conditions  of  this  equation,  we  mijght  do  this,  when  it  n 
possible,  by  the  method  already  explained. 

Taking  the  value  of  ^  in  x,  we  have 

^y  +  «  +  c  =  ^/((c-rx)«-f^(a  +  &r  +  iir*)): 
or,  making  a  =  c»  —  4*/^   ß=:2ar-4^  yz^f*  —  4d^ 

^  +  rx  +  c  =  ^/(a  +  /3x  +  yx^)\    the  Question  will  he 

rvduced  to  finding  the  values  of  x,  that  will  render  ratitmil 

the  radical  quantity  \/(«  +  /?x  -{-  yx'), 

60.  Scholium.     I   have  already  considered  this  »ulijcct, 

rather  differently,  in  the  Memoirs  of  the  Academy  of  Scimr» 

at  Ikrlin,  for  the  year  17()7,  and,  I  believe,  first  gave  a  diirct 

method,  without  the  necessity  of  trial,  for  solving  indeCt*r- 

minate  problems  of  the  M?cond  degree.     The  raider,  who 

wishes  to  in%*estigatc  this  subject  fully,  may  consult  tkwe 

Memoirs  ;   when*  he  will,  in  |>articiilar,  finci  new  ami  im- 

C>rtant  remarks  on  the  investi|i;ation  of  such  integer  nunw 
*rs  as,  when  taken  for  r/,  will  render  ra*  —  a  divisible  In 
A,  A  and  B  being  given  nunilier!».  « 


*  The  iuipoMibilit)  uftlie  roniiula  *J3y- — 5sr*  is  readily  dr- 
moiifctrated  :  for  y*  i»u»t  be  of  uiu*  of  the  fomii»  In,  or  4«  -f  I 
In  the  tirül  ^►e,  J^^v»  — ."»  »-  »»t'tlu  !\»rin  •.*■;  x  I«  — .i.whuh*»  ù\t 
same  a^  I»  —  I,  anu  tliis  i^  an  itnp.)<«v.;)!f  loiiii  t'ur  >4|iiart*  \\\.n\ 
bcf!».  Ill  till-  HCidiid  ca»e,  *J:(v'  — :>  i>  of  thi-  t'oini  'J:)  x  \\n  4- 1 1  — J, 
mhioh  i^  the  r^aiue  a»  In— IS,  or  In  — 'J,  and  this  a^ain  i^  am  :n> 
poMiibie  tonn  lor  M|uare  nuiiiben«.  Therffore,  the  rurm..!^ 
tMy'  —  .9  =  r*  n  always  impossible.     B. 


CHAP.  VI.  ADDITIONS.  M7 

In  the  Memoirs  for  1770,  and  the  foUowin^  years,  in- 
vestigations will  be  found  on  the  form  of  divisors  of  the 
numoers  represented  by  z^  —  bo*;  so  that  by  the  mere 
form  of  the  number  a,  we  shall  often  be  able  to  judge 
of  the  impossibility  of  the  equation  Ap*  =:  r*  —  bj*,  where 
Ay«  +  B  =  D ,  (Art.  5«). 


CHAP.  VI. 


Qf  Double  and  Triple  Equalities. 

61.  We  shall  here  say  a  few  words  on  the  subject  of  double 
and  triple  equalities,  which  are  much  used  in  the  analyâs 
of  Diophantus,  and  for  the  solution  of  which,  that  great 
mathematician,  and  his  commentators,  have  thought  it  ne- 
cessary to  give  particular  rules. 

When  we  have  a  formula,  containing  one  or  more  un- 
known quantities,  to  make  equal  to  a  perfect  power,  such  as 
a  square,  or  a  cube,  &c.  this  is  callea,  in  the  Diophantine 
analysis,  a  simple  equality  ;  and  when  we  have  two  formulae, 
containing  the  same  unknown  quantity,  or  quantities,  to 
make  equal  each  to  a  perfect  power,  this  is  called  a  double 
equality,  and  so  on. 

Hitherto,  we  have  seen  how  to  resolve  ample  equalities, 
in  which  the  unknown  quantity  does  not  exceed  the  second 
degree,  and  the  power  proposed  is  the  square. 
'  Let  us  now  see  how  double  and  triple  equalities  of  the 
same  kind  are  to  be  managed. 

6S.  Let  us  first  propose  this  double  equality, 

a  +  6ar  =z  D  ; 
c  +  dx  -=.  D  ; 

where  the  unknown  quantity  k  found  only  in  the  first 
degree. 

Making  a  +  6 or  =  t\  and  c  -{-  dx  =  u-,  and  expunÂng 
X  from  both  equations,  we  have  ad  -^  be  ^  di*  —  %u*  ; 
therefore, 

dt'^M  +  ad-  bcj  and  (dO*  =  dbu^  -i-  (ad --  bc)d; 

so  that  the  difficulty  will  be  reduced  to  finding  a  rational 
value  of  u,  such,  that  dbu^  -f-  ad^  —  bed  may  become  a 
square.     This  simple  equality  will  be  resolved  by  the  method 

N  X  îi 


548  ADDITIONS.  CHAF.  Tl. 

already  explained,  and  knowing  u,  we  shall  Ekewiae  hmwt 

X  = 


tt*-C 


d 

If  the  doable  equality  were 

ax*  -h  Aur  =  G , 

1 
we  should  only  have  to  make  x  =  -p-,  and  then 

both  formulae  by  the  square  x\  we  should  get  these  two 

equalities,  a  -f  &r  =  D ,  and  r  +  c'«^  =  ^t  which  are  nmilar 
to  the  preceding, 

Thus,  we  may  resolve,  in  general,  all  the  double  equa* 
lities,  in  which  the  unknown  quantity  does  noC  exceed  the 
first  degree,  and  those  in  which  the  unknown  quantity  is 
found  in  all  the  terms,  provided  it  does  not  exceed  the 
second  degree;  but  it  is  not  the  same  when  we  have  equali- 
ties of  this  form, 

a  -f  éj^  +  ex*  =  G, 
a  -f  /3x  +  yx*=  g. 

If  we  resolve  the  first  of  these  eoualities  bv  our  method,  and 
call /*  the  value  of  x,  which  maxes  a-^-ox-^r  ^  =  iT*»  ^"^ 
shall  have,  in  general  (Art  57), 

fii'—c 

wherefore,  substituting  this  expression  of  x  in  the  other 
formula  ;  a  +ftr  -I-  yx'\  and  then  multiplying  it  by  (m*  —  r)*. 
we  shall  have  to  resolve  the  equality, 

yO*-2,.'m  +  6  +  c/)*=  G; 

in  which,  tlie  unknown  quantity,  in,  rises  to  tlie  fourth 
degree. 

Now,  we  have  not  vet  any  general  rule  for  n-sol^ing 
such  equalities  ;  and  all  we  can  do  is  to  find  successivelv 
different  solutions  when  we  alreadv  know  one.  (S 
Chap.  IX.) 

(ii*).  If  we  had  the  triple  equality, 

ax  -f  b}f 
ex  + 
Ax 

we  must  make  jx  +  Äy  =  /*,  rx  -f  dfy  ==  m%  and 

ÄX  +  ijy  =  M\ 


CHAP.  YI.  ADDITIONS.  549 

and,  expunging  x  and  y  from  diese  three  equations,  we 
should  have 

(qk  -  bh)i^  —  {ck  -  dK)t^  =  (ad  -  ci)««  ; 
so  that,  making  --  =  «,  the  difficulty  ixould  be  reduced  to 

resolving  the  simple  equality, 

ak — bh^       ck  —  dh  _^ 

ad-^cb         ad-'cb'^     ' 

which  is  evidently  a  case  of  our  general  method. 

Having  found  the  value  of  (ar,  we  shall  have  u  =  tz^  and 
the  two  first  equations  will  give 

^  d—bz^  ^       _^  az'^—c  ^ 

"" -- Tâ^Tcb^  '  y  -^  Tid^b^' 

But  if  the  given  triple  equality  contained  only  one  variable 
quantity,  we  should  then  again  have  an  equality  with  the 
unknown  quantity  rising  to  the  fourth  degree. 

In  fact.  It  is  evident  that  this  case  may  be  deduced  from 
the  preceding,  by  making  ^y  =  1  ;  so  that  we  must  have 

«"535,'-  ^  '  ^^'  ««»«quenUy,  ^j^^  =  D. 

Now,  calling  y*  one  of  the  values  of  z,  which  can  saüsfy 
the  above  equality,  and,  in  order  to  abrief,  making 

,_   ,  =:  ^,  we  shall  have,  in  general,  (Art.  67.) 

Z  =  r . 

Then,  substituting  this  value  of  z  in  the  last  equality,  and 
multiplying  the  whole  of  it  by  the  square  of  m*— ^,  we  shall 

have,  -^ ad^^ — ^ ^  °  *  **°' 

known  quantity,  m,  evidently  rises  to  the  fourth  power. 


'550  ADDITIONS.  CHAr.  Til. 


CHAP.  VII. 

A  direct  and  general  melJiod  Jbr  ßnd'mg  all  the  veJues  g^r 
expressed  in  Integer  Numbers,  bjf  which  we  mag  renâir 
Quantities  of  the  form  \^(Ay*  -f  b),  rational;  a  amd  m 
being  given  Inteser  Numbers;  a$id  aUoJbrßndmg  aB 
the  possible  Solutions,  in  Int^r  Numbers,  qf  indeUr» 
minate  Quadratic  Equations  of  two  unknown  Quantîtiak 

[appendix  to  cAAP.  VI.] 

64.  Though  by  the  method  of  Art  6,  general  Ibmuiv 
may  be  found,  containing  all  the  rational  values  of  ^^  bjr 
which  A^*  +  B  may  be  made  equal  to  a  square  ;  yet  tboie 
formula?  are  of  no  use,  when  the  values  of  ^  are  required  to 
be  expressed  in  integer  numbers  :  for  which  reason,  we  nusi 
here  give  a  particular  method  for  resolving  the  questioo  in 
the  case  of  integer  numbers. 

Let  then  a^"  +  b  =  x^  ;  and  as  a  and  b  are  supposed  to 
be  integer  numbers,  and  y  must  also  be  integer,  it  is  eridcac 
that  X  ought  likewise  to  be  integer  ;  so  that  we  shall  hatv  id 
resolve,  in  integers,  the  equation  x*  —  aj/*  «s  b.  Now,  I 
Ix'^n  by  remarkinp^,  that  if  b  is  not  divisible  by  a  squarv 
nuinlHT,  i/  mut»t  necessarily  be  prime  to  s  ;  for  8up|iuM%  it' 
|)<)s.sil)!o,   that   1/  and    b   have  a  common  divi.sor  a,   so  that 

y  r=  a..\  and  B  =-  «b';  we  »hall  then  have  j-'*  =  Aa'y*  s  «i". 
whence  it  follows  that  x"^  must  be  divisible  by  a  ;  and  as  a  t« 
neither  a  square,  nor  divihible  by  any  stjuare  (Ay/>.),  Ix- 
cause  a  is  u  factor  of  B,  x  must  Im;  divisible  by  a.    MaLiri: 

then  X  —  «y,  we  shall   have  ol*X'  —  a^\y^  -f  as';  or,  di- 

viding  bv  a,  ax^  ~  aAiy-  +  b' ;  whence  it  is  e\ident,  that  • 
must  still  Ik'  divisible  bv  a,  which  is  i^mtrarv  to  tlu  hvniw 
thesis. 

It  is  only,  theMnn»,  whi-n  w  i-ontains  Mjunn*  farit  ns,  iluii 
yean  have  a  connnon  measure  nitli  b;  and  it  i^  t*a^\  to 
st*e,  from  the  preretling  demonstration«  that  this  «tinriM^n 
measun*  of  y  and  B  can  cmly  k)e  the  root  of  one  of  the  Hiuare 
factors  of  b,  and  that  the  numlnT  x  must  have  tlie  ^alnc 
common  nu^asure  ;  so  that  the  ^hole  e(|iiation  mill  In*  di\  iMb!c 
by  the  square  of  this  cx>!nmoii  (li\isor  of  x^y,  and  u. 


CHAP.  VII*  ADDITIONS.  551 

Hence  I  conclude)  Ist  That  if  b  is  not  divisible  by  any 
square,  y  and  b  will  be  prime  to  each  other. 

2dly.  That  if  b  is  divisible  by  a  single  square  a%  y  may 
be  either  prime  to  b,  or  divisible  by  a,  which  makes  two 
cases  to  be  separately  examined.  In  the  first  case,  we  shall 
resolve  the  equation  x"  —  Ay^  =  b,  supposing  y  and  b 
prime  to  one  another  ;  in  the  second,  we  shall  have  to  resolve 

the  equation,  ar*  —  Ay*  =  b',  b'  being  =  -  g ,  supposing  also 

y  and  b'  prime  to  each  other;  but  it  will  then  be  ne- 
cessary to  multiply  by  a  the  values  found  for  y  and  x^ 
in  order  to  have  values  corresponding  to  the  equation 
proposed. 

3dly.  If  b  is  divisible  by  two  different  squares,  a*  and  0*, 
we  shall  have  three  cases  to  consider.  In  the  first,  we  shall 
resolve  the  equation  x^  —  Ky^  =  b,  conudering  y  and  b  as 
prime  to  each  other.  In  the  second,  we  shall  likewise  resolve 

the  equation,  x'  —  m/^  =  b',  b'  being  =  -v,  on  the  supposi- 

tion  of  y  and  b  being  prime  to  each  other»  and  we  shall 
then  multiply  the  values  of  x  and  yhy  a.  •  In  the  third, 
we  shall   resolve  the  equation  x*  —  Ay*.  =  b",   b^  being 

=  —,  on  the  supposition  of  y  and  b*  being  prime  to  each 

p 

other,  and  we  shall  then  multiply  the  values  of  x  and  y 
by  ß.  . 

4thly,  &c.  Thus,  we  shall  have  as  many  different  equa^ 
tions  to  resolve,  as  there  may  be  diffèrent  square  divisors 
of  b;  but  those  equations  will  be  all  of  the  same  form, 
or*  ^  Ay^  =  B,  and  y  also  will  always  be  prime  to  b. 

65.  Let  us  therefore  consider,  generally,  the  equation 
or*  —  Ky^  =  B  ;  where  y  is  prime  to  b  ;  and,  as  x  and  y  must 
be  integers,  x^  —  Ay*  must  be  divisible  by  n.  ' 

By  the  method,  therefore,  of  Chap.  IV.  48,  we  shall  make 
x=7iy  — Bjsr,  and  shall  have  the  equation, 
(n«  —  A)y*  —  9n^yz  +  b*z*  =  b,  ftom  which  we  perceive, 
that  the  term,  (n^  —  A)y*,  must  be  divisible  by  b,  since  all 
the  others  are  so  of  themselves  ;  wherefore,  as  y  is  prime  to 
B,  {hyp.)  n*  —  A  must  be  divisible  by  b;  so  that  making 

=  c,  and  dividiiur  by  b,  we  shall  hare^ 

*  ^bnyz  4-  B^  =:^*    Now,  this  equatxm  is  ampler  than 
te  one  proposed,  because  the  second  side  is  equal  to  unity. 


the 


55â  ADDITIONS.  CM  Ar.  VU. 


Wc  shall  seek,  therefore,  the  values  ofn,  which  urn] 
der  n^  —  A  divisible  by  b  ;    for  this  it  will   be  aul 
(Art.  47)9  to  try  for  n  all  die  integer  numbers»  pooithre  or 

negative,  not  7-^  ;  and  if  among  these  we  find   no  cor 

satisfactory,  we  shall  at  once  conclude  that  it  is  impissiUt 
forn^  —  Â  to  be  divisible  by  b,  and  therefore  that  tne  give« 
equation  is  not  resolvible  in  integer  numbers. 

But  if,  in  this  manner,  we  find  one,  or  more  s&tkfiKtonr 
numbers,  we  must  take  them,  one  after  another,  for  is,  wfakk 
will  give  as  many  diiTerent  equations,  to  be  separately  eoth 
sidered,  each  of  which  will  furnish  one,  or  more  solutions,  of 
the  pven  question. 

With  regard  to  sudi  values  of  n  as  would  exceed  that  of 

«*'  ^^  ^^y  neglect  them,  because  they  would  give  no  cqua» 
tions  different  from  those,  which  will  result  from  the  rahics 
off!  that  are  not   7  -p,  as  we  have  already  shewn  (Art.  52.) 

Lastly,  as  the  condition  from  which  we  must  determine  m 
is,  that  n^  —  a  may  be  divisible  by  b,  it  is  evident,  that  each 
value  of  n  may  be  negative,  as  well  as  pontive  ;  so  that  it 
will  be  sufiicient  to  try,  successively,  for  n,  all  the  natural 

numbers,  tliat  arc  not  greater  than  -j-,  and  then  to  take  tlkr 

satisfactory  values  of  yi,  lx>lh  in  pluA  and  in  mintM. 

We  have  elsewhere  given  rules  for  facilitating  the  inveiui- 
gallon  of  the  values  of  fi,  that  may  have  the  |>n>pcrty  n^ 
quired,  and  even  for  fioding  those  values  à  pnori  in  a  gn-at 
nuni!)er  of  cases.  Seethe  Memoirs  of  IkTlin  for  the  stror 
J  767,  pges  194,  and  ÎJ74. 

Hesolulion    o/'  the   P^uation   cy*  —  îJnyz  -f  bz*   -  1,  t« 

Integer  Nunilx'rs. 

This  e(|uation  may  l)e  ri^solvixl  by  two  different  uietlKMk. 

First  Method. 

6(i.  As  the  quantities  c,  i«,  b  are  sup|K>sed  ti>  Ik*  integtT 
nun)lKT%  as  will  a>  the  indetiTniinate  quântitie>  1/  .nul  :«  it 
is  e\iclent,  that  the  quantity  i;y^—  "^".y*  ^  ^*^  uui>t  alwa\;«  ixc 
ctjuai  to  integer  numbers;  cc»nM.^|uently,  unity  uill  l»e  it» 
least  |M»Kil)le  v;due,  uniesn  it  may  In-eonie  0,  whieh  cjm\  ««nU 
l)a)>|ien,  when  tlni»  c|uanljtv  may  l>e  renulveil  into  tno  ratMHuJ 


CHAP,  Vlh  ADDITIONS.  553 

factors.  As  this  case  is  attended  with  no  difficulty,  we  shall 
at  once  neglect  it,  and  the  question  will  be  reduced  to  find- 
ing such  values  of  y  and  z^  as  will  make  the  quantity  in 
question  the  least  possible.  If  the  mmimum  is  equal  to 
unity,  we  shall  have  the  resolution  of  the  proposed  equation  ; 
otherwise,  we  shall  be  assured,  that  it  admits  of  no  solution 
in  integer  numbers.  So  that  the  present  problem  falls  under 
the  third  problem  of  Chap.  II.,  and  admits  of  a  similar  so- 
lution. Now,  as  we  have  here  (2n)*  —  4bc  =  4a  (Art.  65), 
we  must  make  two  distinct  cases,  according  as  a  shall  be 
poâtive,  or  negative. 

First  cMCj  when  n*  —  bc  =  a  /.  0. 

67.  According  to  the  method  of  Art.  32,  we  must  reduce 

the  fraction  — ,  taken  positively,  to  a  continued  fraction  ; 

c  , 

this  may  be  done  by  the  rule  of  Art.  4  ;  then,  by  the  formulae 
of  Art.  10,  we  shall  form  the  series  of  fractions  converging 

towards  — ,  and  shall  have  only  to  try,  successively,  the  nume- 

rators  of  those  fractions  for  the  number  v»  and  the  correspond* 
in^  denominators  for  the  number  z  :  if  tne  given  formula  is  re- 
soTvible  in  integers,  we  shall  in  this  way  find  the  satisfactory 
values  of  y  and  z;  and,  conversely,  we  may  be  certain, 
that  it  admits  not  of  any  solution  in  integer  numbers,  if  no 
satisfactory  values  are  found  among  the  numbers  that  we 
have  tried. 

Second  case,  when  n*  —  bc  =  a  7  0. 

68.  We  shall  here  employ  the  method  of  Art  38  et  seq.  so 
that,  because  £  =  4a,  we  shall  at  once  consider  the  quantity 

(Art  39),  a  =  -= ,  in  which   we  must  determine  the 

signs  both  of  the  value  of  n,  which  we  have  seen  may  be 
cither  poative  or  negative,  and  of  v'a,  so  that  it  mav  berôme 
posiüve  ;  we  shall  then  make  the  following  calculation  : 

«•--«,  P*  =  c,  ft    /  j5 . 


554  AODITIOKS.  CILAP.  Til. 


m 

&C.  &C.  &C. 


and  we  shall  only  continue  these  scries  until  two 

ing  terms  of  the  first  and  the  second  series  appear 

together  ;  then,   if  among  the  terms  of  the  s 

F^,  p^,  p",  &c.  there  be  found  one  positive,  and  equal  to  unhj, 

this  term  will  give  a  solution  of  tne  proposed  equatioo;  and 

the  values  of  y  and  z  will  be  the  corresponding  terms  of  the 

two  series  [/%  ff^  1^%^-  and  ç",  q\  q*^  calculated  according 

to  the  formuliie  of  Art.  25  ;  otherwise,  we  may  imiDediatdj 

conclude»  that  the  given  equation  is  not  resolvible  in  Integer 

numbers.    See  the  example  qf  AxX*  40. 

Tliird case,  when  au  a  square. 

69.  In  this  case,  tlie  quantity  y/  a  will  become  ratiodal, 
and  the  quantity  cy*  —  2rgfz  -f  bz*  will  be  reaolrihlc  inlD 
two  rational  factors.     Indeed,  this  quantity  is  do  other  than 

(cy  —  nzY  —  Az*  . 

^' ,  which,  supposing  a  =  a*,  may  be  thn>wa 

(cy  ±{n  ^  a)z)(vy  ±  (»  -  a)s) 


into  this  form, 


V 


Now,  as  n*  —  a*  =  ac  zz  (n  -f  a)  x  (n  —  a\  the  product 
of  yi  -fa  by  n  —  a  must  be  divisible  by  i  ;  and,  conse- 
quently, one  of  these  two  numbers  n  -^  a,  and  n  —  a,  mutt 
be  divîmble  by  one  of  the  factors  of  c,  and  the  other  by  the 
other  factor.  lA»t  us  therefore,  sup|X)6e  c  =  6r,  f i  +  «i  =/*/>, 
and  w  —  fl  =  ^, yand  b  l)einp  whole  numlK^rs,  and  the  pr^ 
celling  quantity  will  become  tne  pnxluct  of  tlioe  t%io  linear 
factors,  cy  ±Jzj  and  hi/  f  t^z  ;  therefore,  since  these  two 
factors  are  Ixith  integers,  it  ia  evident  that  their  pnxiuct 
could  not  Ik*  =  1,  as  the  given  et|uation  requires,  unless 
each  of  them  were  se|Mirately  =  4:  1  ;  wc  shall  therefore 
make  cy  ±  /z  =  ±  1,  and  by  -y  n  =  ±  I,  and  by  these 
means  we  shall  determine  the  numbers  y  and  s.  If  we  find 
thf^se  numbers  integer,  we  shall  have  the  solution  of  the  equa- 
tion proposed  ;  otherwise,  it  will  \re  irresolvible,  at  least  bi 
whole  numtxrrs. 


CHAP.  Vil.  ADDITIONS.  555 

Secood  Method. 

70.  Let  the  formula  cy^  -  18iiy;Bî  +  b«'  undergo  such  trans- 
formations as  those  we  have  already  made  (Art.  54),  and  we 
shall  invariably  be  brought  by  the  transformations,  to  an 
equation,  such  as  Lg*— ^nftlr  f  u^»«,  the  numbers  l,  m,n,  being 
whole  numbers,  depending  upon  the  ^ven  numbers  c,  b,  n, 
so  that  we  have  m*  —  ln  r:  n«  —  cb  =  a  ;  and  farther,  that 
Sm  may  not  be  greater  (abstracting  from  the  signs)  than  the 
number  l,  nor  tne  number  n,  the  numbers  0  and  ^  will  like- 
wise be  integer,  but  depending  on  the  indeterminate  numbers 
1/  and  z. 

For  example,  let  c  be  less  than  b,  and  let  us  put  the 
formula  in  question  into  this  form, 

s'y*  —  Än^ry  +  BjJ«, 

making  c  =:  b',  and  z  zny';  if  2n  he  not  greater  than  b\  it 
lÀ  evident  that  this  formula  will  already  of  itself  have  the 
requisite  conditions  ;  but  if  Sn  be  greater  than  b',  then  we 
must  suppose  y  =  myf  +  y  ;  and^  by  substitution,  we 
shall  have  the  transformed  formula« 

By»— 2nyy +  B»yS 

where  , 

n'  —  A 
fj  =z  n—^ wib',  and  b''  =  m'ß'  —  2mn  +  b  =s  — -j — . 

Now,  as  the  number  m  is  indeterminate,  we  may,  by  sup- 
posing it  an  integer,  take  it  such,  that  the  number  n  —  m^' 
may  not  be  greater  than  ^b^  abstracting  from  the  sign  ;  then 
2n!  will  not  surpass  b'.  So  that,  if  2n!  does  not  even  exceed 
b'',  the  preceding  transformed  formula  will  already  be  in  the 
case  which  we  have  seen  ;  but  if  Sn'  is  greater  than  b*,  we 
shall  then  continue  to  suppose  y  =  tny  -h  y^,  whiAi  will 
give  this  new  transformation, 

läu  um 

B^  —  îwyy  +  By, 

where  „ 

n*  —  A 


«/'  3=  n'  —  iti'b'',  and  b"'  =  »i^b"  —  2mn  +  b'  = 


We  shall  now  determine  the  whole  number  m',  so  that 

b* 
n'  -  îh/b'^  may  not  be  greater  than  -^,  by  wliicli  meant  Sm* 

will  not  exceed  b*  ;  so  that  wc  shall  have  the  required  trans- 
formation, if  an"  does  not  even  exceed  b'^  ;  but  if  M  exceed 
b''',  we  shall  again  suppose  y"  =  m'y  -f  y  %  &c  &c« 


556  ADDITIONS.  CWlAr.  TIL 

Now,  it  \%  evident,  that  these  operations  cannot  flo  oo  to 
infinity  ;  for  since  2n  is  greater  than  a^,  and  iSn'  is  not,  i^ 
will  evidently  be  less  than  n;  in  the  same  manner,  5bi/  k 
greater  than  a*,  and  2fi*  is  not«  wherefore  ff  will  be  las  tba 
ft',  and  so  on  ;  so  that  the  numbers  n,  n',  ii*,  &c.  will  Ibm  a 
decreasing  series  of  integers,  which  of  course  cannoC  go  oa 
to  infinity.  We  shall  therefore  arrive  at  a  formula,  in  which 
the  coefiicient  of  the  middle  term  will  not  be  gremtcr  tbaa 
those  of  tlie  two  extreme  terms,  and  which  will  Rkewite  haive 
the  other  properties  already  mentioned;  as  b  evident  horn 
the  nature  of  the  transformations  employed. 

In  order  to  facilitate  the  transformation  of  the  fonmüa» 

cy*  —  ftnyz  +  bz* 
into  this, 

let  us  denote  by  d  the  greater  of  the  two  extreme  ooefidents 
c  and  B,  and  the  other  coefficient  by  d'  ;  and,  vice  vrrêâ^  let 
us  denote  by  9  the  variable  quantity,  whose  square  shall  he 
found  multiplied  by  d',  and  tne  other  variable  quantitj  bj  f  ; 
so  that  the  given  formula  may  take  this  form, 

d'J'-^JS'+dK 
where  d  is  less  than  d  ;  then  we  have  only  to  make  the  (oL 


lowing  calculation . 

i 
d"                          *              u/     ' 

+  r. 

W  =  —,  n*  =  fi'  -  f/i'i>%  d'^  =  '*'  "T  \  ô'  =  mV 

+  r 

ut 

n"                                         n*  —  \ 

ftl    ^  -  -^  n    =:  71   —  f7|  I)   ,  I)     =   = —  ,7   —  m  9 

+  i". 

icc.  ^c.  6lc. 

where  it  must  be  obscr\'od,  that  the  sign  =,  which  it  put 
al\er  the  letters  m,  m\  m\  &c,  does  not  express  a  perfect 
equality,  but  only  an  equality  as  approximate  as  |)owhte, 
so  long  as  we  understand  only  integer  numbers  by  m,  «i^, 
m',  &e.  The  sign  =  l)eing  only  employed  for  want  of  a 
better. 

These  operations  must  Im.*  continued,  until  in  the  series 
fi,  ff',  ft"^  ike.  we  fiiul  a  term,  as  fi;,  which  (alistnicting  frooi 
the  Mgn)  does  not  excee<i  the  half  of  the  oirresponding  term. 


CHAP.  Vir.  ADDITIONS.  567 

D?  of  the  series  d',  d",  d***,  &c.  any  more  than  the  half  of  the 
following  term  De+ 1.  Then  we  may  make  ne  =  l,  np  =  n, 
DP+l  =  M,  and  ip  =  ^,  0P+1  =  g,  or  dp  =  m,  dp+i  =  Jj, 
and  flp  =  0,  9p+^  =:\^.     We  must  always  suppose,  as  we 

Eroceed,  that  we  have  taken,  for  m,  the  less  of  the  two  num- 
ers  D;,  ne  +  ^ 

71.  The  e<|uation,  cy^  —  2nyz+D«'  =  1,  will  therefore  be 
reduced  to  this, 

where  n«  —  lm  =  a,  and  where  2n  is  neither  7  l,  nor  7  m, 
(abstracting  from  the  signs).  Now,  m  being  the  less  of  the 
two  coefficients  l  and  m,  let  us  multiply  the  whole  of  the 
equation  by  the  coefficient  M  ;  and  matdng 

it  is  evident,  that  it  will  be  changed  into 

u«  -  Ag*  =  M, 
in  which  we  must  make  a  distinction  between  the  two  cases 
of  A  posiüve,  and  a  negative. 

1st.  Let  A  be  negative,  and  zz^  a  (a  being  a  positive 
number),  the  equation  will  then  be 

Ü*  4-  ûg«  =  M. 
Now,  as  n'  —  LM  z:  A,  we  shall  have  a  =  lm  —  n'  ;  whence 
we  immediately  perceive,  that  the  numbers  l  and  M  must 
have  the  same  signs  ;  otherwise,  2n  can  neither  be  7  l,  nor 

7  M  ;  wherefore  n*  will  not  be  7  -r-;  therefore,  a  =,  or 

7^LM  ;  and  since  m  is  supposed  to  be  less  than  l,  or  at  least 
not  greater  than  l,  we  snail  have,  à  fortiori^   a  =,  or 

7  -JtM*  ;  whence  m  =,  or  Z.  \/  ^   ;  and  m  Z.  y  -^^  ^* 

• 

Hence,  we  see  that  the  equation,  u*  +  af*  =  m,  could  not 
exist  on  the  supposition  of  u  and  0  being  whole  numbers, 
unless  we  made  ^  =  0,  and  u*  =  m,  which  requires  m  to  be  a 
square  number. 

Let  us,  therefore,  suppose  m  =  /x-,  and  we  shall  have 
g  =  0,  Ü  =  +  jx,  wherefore,  from  the  equation,  w  =:  Mtjf  -  »f, 

we  shall  have  /x'tjr  =  +  /x,  and,  consequently,  ^  =  ±  -  ;    so 

that  ^  cannot  be  a  whole  number,  as  it  ought,  by  the 
hypothesis,  unless  /x  hi  equal  to  unity,  or  =:  ±  1 ,  and,  oon- 
sequendy,  m  rr  1. 

Hence,  therefore,  we  may  infer,  that  the  given  equation  is 


668  ADDITIONS.  CHAP.  TIL 

not  retolvible  in  integcn^  unless  u  be  found  rauAl  to  onh? , 
and  posiuve.  If  this  condition  takes  place,  Uiea  we  iiia£r 
(  n  0,  ^I'  =  ±  I9  and  go  back  from  these  values  to  those  ai 
y  and  z. 

This  method  is  founded  on  the  same  principlea  as  that  of 
Art  67;  but  it  has  the  advantage  of  not  reqiûriiig  aaj 
trial. 

£dly.  Let  a  be  now  a  positive  number,  and  we  thai!  bavr 

d^t  that  the  equation  cannot  subsist,  unkas  -*  lm  be  a 
positive  number;  that  is  to  say,  unless  l  and  m  Imivc  oob» 
trary  signs.  Thus,  a  will  necessarily  be  z.  <—  loi,  or  at 
farthest  =  —  lm,  if  n  =  0 ;  so  that  we  shall  have  —  lm  =« 
or  Z.  a;  and,  consequently,  m*  =,  or  Z.  a,  or  m  =,  or 
/  ^/  A. 

The  case  of  m  =  v^"  a  cannot  take  place,  except  when  a 
is  a  square  ;  consequently,  this  case  may  be  easily  nil  nil 
by  the  method  already  given,  (Art.  69)* 

There  remains,  now,  only  the  case  in  which  a  is  not  a 
square,  and  in  which  we  shall  necessarily  have  m  z.  %'  a 
(abstracting  from  the  sign  of  m)  ;  then  the  equation, 
v^  —  A^  "=  M,  will  come  under  the  case  of  the  theorem.  Art. 
88^  and  may  tliercfore  be  resolved  by  the  method  there  ex- 
plained. 

Ilence,  we  have  only  to  make  the  following  calculatioo 


Q»=0, 

v"  =  1, 

(^  ^ 

V/A 

«'  =^, 

I-'    =q'-A, 

t.'^ 

-«'-    xM 

r* 

q'  =  v!\^  +  ./, 

II 

l^"^ 

-u'-r    »A 

'    -      r'    ' 

V* 

«-  =  ^'v  4  .r, 

fTi 

-«"-    .    K 

P" 

&c. 

kc. 

&C. 

continuing  it  until  two  cnrresj)<)n(lin^  li-rnis  of  the  first  and 
stvuncl  scries  ap|)ear  again  together  ;  or  until  in  the  dcnc« 
I',  r\  p",  5cc.  there  Ik*  founil  a  lenn  e<jii:d  to  unity,  ah*! 
|)o^itivi'  ;  that  i>  to  say,  ~  i"*'  :  for  then  all  the  ^Uitxwlinç 
tennt»  vill  n-liim  in  the  same  order  in  eaeh  of  the  three  ^<me4 
(Art.  :i7!.  It  in  the  stries  v\  v" ,  r",  Sec.  therr  lie  fiHiod  â 
term  equal  to  m,  we  shall  have  the  resolution  of  the  gi%cn 


CHAP.  VII.  ADDITIONS.  559 

equation  ;  for  we  shall  only  have  to  take^  for  u  and  0,  the  oor- 
responding  terms  of  the  series  f\  p",  jl^^  &o.  y*,  ^',  y'  ',  &c. 
calculated  according  to  the  formulai  of  Art.  9JS  ;  and  we  may 
even  find  an  infinite  number  of  satisfactory  values  for  u  and  ^, 
by  continuing  the  same  series  to  infinity. 

Now,  as  soon  as  we  know  two  values  of  u  and  0,  we  shall 
have,  from  the  equation,  u  =  Mtfr  —  k£»  that  of  \(^,  which  will 
also  be  a  whole  number  ;  then  we  may  go  back  from  these 
values  of  ^  and  tfr,  that  is  to  say,  of  de-**  'i  and  £e,  to  those  of 
9  and  ^^  or  of  y  and  z  (Art  70). 

But  if  in  the  series  i^,  i^,  r'*,  &c  there  is  no  term  =  m , 
we  are  sure  that  the  equation  proposed  admits  of  no  solution 
in  whole  numbers. 

It  is  proper  to  observe,  that,  as  the  series  p^,  p',  f^,  &c.  as 
well  as  the  two  others,  q^,  q',  q",  &c.  and  jx,  ^^  fj*,  &c.  de^ 
pend  only  on  the  number  a  ;  the  calculation,  once  made  for 
a  given  value  of  a,  will  serve  for  all  the  equations  in  which 
A,  or  n*  —  CB,  shall  have  the  same  value;  and  hence  the 
foregoing  method  is  preferable  to  that  of  Art  68,  which 
requires  a  new  calculation  for  each  equation. 

Lastly,  so  long  as  a  does  not  exc^d  100,  we  may  make 
use  of  the  Table  given.  Art.  41,  which  contains  for  each 
radical  V  a,  the  values  of  the  terms  of  the  two  series  F^, 
—  p',  p",  —  p*",  &c.  and  jut,  ft',  jx",  &c.  continued,  until  one 
of  the  terms  p',  p'',  p*",  fee  beconies  =  1  ;  after  which,  all 
the  succeeding  terms  of  both  series  return  in  the  same  octler. 
So  that,  by  meads  of  this  Table,  we  may  judges  immediately, 
whether  the  equation,  u^  —  a£^  ==  m,  I)e  resolvible,  or  not 

Of  the  manner  of  finding  all  the  possible  solutions  of  the 
ecucUUm^  cy^—  2nyz  +  bz*  =  1,  zvhen  we  know  only  one 
qfthem, 

^fL  Though,  bv  the  methods  just  given,  we  may  suc- 
cessively fina  all  the  solutions  of  this  equation,  when  it  is 
resolvible  in  integer  numbers;  yet  this  may  be  done,  in  a 
manner  still  more  simple,  as  follows  : 

Call  p  and  q  the  values  found  for  ^  and  z  ;  so  that  we  have 

cp*  —  2npq  +  By*  =  1, 

and  take  two  otlier  whole  numbers,  r  and  «,  such,  that 
ps  ^  qr=i  \;  which  is  always  possible,  because  p  and  q  are 
necessarily  prime  to  each  other  ;  then  suppose 

y  z=z  pt  -\-  ruy  and  2  =  y/  +  «i, 

i  and  u  being  two  new  indeterminate  numbers  ;  substitutii^ 
these  expressious  in  the  equation^ 

cy*  -  Any«  -f  m*  ss  1, 


060  ADDITIONS.  CHAP.  Til 

and,  in  order  to  abridge,  making 

p  =  cp^  -  ^tpq  +  nq\ 

Q  =  cpr  —  n(ps  -f  qr)  +  bj.% 

wc  shall  have  the  equation  transformed  into  this» 

p<*  -f  ÄQ/U  I-  RU   =  1. 
Now   we   have,   by   hypothesis,  p  =  1  ;    fiirther,    if  wr 
call  f  and  o-,  two  values  of  r  and  9  that  satisfy  the  équation, 
ps  —  qr  ^\j  we  shall  have,  in  general,  (Art.  42)^ 

m  being  any  whole  number  ;  therefore,  putting  theae  value» 
into  the  expresûon  of  q,  it  will  become 

Q  =  cpf  —  n{  po-  -f  q^^)  -f-  Bjr  +  mp  ; 

so  that,  as  p  =  1,  wc  may  make  a  =  0,  by  taking 

I»  =  —  cpç  +  w(po-  +  yf  )  —  BJO-. 

We  now  observe,  ihnl  tlie  value  of  q*  —  fe  is  reduced 
(after  the  alx)ve  substitutions  and  reductions),  to  this  ; 
(n*  —  cb)  X  {ps  -  qry  ;  so  that  as  /w  —  yr  =  I,  we  fball 
have  Q*—  PEz:«*—  CH  =a;  therefore,  making  r  ir  !• 
and  Q  z=  0,  we  shall  have  —  R  =:  a,  that  is,  a  iz  —  a  ;  m> 
that  the  equation  before  transformed  will  become  /*— a«*=i1. 
Now,  as  y,  z,  p,  ^,  r,  and  s  are  whole  numbers,  by  the 
hypothesis,  it  is  easy  to  jKTCfive,  that  /  and  u  will  al^io  lie 
whole  nunilK*rs  ;  for,  deducing;  lluir  values  fnim  the  equa* 
tions,  y  zz  pt  -\-  ruy  and  z  zu  qt  -^  su,  we  have 

t  =  ^ ,  and  u  =  ^^^— '-   ; 

p^—qr  q^^P'^ 

that  is  to  say,  (because  ps  —  yr  —  1),  /  =  ity  —  rji,  and 
u  =  ;)z  —  qy'. 

We  shall  therofon»  only  have  to  resolve,  in  whole  numbers 
the  equation  fi  —  am*  n  1,  and  each  value  of  I  and  w  will 
give  new  vahu's  of  y  anti  r. 

For,  siib>titutin;^  the  value  of  the  nunilx^r  m,  alread; 
found,  in  the  ^Mieral  values  of  r  and  ^,  we  sliall  have 

r  =  f(l  —  cp)  ~  B/>^<r  -I-  M/*(/><r  +  çf), 
s  =:  ir(l  -  B7')  -  vpq-^   f  ny(/*«-  +  y^)  ; 

or,  l>ecauhe  vp-  —  îif</>y  -♦-  By*  ==  1, 

r  -  (By  —  w/^)  X  (yr  -  ;>«^)  =—  ay  »   w^, 
.▼  ;=  (ip  — nq)  X  (/^»"—  yf)  —  »  I»   —  My. 

Therefore,  putting  ihise  values  of  r  ami  ë  in  the  fcirv- 
^oing  e\prL*!»stoiis  of  jy  ami  r,  we  »hall  luive,  in  g«*nenil. 


CHAP.  Vil.  ApD4TlQNS.  Ml 

y  =  pi-iBq-'np)u, 
z  =  qt-^  (cp  —  nq)u. 

73.  The  whole  therefore  is  reduced  to  resolving  the 
equation  t*  -  au^  =:  1, 

Now,  Ist,  if  A  be  a  negative  number,  it  is  evident,  that 
this  equation  cannot  subsist,  in  whole  numbers,  except  by 
making  ii  zz  0,  and  t  zz  I,  which  would  give  y  =i?>  and 
z  zz  q.  Whence  we  may  conclude  that,  in  the  case  of  a 
being  a  negative  number,  the  proposed  equation,  • 

CI/'  —  2n^z  +  Bz-  -=  1, 

can  never  admit  but  of  one  solution  in  whole  numbers. 

The  case  would  be  the  same,  if  a  were  a  positive  square 
number  ;  for  making  a  =  a\  we  should  have 
{t  +  au)  X  (^  —  an)  =  1  ;  wherefore,   t  +  au  =  +  1,   and 
t  --  au  =  ±  1  ;  wherefore,  2au  =0,    w  =  0,   and   conse- 
quently ^  =  +  1.     . 

2dl^.  But  if  A  be  a  positive  number,  not  square,  then  the 
equation,  ^  —  a?^^  ^1,  is  always  capable  of  an  infinite 
number  of  solutions,  in  whole  numbers,  (Art.  87),  which 
may  be  found  by  the  formulae  already  given  (Art.  71)  ;  but 
it  will  be  sufficient  to  find  the  least  values  of  t  and  u  ;  and, 
for  this  purpose,  as  soon  as  we  have  arrived,  in  the  series 
p',  p'',  ?''',  &c.  at  a  term  equal  to  unity,  we  shall  have  only  to 
calculate,  by  the  formulae  of  Art.  25,  the  corresponding  terms 
of  the  two  series  f/,  ^,  ly,  &c.  and  g',  q'j  y'",  &c.  for  these 
will  be  the  values  requirea  of  t  and  w.  Whence  it  is  evident, 
that  the  same  calculation  made  for  resolving  the  equation 
Ü*  —  Af*  =  M,  will  serve  also  for  the  equation 

(i  -  AM«  =  1. 

Provided  that  a  does  not  exceed  100,  we  have  the  least 
values  of  t  and  u  calculated  in  the  Table,  at  the  end  of 
Chap.  VII.  of  the  preceding  Treatise,  and  in  which  the 
numoers  a,  m,  n,  are  the  same  as  those  that  are  here  called 
A,  t  and  u. 

74.  Let  us  denote  by  tf,  t/,  the  least  values  of  f,  t/,  in  the 
equation  ^  —  au*  ^  1  ;  and  in  the  same  manner  as  these 
values  may  serve  to  find  new  values  of  y  and  z,  in  the  equa- 
tion, c^^  —  9,nj/z  -f  Bz'*  =:  1,  so  they  will  likewise  serve  for 
finding  new  values  ofi  and  u  in  the  equation  ^  —  Au'  =  1, 
which  is  only  a  particular  case  of  the  former.  For  this  pur« 
pose,  we  shall  only  have  to  suppose  c  =  1 ,  and  n  =  0,  wnich 
^ves  ~  B  =  A,  and  then  take  /,  u,  instead  of  y,  2»  and  /,  t/, 
instead  of  p,  q.  Making  these  substitutions,  therefore,  in 
the  ^neral  expressions  of  y  and  z  (Art.  7S),  and  farther, 
putting  T,  v,  instead  of  #,  v,  we  shall  have,  generally, 

o  o 


ADDlTIOMi.  CSA».  Vil. 

<  =  t/  +  AVW, 

and,  fer  the  detonnadon  of  t  and  ▼,  we  diaD  bwe  the 
equation  t^  —  at*  =  1,  whidi  bâmilar  to  the  one  piopowd 
Thui|  we  may  sappoae  t  =:  ^9  and  y  s  t/9  whkli  will  ^^e 

<  =  (•  +  Att*,  Il  =  ^•i'  +  f^. 

Calling  /^,  t/  the  second  values  of  i  and  t^  we  shall  have 

Now,  it  is  evident,  that  we  may  take  these  new  vabKS  f^ 
1/,  instead  of  the  first  ^,  ii'  ;  so  tnal  we  shall  have 

where  we  may  again  suppose  t  =:  ^y  v  =  t/,  which  will  gifv 

t:=.tP  '\-  AttV,  uzzfuF  -{■  ^f. 
Thus,  we  shall  have  new  values  of  i  and  11,  whidi  wîD  be 

e  -szte  ->t  Kti%P  =  /(<«  +  Sam«), 

t/'^itfl/^l^f  ^  n'iSi«^  Ay«), 

and  soon. 

75.  The  foregoing  method  only  enables  us  to  find  the 
values  /\  ^,  &c.  t/,  t^^  Six.  successively  ;  let  us  now  con- 
sider how  tills  investigation  may  be  generalised.  We  have  first, 

/  =  T/'  4-  AVil',  U  =:  Til'   -H  V/; 

whence  this  combination, 

i  ±  U  v/  A  =  (/  t  w'  ^^  a)  X  (t  ±  V  v'  A); 

then  supposing  t  =r  ^,  and  v  =  t/,  we  ^all  have 

r'±fi»^A=(/±t/^  a)*. 

Let  us  now  substitute  these  values  of  f  and  1/,  instead  of 
those  of  tf  and  t/,  and  we  shall  have 

<  ±  n  ^  A  =  (<*  ±  1/  v^  a)*  X  (T  ±  V  v/  a)» 
where,  W^m  making  t  =  ^,  and  v  =:  ii',  and  calling  (*«  i^, 
the  resuaing  values  of  t  and  u,  there  will  arise 

/•  -f  t/»  ,^A  =  (^  t  «'v^  Ay*. 
In  the  same  manner,  we  shall  find 

r  ±  u''  s'  kz=(t  y_  yf  ^  a)\ 

and  so  on. 

IIenc(\  in  order  to  simplify,  if  we  now  call  t  and  v  the 
first  and  tlie  least  values  kä  I,  a,  which  we  before  caUed /»  «'« 


CHAF.  TH.  AlUUnoVS.  AflS 

we  shall  have,  in  general, 

t±n  x/  A  =  (t  ±  T  V  a)*, 

m  being  any  positive  whole  number  ;  whence,  on  account  of 
the  ambiguity  of  the  signs,  we  derive 

_  (t  4- V  \^ a)"*  4-  (t^vV a)"» 
t g 

(t  +  V  v/a)*"  —  (t  —  V  ^/a)* 
2.  a 

Though  these  expressions  appear  under  an  irrational  forain 
it  is  easy  to  see  that  they  will  become  rational,  if  we  involve 
the  powers  of  t  ±  v  v^  a  ;  for  it  it  well  known  that 

(t  ±  V    x/  a)"*   =  T*   ±  IWT'^H'   v^   A    +  — !^-5 •  T"*-*V«A 

.  m(m-l)x  (m  — 2) 
Wherefore, 

w(iM  —  l)x{m  — 2) ,  , 

2x3 

m(m-l)x(m.-2)x(fii-3)x  (m-4)^,^_,^,,  ^  ^^^ 

2xSx4x5  * 

Where  we  may  take  for  m  any  positive  whole  numbers 
whatever. 

It  is  evident  that,  by  successively  makrog  f7t  =  1,  2,  S,  4, 
&C.  we  shall  have  values  of  ^  and  tt,  that  wiUgoon  increanng. 

I  shall  now  shew  that,  in  this  manner,  we  may  obtain  lul 
the  possible  values  of  /  and  u,  provided  T  ana  v  are  the 
least  of  them.  For  this  purpose,  it  is  sufficient  to  prove, 
that  between  the  values  or  t  and  fh  which  answer  to  f7t,  any 
number  whatever,  and  those  which  would  answer  to  the 
number,  m  +  I,  it  is  impossiUe  to  find  any  intermediate 
values,  that  will  satisfy  the  equation  t*"  —  au^  s=  1. 

For  example,  let  us  make  the  values  f^  m'",  which  result 
from  the  suppo^tion  of  m  =:  3,  and  the  values  ^^',  u*"",  which 
result  from  tne  supposition  of  tn  =  4,  and  let  us  suppose  it 
possible  that  there  are  other  intermediate  values,  0  and  u, 
which  would  likewise  satisfy  the  equation  P  — '  Ati^  =  1. 

o  o  2 


564  ADDITIOMB.  CHAP.  VIL 


IM  W  Kr  Iv 

Since  we  have  /*- ai**  ==  1,  <»- ai**  =  1,  and  5*  — a»'=1, 

we  shall  have  »*  -  î«  =  a(v*  -  '%  and  /•  —  a«  =:  aI  J»— •^); 
whence  we  see  that,  i(  tjf  and  Z  /^,  we  ihall  «lao  have 
v7  u^i  and  /  t^".  Farther,  we  shall  also  have  thcxe  oÜmt 
values  of  ^  and  u;  namely,  ^  =  W  —  Autf'%  u  =  Ja**  —  i<*, 
which  will  satisfy  the  same  equation,  T  —  au^  =  1  ;  for,  bv 
substitution,  we  shall  have 

(»r  —  ABH«^*  -  A(rf'-.  «tt*^  =  (a« —  Ai«)   X   (r— A^)=  1, 

an  identical  equation,  because  t*  —  au*  =s  1,  and  f*  —  ah'sI 
(A^).     Now,  thete  two  last  equations  give 

•  —  Ü  ^A  =  T- —,  and  i^  —  u^^a  =  ^r-- — ,— —  ; 

hence,  substituting  instead  of  t,  in  the  exprewioo, 

the  quantity  u  \^a  -f  ? ;  and,  instead  of  f*^,  the  qt 

tity  u»^  ./A  +  ^„^^i,^^,  we  shaU  have 


„w 


M  = 


5+üv^A        r'+M*'v^A' 

In  the  same  manner,  if  we  consider  the  quantity  Cu*^  ^  w^f^, 

M  IN 

it  may  likewise,  on  account  of  /*—  Aii^=rl,  be  put  into  the 

form,  fTC^jT^^  +  FTj^;^- 

Now,  it  is  easy  to  fierceive,  that  the  preceding  quantitv 
must  lie  less  than  this  because  5  /  f^,  and  v  7  ^  \  therrforv, 
we  shall  have  a  value  of  m,  which  will  be  Icm  tlian  the  quan- 
tity f^u*^  —  u*^/'*  ;  but  this  quantity  is  equal  to  v  ;  for 

^  ^   (T-l-V.^A)^  +  lT-V  ,/a)' 


/••  = 


^  ^ 


(T-f  v%^a)*4-(t-vv^a)* 

««» 

(T  +  V  •a)^-(t-V^^aV 

2.  A 
(T+Vv/Ar-(T— V  ^/a)*        . 

«-7: •»  whence, 

*  \  a 


CHAP,  VII,  ADDITIOV8.  565 

(t  —  V  x/aY  X  (t  +  V  -v/a)*  -  (t— V  -v/a)*  X  (t+ V  -v/a)' 


2v/A 

Farther,  (t  -  vy^A)'  x  (t  +  v  Va)'  =  (t«  -  av«)*  =  1, 
since  t*  —  av«  =  1,  by  hypothesis  ;  whence 

(t  —  V  v'a)*  X  (t  +  V  -v/a)*  =  t  -f  V ^A,  and 
(t  —  V  -v/a)*  X  (t  +  V  ^a)'  =  t  —  V  v/A  ; 
so  that  the  value  of  fu^^  —  tiFfi^  will  be  reduced  to 

2Vv/A 

2  v^A  ""  ""• 

It  would  follow  from  this,  that  we  should  have  a  value  of 
tfZ.v,  which  is  contrary  to  the  hypothesis;  since  v  is  sup» 
posed  to  be  the  least  possible  value  of  u.  There  cannot, 
therefore,  be  any  intermediate  values  of  t  and  u  between 
these,  f,  ^%  ana  u^,  u*^  And,  as  this  reasoning  may  be 
applied,  in  general,  to  all  the  values  of  t  and  u,  which  would 
result  fVom  the  above  formulae,  by  making  m  eaual  to  any 
whole  number,  we  may  infer,  that  those  formulae  actually 
contain  all  the  possible  values  of  ^  and  u. 

It  is  unnecessary  to  observe,  that  the  values  of  t  and  u 
may  be  taken  either  positive,  or  negative  ;  for  this  is  evident 
from  the  equation  itself,  f*  —  au*  =  1. 

Of  the  manner  qf finding  all  the  possible  Solutions,  in  wliole 
numbers^  qf  indeterminate  Quadratic  Equations  qf  two 
unknown  quantities. 

76.  The  methods,  which  we  have  just  explained,  are  suf- 
ficient for  the  complete  solution  of  equations  of  the  form 
Ajy*  +  B  =  X*  ;  but  we  may  have  to  resolve  equations  of  a 
more  complicated  form:  for  which  reason,  it  is  proper  to 
shew  how  such  solutions  are  to  be  obtûned. 

Let  there  be  proposed  the  equation 

af^  -f  6r«  -f  «*  +  dr  -f  «  +/=  o, 
where  a,  6,  c,  cf,  e^f!,  are  given  whole  numbers,  and  r 
and  s  are  two  unknown  numbers,  that  must  likewise  be 
integer. 

I  shall  first  have,  by  the  common  solution, 

Air  +  A*  -f  d  =  V{{bs  +  d)*  -  4a(M«  +  e*  -f-d)), 
whence  we  see,  that  the  difficulty  is  reduced  to  making 
(Ä*  -f  rf)«  -  4a(c«*  -{-  es  •\-  d)tL  square. 
In  order  to  simplify,  let  us  suppose 


S66  ^DDinovs.  cuAr.  vn. 

*•   -  4öC  =  A, 

and  AA^  +  9gê  +  h  must  be  a  square  ;  repreaenting  Uii* 
square  by  y*,  in  order  that  we  may  nave  the  equation, 

and  taking  the  value  of  y,  we  shall  have 

so  that  we  shall  only  have  to  make  a  square  of  the  fomula» 

If,  therefore,  we  also  make  g^  —  aA  =  a,  we  shall  have  to 
render  rational  the  radical  quantity,  \\Ay*  -{-  b);  which  we 
may  do  by  the  known  methods. 

Let  \/(Ajf*  4*  *)  ^  ^>  ^  ^^^  ^  eauatioii  to  be  r— uliwl 
may  be  a^*  +  b  ^  or*  ;  we  shall  then  have  as  ^  g  z^  ^  jr. 
Now,  we  already  have  2ar  -|-Af-fJs  +  y;  so  äst,  wfaee 
we  have  found  the  values  of  x  and  y,  we  sliall  have  tkoae  ef 
r  and  «,  by  the  two  equations, 


jf  = 


A      '  9a 

Now,  as  r  and  9  must  be  whole  numbers^  it  is  evident, 
1st,  that  X  and  y  must  be  whole  numbers  likewise;  ftflv, 
that  ±  X  —  g  must  be  divisible  by  A,  and  ±  y  —  i/  —  is 
by  2a.  Thus,  after  having  found  all  the  possible  values  of 
X  atul  y,  in  whole  nunilxTs,  it  will  still  remain  to  find  tho« 
amon^  them  that  will  render  r  atul  a  whole  nuniliers.  If  % 
is  a  ne^tive  number,  or  a  jKi>itive  snuare  numlxT,  we  ha*c 
scvn  that  the  niimlKT  of  |X)sMl)le  s<^lutionH  in  whiilo  nun:- 
Ihts  is  aluavs  liinitetl  ;  so  that  in  these  case^i,  we  Miall  onlv 
have  to  try,  successively,  for  x  and  y>  the  values  found  ;  and 
if  we  meet  with  none  that  give  whole  numl)ers  for  r  and  #, 
we  conclude  that  the  pra|X)9c<l  equation  admits  of  no  Koiutioo 
of  this  kiiul. 

There  is  no  ilifTicultv,  therefore,  but  in  the  case  of  a  bei n^ 
a  |M)>itive  niiiiil)er.  not  a  fjquarc;  in  which  we  have  «rn, 
that  the  ninnU'r  of  |)ossil)le  solutkms  in  wh(4e  numbers  may 
Ik.*  infinite.  In  this  easi*,  a.s  we  ^houKI  have  an  lulinit«: 
nunilxT  <»f  valutas  to  try,  we  could  never  iudtfe  oi  tlie  utX- 
^il)ilitv  <»l'the  projJONitl  etjiiation,  x^ithoiit  having  a  lule,  by 
whirli  the  trial  may  be  reduced  witliin  certain  limits.  This 
we  ^ha!l  now  iiiM-Niigale. 

77.  Since  wv  have  (  \rt.  Ciî,  x  =  //(/  -  B.-:,  and  (Art  Tiu 
y  •-  pt  -  [lui  np)ii^  ami  z  =  qt  f  (</>  —  9iq)u,  it  is  easy 
to  iHTceive,  that  the  giiund  expressions  of  r  and  m  will  ukc 


thisf« 


»rill. 


CHAP.  Vil.  AI>mTIOM»^  587 

^  ^  y»  ^»  ^9  ß^9  y«  ^»  beinff  known  whole  numbers,  and  i, 
0y  being  given  by  die  formulae  of  Ak.  75,  in  whidi  the  ex- 
ponent m  may  be  any  positive  whde  number  ;  thus^  the 
question  is  reduced  to  nnding  what  value  we  must  ^ve 
to  m,  in  order  that  the  values  of  r  and  s  may  be  whole 
numbers. 

78.  I  observe,  first,  t!hat  it  is  always  possible  to  find  a 
value  of  u  divisible  by  any  given  number,  a  ;  for,  sup- 
poâng  u  =:  Act;,  the  equation,  ^  »  au*  zz  1,  will  become 
/*  —  A  A^*  =  1)  which  is  always  resolvible  in  whole  num- 
bers ;  and  we  shall  find  the  least  values  of  t  and  »,  by 
making  the  same  calculation  as  before,  only  taking  aa% 
insteaa  of  a.  Now,  as  these  values  also  satisfy  the  équation 
I*  —  AU*  =  1,  they  will  necessarily  be  cootained  m  the 
formulœ  c^  Art  75.  Thus,  we  snail  necessarily  have  a 
value  of  m,  which  will  make  the  expresaon  of  u  divisible 
by  A.      . 

Let  us  denote  this  value  of  m  by  fu,  and  I  say  that,  if  we 
make  m  =  âjx,  in  the  general  expressions  of  i  and  u  of  the 
Article  just  quoted,  the  value  cau  will  be  diviâble  by  a  ; 
and.  that  of  t  bong  divided  by  a  will  give  1  for  a  re* 
mainder. 

For,  if  we  express  by  t*  and  V  the  values  of  t  and  ti, 
in  which  tn  =  [i^^  and  by  t''  and  v''  those  in  which  m  ^  IS/u., 
we  shfdl  have  (Art  75), 

T*  ±  V  ./A  =  (t  +  v  -/a)/*,  and 

t"  ±  v^  a/a  =  (t  ±  v-v/ a)V  ;  therefore, 

(t' ±  vVa)«=(t^  ±  v^ -v/a), 

that  is  to  say,  comparing  the  rational  part  of  the  first  side 
with  Uie  rational  part  of  the  second,  and  the  irrational  with 
the  irrational, 

T^  ==  T*  +  Av«,  and  v"  =s  ät'v'  ; 
hence,  once  v'  is  cbvisible  by  A,  v''  will  be  so  likewise;  and 

T*'  will  leave  the  same  remainder  that  t*  would  leave  ;  but 
we  have  t*  -  av*  =  1  (hjfp.),  therefore  t*  —  1  must  be  di- 
visible by  A,  and  even  by  aS  mbcc  v*  is  so  akeady  ;  wheie- 

fore,  tS  and,  consequently,  t'' Ukewise»  bang  divided  by  Ai 
will  leave  the  remainder  1 . 


568  ADDlTIOVt.  CHAF.  Til 

Now,  I  say  that  the  values  of  i  and  «,  which  answer  in 
any  ex|x>nent  whatever,  in,  being  divided  by  a»  will  leave 
the  same  remainders  as  the  values  of  I  and  m,  which  would 
answer  to  the  exponent  m  4-  ^*  for^  denoting  these  kit 
by  6  and  v,  we  sludl  liave, 

i  ±  ft  \^A  =  (t  ±  v^/ a)",  and 

B  ±  u^A  ={T  ±  v^/a)«-»-'^^;  wherefore, 

0  ±  w^A  =  (<  ±  II v^ a)  X  (t  ±  vv'a)V, 

but  we  have  just  before  found 

t'  ±  v^^A  =  (T  ±  vv^a)«/«; 

whence  we  shall  have 

ê  ±  Va  =  (<   ±  liy/A)  X  (t*  ±  v'Va); 

then,  by  multiplying  and  comparing  the  rational  puta,  and 
the  irratioiud  parts,  respectively,  we  derive 

Now,  v''  is  divisible  by  a  9  and  t^  leaves  the  remainder  1  ; 
therefore  6  will  leave  the  same  remainder  aa  i^  and  ;.  the 
same  remainder  as  u. 

In  general,  therefore,  the  remainders  of  the  values  cf  I 
and  t/,  corres»}x>nding  to  the  ex|x>nents  m  -f  2|c^  «1  -*-  V* 
m  -f  6/t,  &c.  will  be  the  same  as  those  of  the  values,  which 
correspond  to  any  exponent  whatever,  fn. 

Hence,  therefore,  we  may  conclude,  that,  if  we  wi^h  10 
have  the  remainders  ariMi»<j  fn>ni  the  divJMon  of  the  ten;  i 
/',  t\  /*',  &:c.  ami  f/,  ti\  u  \  ^c.  which  correNinrnd  to  m  =  1. 
Hy  ij,  ii:c.  by  the*  luinilHT  a»  »t  will  Ik»  Mitlicicnt  to  tiiui  l!**^ 
rcmaiiulors  as  far  as  the  terms  /-"  aiitl  i/-'-  iiuliistxe;  t«  r. 
aftiT  iIk*m?  ttTiiis,  the  s^nno  rctnaindiTs  will  n'tuiii  \\\  i!v 
same  oniiT;  ami  so  on  to  infinity. 

With  n»«^ard  to  thi*  terms  /'••  ami  m'^«,  at  which  wc  na\ 
stt)p,  one  oi*  tlicni  /i^"  will  Ik*  exactly  diviMhlc  bv  ^  .  ai)«i  ilw 
other  /•"  will  leave  unity  for  a  runainiicr;  so  that  no  ^n.il. 
only  have  tt)  continue  the  divifiions  until  we  arri\t  :  i  tlu*  rx-- 
mauuiers  1  and  0;  we  may  then  Ik»  sure  that  thr  •'»iri*%'viiin|[ 
terms  uill  alwa\s  pve  a  ri'|Htition  iif  the  .>anu  r.  v  ...r  lir> 
as  tht>se  we  ha\e  already  found. 

We  nii^ht  alv)  tind  the  e\|x»nent.  *ia,  ^1  ;»/»(•/# ,  ;»ir  mr 
should  only  ha\r  to  |KTi'onn  the  caUulMtion  )N<ii<*,tl  «lut« 
Art.  71.  in  the  lir>t  |.lace,  lor  the  iiundnT  ^,  au«:  il.*  1  ùtt 
the  number  a  a*;  and  if  9  Ik»  the  rank  ni'  tl.»-  te:iii  t»t  :W 
sericN  v\  v\  I*"".  \-t .  uhicli,  in  the  lirst  ca-r,  will  le  1, 
and  f  the  raid,  of  the  term  that  uill  Ik*  ■--  1,  in  tic  i^it^^nd 
ci'T,  we  nImII  onl\  liaM    to  Mik  the  small«  ^î   n  t:tli|  k   i»l  c 


CHAP.  VU.  ADDITIONS.  509 

and  f,  which  being  divided  by  ir,  will  pve  the  required 
value  of  fu, 

.  Thus,  for  example,  if  we  have  a  =  6,  and  a  =  8,  we 
shall  find  for  the  radical  ^ßy  in  the  Table  of  Art.  41, 
P^  =  1,  P'  =  -  2,  p'  =  1  ;  therefore,  r  =  2.  Then  we  shall 
find,  in  the  same  Table,  for  the  radical  ^(6  x  9)  =  \/54^ 
p'^  =  1,  p'  =  -  5,  p''  =  9,  P^  -=  -  Ä,  p*^  =  9,  p^  =  -  6, 
p*'  =  1 J  and  hence  f>  =  6.  Now,  the  least  multiple  of  2 
and  6  is  6,  which  being  divided  by  â  gives  the  rei^aiuder  3  ; 
so  that  we  shall  here  have  /x  =  3,  and  ^  =  6. 

Therefore,  in  order  to  have,  in  this  case,  all  the  remainders 
of  the  division  of  the  terms  t\  /",  t^\  &c.  and  u',  w",  w*", 
&c.  by  3,  it  will  be  sufficient  to  find  those  of  the  six  leading 
terms  of  each  series  ;  for  the  succeeding  terms  will  always 
give  a  repetition  of  the  same  remainders:  that  is  to  say, 
the  seventh  terms  will  give  the  same  remainders  as  the 
first,  the  eighth  terms,  the  same  as  the  second  ;  and  so  on  to 
infinity. 

Lastly,  the  terms  tf^  and  ttf^  may  someümes  happen  to 
have  the  same  properties  as  the  terms  /^i"  and  uV  ;  that  is 
to  say,  w^  may  oe  divisible  by  a»  and  ^  may  leave  unity 
for  a  remainder.  In  such  cases,  we  may  stop  at  these  very 
terms;  for  the  remainders  of  the  succeeding  tcnns,  tf^-^^y 
t/*  +  2j  &c.  MA'+i,  M/«  +  2,  &c.  will  be  the  same  as  those  of  the 
terms  ^,  t^  &c.  t/,  u^^  &c.  and  so  of  the  others. 

In  general,  we  shall  denote  by  M  the  least  value  of  the 
exponent  m,  that  will  render  t  —  1,  and  u,  divisible  by  a* 

79.  Let  us  now  suppose  that  we  have  any  expression 
whatever,  composed  of  t  and  i/,  and  given  whole  numbers, 
so  that  it  may  always  represent  whole  numbers  ;  and  that  it 
is  required  to  find  the  values,  which  must  be  given  to  the  ex- 
ponent rriy  in  order  that  this  expression  may  l^ecome  divisiblcf 
by  any  given  number  whatever,  a  :  we  shall  only  have  to 
make,  successively,  m  =  1 ,  S,  3,  &c.  as  far  as  m  ;  and  if 
none  of  these  suppositions  render  the  given  expression  di- 
visible by  A,  we  may  conclude,  with  certainty,  that  it  can 
never  become  so,  whatever  values  we  give  to  m. 

But  if  in  this  manner  we  find  one,  or  more  values  of  m, 
which  render  the  given  expression  divisible  by  a,  then  calling 
each  of  these  values  n,  all  the  values  o(  m  that  can  possibly 
do  the  same,  will  be  x,  N  -f  M,  n  +  2m,  n  +  3m,  &c. 
and,  in  general,  n  -f  ^m;  A  being  any  whole  number 
whatever. 

In  the  same  manner,  if  we  had  another  expression  com- 
(X)8ed  likewise  of  ^,  u,  and  given  whole  numbers,  and,  at  the 
same  time,  divisible  by  any  other  given  number  whatever. 


570  ADDITIONS«  eiLAr.  vil 

a\  we  ahouki  in  bke  Biahner  seek  the  correyonding  tsIwi 
of  M  and  N,  which  we  shall  here  express  by  m'  and  jr*,  aad 
all  the  values  of  the  exponent  w,  tiiat  will  satisfy  ihm  a»» 
dition  proposed,  will  be  contained  in  the  fomula  n'  -f  aV; 
a'  being  any  whole  number  whatever.  So  that  we  sIhB 
only  have  to  seek  the  values,  which  we  must  give  to  the 
whole  numbers  A  and  X',  in  order  that  we  may  have 

N  -h  AM  =  N*  +   A'm,  or  mA  —  liA'  =  n'  —   N, 

an  equation  rcsolvible  by  the  method  of  Art  42. 

It  is  easy  to  apply  what  we  have  just  now  said  to  the 
case  of  Art.  77,  where  the  given  expresûons  have  the  form, 
ai  +  0u  -^  y,  at  -^  ß^u  ^  Y,  and  the  divisors  are  i  and  f. 

We  must  only  recollect  to  take  the  numbers  /  and  m, 
cpssively,  positive  and  negative,  in  order  to  have  all  the 
that  are  {M)ssible. 

80.  Scholium  If  the  equation  proposed  for  resolutkm,  in 
whole  numbers,  were  of  the  form 

af-  -}-  2brs  -I-  c*«  =f, 
we  might  immediately  apply  to  it  the  method  of  Art.  65; 
for,  1st,  it  is  evident  that  r  and  s  could  have  no  conmoQ  cfi. 
visor,  unless  the  numbery*were  at  the  same  time  divisible 
by  the  square  of  that  divisor;  so  that  we  may  always  rcduee 
the  question  to  the  case,  in  which  r  and  s  maW  be  prime  to 
each  other.  2dl^*,  It  is  evident,  also,  that  s  andycould  ha\e 
no  common  divisor,  unless  that  divisor  were  one  also  of  the 
nunilxT  üy  ÄUj)|X)Mn«^  r  prime  to  ^;  so  that  we  mny  al^» 
reduce  the  (|uet>tion  to  tlie  ca^c,  in  which  ,t  andysfiall  be 
prime  to  each  other.     (See  Art.  (54). 

Now,  s  iKîing  süp|K)so<l  prime  toyj  and  to  r,  we  may 
uiake  ;•  —  ris  —/z  ;  uiul,  in  onler  that  the  equation  may  lie 
resolvible  in  whole  numbers,  there  must  be  a  value  of  n, 

positive  or  negative,  not  greater  than  ~,  which  may  render 

the  quantity  an-  +  Ul/n  +r  divisible  by^I  This  \alue 
being  subbtituted  for  fi,  the  uhole  e(|uation  will  becooie 
divisible  by^^  and  will  Ix;  fouud  reduced  to  the  case  of*  Art. 

Gil  it  Mtq. 

It  iti  easy  to  percc*ive,  tliat  the  same  metliod  may  serve  fiw 
reiiucing  every  W|uution  of  the  form, 

ar-  4-  br^*  +  ^'•""•**  +,  ^^^  -r  A*"  =7", 
a»  6,  r,  ice.  iKMng  given  whole  niimlK^rs  and  r  and  t  being 
two  indetenuinate  nnmlx»rs,  which  must  likewi«  be  in- 
tegers in  another  himilar  et|uatit>n,  but  in  which  the  whole 
known  term  is  unity,  and  tlien  we  mnv  Ap|>ly  to  it  the 
gem*ml  metluid  of  Art.  )L     Set*  the  Svholwm  of  Art.  90. 


CUAF«  Vil.  ADDIT10V5.  571 

81.  Example  1.  Lèt  it  be  proposed  to  render  rational 
the  quantity,  v^(80  4-  6fe  -  V),  by  taking  only  whole 
numbers  for  s. 

We  shall  here  have  to  resolve  this  equation, 

30  +  62*  -  7*«  =  ^, 

which  being  multiplied  by  7,  may  be  put  into  this  form^ 

7  X  30  +  (31)=  —  (7*  -  31)«  =  TyS 

or»  making  Is  —  31  =  x,  and  transposing, 

x«  =  1 171  -  ly\  or  x^  +  7y*  =  1171. 

This  equation  now  comes  under  the  case  of  Art.  64  ;  so  that 
we  shall  have  a  =—  7,  and  b  =  1171,  from  which  we  in- 
stantly perceive,  that  y  and  b  must  be  prime  to  each  other, 
since  this  last  number  contains  ne  square  factor. 

According  to  the  method  of  Art  65,  we  shall  make 
a;  =  7»^  ^  1171;s  ;  and,  in  order  that  the  equation  may  be 
resolvible,  we  must  find  for  n  a  positive,  or  negative  integer, 

not  7  -g-  ;  that  is,  not  7  580,  such  that  n*  —  a,  or  «•  +  7, 

may  be  divisible  by  b,  or  by  1171. 

I  find  »  =  ±  321,  which  gives ««  +  7  =s  1171  x  88;  bo 
that  I  substitute,  in  the  preceding  equation,  ±321^^  1171«, 
instead  of  x  ;  by  which  means,  tne  whole  is  now  dlivisible  by 
1171,  and  when  the  division  is  performed,  it  becomes 

88y*  4=  U2tjz  +  1171?«  =  1. 

In  order  to  resolve  thb  equation^  I  shall  employ  the 
second  method,  explained  in  Art.  70,  because  it  is  in  fact 
simpler  and  more  convenient  than  the  first  Now,  as  the 
coemcient  of^*  is  less  than  that  of  z«,  we  shall  here  have 
D  =  1171,  d'  =  88,  and  n  =  ±  821  ;  wherefore  retaining, 
for  the  sake  of  simplifying,  the  letter  ^,  instead  of  9,  and 
putting  y,  instead  of  z,  I  shall  make  the  following  cal« 
culation,  first  supposing  n  =  321  ; 

w  =  W  =  4s         n'  =  321  -  4  X  88  =-  31, 

31«+7 

m'  =  ^  =—  3,  n"  =  -  31  -L  3  X  11  :=  2, 
wi"  =  *  =  2,  n"=  2  —  2x1  =  0, 


572  ADDITIONS«  VHAT,  VtK 

D*  ,  D** 

Since  n^  =  0,  and  consequently  z  -^^  and  Z  -^^  we  shall 

here  stoji,  and  make  d'*=m  =  1,  d'^sl  —  T,  m^äOssx,  and 
y  =  f ,  y  =  \^,  because  d*  is  z  d'^. 

I  now  observe,  that  a  being  =—7,  and  conseqtiendy 
negative,  in  order  that  the  equation  may  be  reaolTible,  wt 
must  have  m  ^  1,  as  we  have  just  now  found  ;  so  that  ve 
may  conclude,  that  the  resolution  is  possible.  We  shall 
therefore  suppose  0=y=rO,  \^=y"'Ä+l;  and  we  shall 
have,  from  the  foregoing  formula?, 

y  =  ±  l.y  =  T3  =  z,j^  =  +12±l  =qp  11, 

the  doubtful  signs  being  arbitrary.     Therefore, 

X  =  321^  —  1171;ar  =  ^  18;  and,  consequently, 
xH-31      81=F18 


7     "       7 


s  =  — ur— =  — =;—  =  V,  or  =  y  =  i. 


Now,  as  the  vakie  of  s  is  rei^uired  to  be  a  whole  number,  ve 
can  only  take  ^  =  7. 

It  is  remarkable,  that  the  other  value  of«,  namely  V, 
althou<;h  fractional,  gives  nevertheless  a  whole  number  fior 
the  value  of  the  radical,  k  (30  \  Gas  -  7«*),  and  the  same 
number,  11,  which  the  value  5  =  7  gives;  so  that  these  two 
values  of«  will  be  the  roots  of  the  equation, 

J0  +  G2ê-  75*  =  121. 

We  have  Hup|)osiHl  n  =  îWl.  Now,  we  may  likewise 
make  /i  =  —  «i:^l  ;  but  it  is  easy  to  foresee,  that  tîie  wh<4( 
change  that  would  result  ïrtmi  it,  in  the*  prt'ceding  formulj*. 
would  be  a  chai)^e  ofthe  si^u  tif  the  viduesofw,  //i*,  m\and  tit 
fi',  n",  l)y  which  means  the  values  of  v'»  and  of  y,  will 
also  have  different  signs  ;  we  should  not  therefi>re  have 
anv  new  n^ult,  since  these  values  already  have  the  doubtful 
sign  ±. 

It  Null  l)e  the  s;uue  in  all  other  cases;  so  that  we  m*itl  iioC 
take  the  value  of  n^  suiTessively,  |)osilive  and  ni*gative. 

The  value  5  =  7,  v%hiih  we  have  just  found,  result»  fiwn 
the  value  of  n  -  ♦  iiîil  :  and  ue  niav  lind  other  valuta  ol*  s 
if  we  have  found  other  values  of  n  having  the  n*t|uiMte  con- 
dition ;  but,  Its  the  diiisor  h  =  1171,  is  a  prime  nuudiiT, 
there  ean  Ik'  nt»  other  values  of  /i,  with  the  sanie  pro|iertv, 
as  we  have  elsi'\* lure  denionstratiil  •,  uheniv  we  must  e«in- 
elude,  that  the  imiuiIkt  7  i^  the  only  one  that  sati^Uie»  the 
qui*stion. 

•    ^leiuou'*  ot  lUrlii».  l^r  I'u   ;. e.r  17<)7.  pJ^*-'  **^* 


CHAP.  V!l.  ADDITIONS.  573 

The  preceding  problem  may  be  resolved  more  easily  by 
mere  trial;  for  wnen  we  have  arrived  at  the  ec|uation, 
a:*  =  1171  —  7j^%  we  shall  only  have  to  try,  for  y,  all  the 
whole  numbers,  whose  squares  multiplied  by  7  do  not  exceed 
1171  ;  that  is  to  say,  all  the  numbers  z  v  '  y  '  z  13. 

It  is  the  same  widi  all  the  equations,  in  which  a  is  a  ne- 
gative number;  for  when  we  are  brought  to  the  equation, 
X*  =  B  -r  Ay-,  where  making  a  =  —  0,  and  j-*  =  b  —  oy^, 
it  is  evident,  that  the  satisfactory  values  of  y,  if  there  are 

any,  can  only  be  found  among  the  numbers^  z  ^/  — .      So 

that  I  have  not  given  particular  methods  for  the  case  of  a 
negative,  only  because  these  methods  are  intimately  con- 
nected with  those  concerning  the  case  of  a  positive,  and 
because  all  these  methods,  being  so  nearly  aUke,  reciprocally 
illustrate  and  confirm  each  other. 

82.  Example  2.  Let  us  now  ^ve  some  examples  for 
the  case  of  a  positive,  and  let  it  be  proposed  to  find  all  the 
wHole  numbers,  which  we  may  take  tor  y,  in  order  that  the 
radical  quantity,  V(13^^  +  101),  may  become  rational. 

Here,  we  snail  have  (Art.  64),  a  =  13,  b  n  101  ;  and 
the  equation  to  be  resolved  in  integers  will  be, 
X*  r- 13y*  =  101,  in  which,  because  101  is  not  divisible  by 
any  square,  y  must  be  prime  to  101. 

We  shall  therefore  make  (Art  65),  x  ^  ny  —  lOlir,  and 
n*  —  IS  must  be  divisible  by  101,  taking  n  z  '|'  z  51. 

I  find  n  =  85,  which  gives  n'  =  1225,  and 

n«  -  18  =  1212  =  101  X  12; 

so  that  we  may  take  n  =:  +  35,  and  substituting 
±  35y  —  lOl^r,  instead  of  or,  we  shall  have  an  equation 
wholly  divisible  by  101,  which,  after  the  division,  will  be 
W  4=  70y2  +  lOlz»  =z  1. 

In  order  to  resolve  this  equation,  let  us  also  employ  the 
method  of  Article  70;  let  us  make  d'  =  12,  d  =  101, 
fi  =  ±  85  ;  but,  instead  of  the  letter  9,  we  shall  preserve  the 
letter  y,  and  -shall  only  change  z  into  y,  as  in  the  preceding 
example. 

1st.  If  n  =  85,  we  shall  make  the  following  calculation: 

III  =  ^3|  =  8,  fi'  =  85  -  8  X  12  =-  1, 

m  1  "^  13  -  ^     f      .  » 


574  ADDITION».  THAr.  VIL 

mf  =  ^  =  1,        i/'  =  -  1  +  1  =  0, 
—  13 

d'*=— ^  =  13,   y=y+y. 

At  fi''  r:  Oy  and,  oonsequeDtlj,  ^-^,  and  z  ^-,  «eahall 
stop  here^  and  shall  have  the  transformed  equation« 

III  H  um  H  IK 

Dy*  -  UnTt/'^  +  oy«  =  1,  or  IV  -  J'*  =  1  i 

m 
which  being  reduced  to  the  fonn,  ^  — ISy^  =  1,  will  adnii 

of  the  metmd  of  Art.  71  ;  and,  as  a  =  13  is  z  100,  we  umy 

make  use  of  the  Table,  Art.  41. 

Thus»  we  shall  only  have  to  see,  whether,  in  the  upfxr 
series  of  numbers  betonging  to  ^/IS^  there  be  found  the 
number  1  in  an  even  place  ;  for,  in  order  that  the  prwxtBng 
eqoation  may  be  resolvible,  we  must  find  in  the  series  r",  rV 
p%  &C.  a  term  z=  —  1  ;  but  we  have  p'  =  1,  — .  r'  =  i^ 
f''  ~  3,  &C.  wherefore,  &c.  Now,  in  the  series  1,  4,  3^  S» 
4, 1,  Sec.  we  find  1  in  tlie  sixth  place  ;  so  that  p*  =  —  i  ; 
and  hence  we  shall  have  a  solution  of  the  given  eqoatioa, 
by  taking  y  =  p^'j  and  y  =  7%  the  numbers  p%  9*,  being 
calculated  according  to  the  formulse  of  Article  25,  giving  to 
M,,  ijl\  ^\  &c.  the  values  3,  I,  1,  I,  1,  6,  &c.  which  form 
tlie  lower  series  of  numberd  bi*longing  to  ^'13  in  the  same 
Table. 

We  shall  therefore  have 

;/*  =  1  p''  ^-p'^ip''  =11  7''  =  1 

p'  =  il  /)'=//^+/;'^^18  </»=/  +  y'=s2 

f/  =^pl  ^  lif>=^  f  .-.  0  9"  =  /'-K  y'  =  3 

;;•=  /V  -h  /V  -  7  t'  =  1  7'  =  9«'  ^  ^-  ^  5. 

So  that  y    —  18.  and  y  =  5  ;  therefore, 

y  =  y + ff"  =  »J«  «"<>  j^  -  »y  4-  y  =  7*. 

\N'e   have   siip]X)sed   n  =  3.5;    but   we   mav    also    take 
w  =  -  3.5. 

Let  tluTelore  f  1  =r  —  S.*!,  we  shall  make 

-^3.5 
m  ^  -;r^,-  :=  -  3.         fi'  =  -  ;J5  -f  3   <  î%î  .^  1 . 

1-1:1 


CHAP.  VII.  ADDITIONS.  676 

f»'  =  -f=  =  -l,  W»  =  1-1  =  0, 

Thus^  we  bave  the  same  values  of  ifj  d^,  and  ff^  as  before  ; 
so  that  the  transformed  equation  in  y,  and  y,  will  likewise 
be  the  same. 

We  shall,  therefore,  have  also  j/^  =  18,  and  y  =  6  ; 
wherefore,  y=  — ^+^"=18,  and  y= — S^+y*  =  —84. 

So  that  we  have  found  two  values  of^,  with  the  cor- 
responding values  of  y^  or  z\  and  these  values  result  from 
the  supposition  of  fi=  +  85.  Now,  as  we  cannot  find  any 
other  value  of  n,  with  the  requinte  conditions»  it  follows  that 
the  preceding  values  will  be  the  only  primitive  values  that 
we  can  have  ;  but  we  may  then  find  from  them  an  infinite 
number  of  derivative  values  by  the  metHod  of  Art.  7& 

Takinff,  therefore,  these  viuues  of  y  and  z  tar  p  and  q^ 
we  shall  nave,  in  general,  by  the  same  Article, 

y  =  74/  -  (101  X  28  -  35  X  74)w  =  74/  +  267« 
jr  =  28/  +  (  12  X  74  —  85  x  23)«  =  23/  -f   88*1  ;  or 

y  =  -  34/  -  (  101  X  18  -  85  X  34)«  =-  84/  -  128« 
2  =      18/  +  (- 12  X  34  +  35  X  13)«  =      13/  +    47«; 

and  we  shall  only  have  farther  to  deduce  the  values  of  / 
and  «  from  the  equation^  /'  —  13fi*  rr  1.  Now,  all  these 
values  may  be  found  alrc«dy  calculated  in  the  Table  at  the 
end  of  Chap.  VII.  of  the  preceding  Treatise:  we.  shall 
therefore  immediately  have  /  =  649«  and  u  =  180  ;  so  that 
taking  these  values  for  t  and  v,  in  the  formulae  of  Art.  75, 
we  shall  have,  in  general, 

_  (649 H- 180  ^/13y"+(649- 180^13)" 
/ ^ 

(649+180^/18)"'-(64a-180>v/13>» 
^^  2^/13  * 

where  we  may  give  to  m  whatever  value  we  choose,  provided 
we  take  only  positive  whole  numbers. 

Now,  as  the  values  of  /  and  «  may  be  taken  both  positive 
and  n^ative,  the  values  of  y,  which  satisfy  the  question, 
will  all  be  contained  in  these  two  formulae, 

y  =  ±  74/  ±  267«, 
andy  =  ±34/±  123«, 

the  doubtful  signa  being  arbitrary. 


fi76  AUUITIOS».  t-BAP*  TH. 

If  WC  make  m  =  0,  wc  shall  have  /  =  1  »  and  «  s  0  ; 
wherefore,  v  =  ±  74,  or  =  ±  S4  ;  and  this  last  value  i»  ihr 
least  that  will  resolve  the  prohlem. 

I  liave  already  resolved  this  problem  in  the  Memoir»  of 
Berlin,  for  the  vear  1768,  jwge  213;  but  as  I  liavc  thrfr 
cinployeii  a  metfiod  somewhat  diff*erent  from  the  for\'pMn|;« 
anu  fundamentally  the  same  as  tlie^rj/  method  of  Art.  CÎS, 
it  was  thoii^rht  proper  to  rejxrat  it  here,  in  order  tlial  th« 
eoni|Mirison  of  the  results,  which  are  the  same  by  Lt^th 
methods,  might  serve,  if  necessary,  as  a  confirmation  ot* 
them. 

8!3.  Example  3.  Let  it  be  proposed  to  find  wbole  num- 
bers, which  being  taken  for  y,  may  render  raUooal  the 
quantity,  ^/(7fl^*  -»-  101). 

Here  we  ^lail  have  to  resolve.  In  integers,  the  equatios« 

j--79v- =  101, 
in  which  y  will  l)c  prime  to  101)  since  tliia  number  doe»  ooi 
contain  any  square  factor. 

If  we  thert-fore  sunjxise  x  =  ni/  —  lOlz,  n^  —  79  must  far 
divisible  by  101,  takmg  fi  z  '^'  Z  51  ;  me  find  n  =  SS, 
which  givJs  n'^  -  l.i  r=  IQIQ  ^  101  x  10;  thus,  vc  may 
take  'I  =±  'My  and  these  will  be  the  only  values  that  have 
the  condition  required. 

Substituting,  therefore,  ±  lliii/  —  IOI2  instead  ofjr,  aod 
then  dividing  the  whole  ec|uati(m  by  101,  we  shall  have 
it  transformed  into  lOv*  ^'CAi^tZ  +  101:*  =  1.  Let  u«, 
theretbre,  make  d'  =  10,  d  =  101,  m  =  ±  33,  and  fint 
taking  n  positive,  we  »hall  work  as  in  tin*  preceding  exanipir  • 
thus,  we  shall  have  hi  =1  J  ]  =  3,   m'  =:  3d  —  S  x   10  =  3. 

i>'  =  -fo   =-7,i^  =  .V+y. 

Now,  as  n  -  3  is  already  /    ^^  ,  and  z.  —,  it  is  mil  ne- 

cessary  to  proet\^l  any  farther:  so  that  the  equation  mill  be 
transft>rnivHl  to  this, 

-tI ■•-%:/  »  uy  =  1. 

mhich  Ix'in^  miiltiplietl  by  —  7,  may  Ik*  put  intc»  thii«  form. 

(•'.  '        t        4»      »"V  Î  ^*t\  *^ 

tt/  -f  ijl/)  —  li?J/  =  -  *. 

SiiKv,  theri'fon',  7  is  /  ^  79,  if  this  iH|uation  Ix*  ri»M>lviblr, 
the  nuinluT  7  must  be  found  anioii^  thi*  terms  of  1 1  to  iipfnr 
MTii's  of  niiinlxTs  answiTin^  to  x  79  in  the  Tablr  (  Art  41 1, 
and  jiIm)  hold  an  vm-u  pl.uv  there,  sinix'  it  has  the  sign    —, 


CRAP.  VII.  ADOITIOXS*  577 

But  the  series  in  question  contains  only  the  numbers  1,  15, 
2,  always  Fepeated  ;  therefore,  we  may  immediately  conclude, 
that  the  last  equation  is  not  resolvible  ;  and,  consequently, 
the  equation  proposed  is  not,  at  least  when  we  take  n  =  S^. 
It  only  remains,  therefore,  to  try  the  other  value  of 
11=^  S5,  which  will  give 

«=— ^=-8,«'=-83  +  8x  10  =-8, 

80  that  we  shall  have  the  equation  transformed  into 

whîdi  may  be  reduced  to  Uie  form, 

which  is  similar  to  the  preceding.  Whence  I  conclude,  that 
the  ffiven  equation  absolutely  admits  of  no  solution  in  whole 
numoers. 

84.  Scholium.  M.  Euler,  in  an  excellent  Memoir  printed 
in  Vol.  IX«  of  the  New  Commentaries  of  Petersburg,  finds 
by  induction  this  rule  for  determining  the  resolvibility  of 
every  equation  of  the  form  x^  —  Ay*  =  b,  when  b  is  a  prime 
numoer  :  it  is,  that  the  equation  must  be  possible,  whenever 
B  shall  have  the  form  4Afi  -f  r*,  or  4An  -f  r*  «—  a  ;  but  the 
foregoing  example  shews  this  rule  to  be  defective;  for  101 
is  a  prime  number,  of  the  form  4An  -f*  ^'^  —  a,  making 
A  =  79,  n  =  —  4,  and  r  s  38  ;  yet  the  equation, 
x^  —  79y^  =  101,  admits  of  no  solution  in  whole  numbers. 

If  the  fbr^cnng  rule  were  true,  it  would  follow,  tbat,  if 
the  equation  a:*  —  a^*  :r  b  were  possible,  when  B  has  any 
value  whatever,  6,  it  would  be  so  likewise,  when  we  have 
taken  b  =  4An  +  6,  provided  b  were  a  prime  number.  We 
might  limit  this  last  rule,'bv  recjuiring  6  to  be  also  a  prime 
number;  but  even  with  this  lunitation  the  prec^iAg  ex- 
ample would  shew  it  to  be  fisilse;  for  we  have  l01=4An  +  &, 
by  taking  a  =  79,  n  =—  2,  and  b  =  733;  now,  733  is  a 
prime  number,  of  the  form  x'^  —  7S!^*,  making  x  =  38,  and 
^  =s  3  ;  yet  101  ia  not  of  the  same  form,  ar*  —  79y^ 


pp 


S7S  AODITIOXSI.  CHAT.  TllL 


CHAP.  VIII. 

Remarks  on  Equations  of  the  Jbrm  p-  =  Aq*  +  ^t  ^"^  ^ 
Uu  common  mit /tod  of  resolvhtg  tfiem  in  Whole  Numbers. 

85.  The  method  of  Chan.  VII.  of  the  preceding  Tres^. 
for  resolving  equations  of  tnis  kind,  is  the  same  thml  Wallis 

S'ves  in  his  Algebra  (Chap.  98),  and  ascribes  to  Lord 
rouDcker.  We  find  it,  also,  in  the  Algebra  of  Oianaaiw 
who  gives  the  honor  of  it  to  M.  de  Fermât.  Wboercr  wm 
the  inventor  of  this  method,  it  is  at  least  certain,  that  M.  de 
Fermât  was  the  author  of  the  problem  which  is  the  subject 
of  it.  He  had  proposed  it  as  a  challenge  to  aD  the  EiyMi 
mathematicians,  as  we  learn  from  the  Commarium  EpukJ^ 
cum  of  Wallis  ;  which  led  Lord  Brouncker  to  the  UTeotiao 
of  the  method  in  question.  But  it  does  not  appear  thai  ûûê 
author  was  fully  apprised  of  the  importance  of  the  pwiMf 
which  he  resolved.  We  find  nothmg  on  the  suUeety  mmm 
m  the  writings  of  Fermât,  which  we  possess,  nor  m  mmj  of 
the  works  of  the  last  centurv,  which  treat  of  the  IndeteraMMie 
Analysis.  It  is  natural  to  suppose  that  Fermât,  who  was 
particularljr  engaged  in  the  theoiy  of  int^er  amabeiB,  mm- 
oeming  which  he  has  led  us  some  very  excellent 
had  been  led  to  the  problem  in  question  bv  his 
the  general  resolution  of  ecjuations  of  the  form, 

J-*  =  Ay''  -f  B, 

to  which  all  quadratic  ei][uations  of  two  unknown  quantiti«^ 
arc  reduced.  However,  we  are  indebted  to  Euler  alone  !*< 
the  remark,  that  this  problem  is  ncxrcssary  for  finding  ail  xix 
possible  solutions  of  such  e(|uations  *. 

The  nieth(Kl  which  I  have  pursued  for  demonstrating  ihi* 
proposition,  is  somewhat  different  fnnn  tlmt  of  M.  Kuler  ;  bu: 
It  is,  if  I  am  not  mistaken,  more  dinx*t  and  more  general.  Fiir, 
on  the  one  hand,  tlie  method  of  M.  Euler  naturally  lead»  U> 
fractional  expressions,  where  it  is  retjuired  to  avoid  them; 
and,  on  the  other,  it  does  not  ap|)ear  very  evidently,  that  the 
suppositions,  which  are  made  in  order  to  remove  the  fractiocu^ 
are  the  only  ones  that  coulil  have  taken  plaixv  Indeed,  vr 
have  elsewhere  shewn,  that  the  finding  of  one  solutiooolthc 
equation  x'=zAt/*  -f  it,  is  not  always  sufficient  to  enable  us  to 

*  See  Chap.  \'I.  of  the  preceding  Treatise,  Vol.  VI.  of  the 
Ancient  Commentarief^  of  IVter^burg,  and  Vol.  IX.  of  the 


CHJ^r.  VIII.  ADDITIONS«  579" 

deduce  others  from  it,  by  means  of  the  equation  />*=» aç*  + 1  ; 
and  that,  frequently,  at  least  when  b  is  not  a  prime  number, 
there  may  be  values  of  x  and  y^  which  cannot  be  contained 
in  the  general  expressions  of  M .  Euler  ^. 

Wim  regard  to  the  manner  of  resolving  equations  of  the 
form  jp*  =  A^«  +  1,1  think  that  of  Chap.  VIL,  however  in- 
genious it  may  be,  is  still  far  from  being  perfect.  For,  in 
tne  first  place,  it  does  not  shew  that  every  equation  of  this 
kind  is  always  resolvible  in  whole  numl)ers,  when  a  is  a 
positive  number  not  a  square.  Secondly,  it  is  not  demon- 
strated, that  it  must  always  lead  to  the  solution  sought  for. 
Wallis,  indeed,  has  professed  to  prove  the  former  of  these 
propositions;  but  his  demonstration,  if  I  may  presume  to 
say  so,  is  a  mere  petitio principii,  (See  Chap.  99).  Mine,  I 
believe,  is  tfie  first  rigia  demonstration  that  has  appeared  ; 
it  is  in  the  Melanges  de  Turitiy  Vol.  IV.  ;  but  it  is  very 
long,  and  very  inwrect  :  that  of  Art  37,  is  founded  on  the 
true  prindples  of  the  subject,  and  leaves,  I  think,  nothing  to 
wish  for.  It  enables  us,  also,  to  appreciate  that  of  Chap.  Vll.^ 
and  to  perceive  the  inconveniences  into  which  it  mignt  lead, 
if  followed  without  precaution.  This  is  what  we  shall  npw 
diftcusi. 

86u  From  what  we  have  demonstrated,  Chap.  II«,  it  f<d* 
lows,  that  the  values  of  p  and  q,  which  satisfy  the  equation 
p*  —  Aç^  =s  1,  cab  only  be  the  terms  c^  some  one  of  the 
principal  fractions  derived  from  the  continued  fraction,  which 
would  express  the  value  of  ^h  ;  so  that  supposing  this  con^ 
tinned  fraction  to  be  represented  thus^ 

^^ ^'^'J^A.^A'  &c 
we  must  have, 

?  '*%''+,  &Ç. 

I 

+-7; 

ffce  beÎDir  any  terra  whatever  of  the  infinite  seriee  jk^,  jx',  &ci 
the  ranK  of  which,  p,  can  only  be  determined  a  posteriori. 

We  must  observe  that,  in  Uiis  ccmtinued  fracCioo,  the  num- 
bers /Xr,  |x',  fCr",  8cc.  must  all  be  positive,  although  we  have 

*  See  Art.  45  ofmy  Memoir  on  ladetefBiiAate  Pïoblemi^.  in 
Itat  Memoirs  of  Berlin.    1767. 

pp  2 


580  ADDITIONS.  CUAP.  Tlfî. 

ieen  (Art.  S)  that,  in  general,  in  continued  fnictîoos»  we  nay 
render  the  denominators  positive  or  negatire,  aooording  as 
we  take  the  approximate  values  less,  or  greater,  than  the  real 
ones  ;  but  the  method  of  Problem  I.  (Art.  £8,  H  J«ç.)»  ab> 
solutely  requires  the  approximate  values  /s  f^'»  f^%  &c.  to  he 
all  token  less  than  the  real  ones. 

87.  Now,  since  the  fraction  —  is  equal  to  a  oontinocd 

fraction,  whose  terms  are  /ui,  /x',  fi'',  &c.  it  is  evident,  firooi 
Art  4,  that  ft  will  be  the  quotient  of />  divided  by  7,  that  »' 
wUl  be  that  of  q  divided  by  the  remainder,  f^^  that  of  tins 
remainder  divided  by  the  second  remainder,  and  so  00  ;  so 
that  odling  r,  «,  /,  &c.  the  remainders  in  question,  we  sfaaD 
have,  from  the  nature  of  division,  p  =:  ^  -|~  r,  j  =  ^V+«^ 
r  =  /i,*f  -|-  /,  &c.  where  the  last  remainoer  must  be  =  0^ 
and  the  one  before  the  last  =  1,  because  p  and  q  are  warn- 
bers  prime  to  each  other.     Thus,  ft  will  he  the  approfûmate 

integer  value  of  — ,  /x'  that  of  -2-,  ft"  that  of  — ,  &c 

values  being  all  taken  less  than  the  real  ones,  except  the 
last  fb-,  which  will  be  exactly  equal  to  the  correapopdiag 
fraction  ;  because  the  following  remainder  is  suppoaed  to  be 
nothing. 

Now,  as  the  numbers  ft,  ft',  a',  &c  ft<,  are  the  same  tat 


P 
the  continued  fraction,  which  expresses  tlie  value  of  -     «and 

for  that  whici)  expresses  the  value  of  %/  a,  we  may  take,  as 

far  as  the  term  m*,  ~  =  v^  a,  that  is  to  say,  p^  —  Af*  z=  0. 

Thus,  we  shall  first  seek  the  approximate,  deficient  value  of 

-^  ;  that  is  to  say,  of  y/  a,  and  that  will  be  the  value  of  ^  ; 
9 

then  we  shall  substitute  in  p*  —  a^*  =  0,  instead  of  p,  its 
value  fiq  -|-  r,  which  will  give 

(f^'  — AV  +  2é^r+r«  =  0, 

and  we  shall  again  seek  tlie  approximate,  deficient  value  of 

—  ;  that  is,  of  the  |iosilive  root  of  tlie  equation, 

and  we  shall  have  the  value  of  p'. 
Still  continuing  to  substitute  ftV  +  #,  instead  of  f,  m  die 


CHAP.  VIII/  ADDITIONS.  581 

transformed  equation  (ft«  —  a)^'  +  Say/-  +  r«  =  0  ;  we  shall 

I» 
have  an  equation,  whose  root  will  be  —  ;    then  taking  the 

approximate,  de6cient  value  of  this  root,  we  shall  have  the 
value  of  fß?.  Here  again  we  shall  substitute  fjJ'r  +  ^,  instead 
of  r,  8cc. 

Let  us  now  suppose,  for  example,  that  t  is  the  last  re- 
minder, which  must  be  nothing,  then  s  will  be  the  last  but 
one,  which  must  be  =  1  ;  wherefore,  if  the  formula /i'  -  a;^, 
when  transformed  into  terms  of  s  and  t,  is  fs*  +  Qj^/  4-  ai«, 
by  making  ^  =  0,  and  5  =  1,  it  must  become  =  1,  in  order 
diat  the  given  equation,  p^  -*  aj*  =  1 ,  may  take  place  ;  and 
therefore  p  must  be  =  1 .  Thus,  we  shall  only  have  to  con- 
tinue the  above  operations  and  transformations,  until  we 
arrive  at  a  transformed  formula,  in  which  the  coefficient  of 
the  irst  term  is  equal  to  unity;  then,  in  that  formula,  we 
«hall  make  the  first  of  the  two  indeterminates,  as  r,  equal  to 
1,  and  the  second,  as  «,  equal  to  0  ;  and,  by  going  back,  we 
shall  have  the  corresponding  values  of  p  and  q. 

We  might  likewise  work  with  the  equation  p^  —  ao*  =  1 
itself,  only  taking  care  to  abstract  from  the  term  I,  wnich  is 
known,  and  consequently  from  the  other  known  terms,  like- 
wise, that  may  result  from  this,  in  the  determination  of  the 

approximate  values  ft,  ft',  ft*,  &c.  of  ^,   —,   — ,  &c. .  la 

this  case,  we  shall  try  at  each  new  transformation,  whether 
the  indeterminate  equation  can  subsist,  by  making  one  of  the 
two  indeterminates  =:  1,  and  the  other  =:  0  ;  when  we  have 
arrived  at  such  a  transformation,  the  operation  will  bç 
finished  ;  and  we  shall  have  only  to  go  back  through  the 
several  steps,  in  order  to  have  the  required  values  of  p 
and  q. 

Here,  therefore,  we  are  brought  to  the  method  of  Chap. 
Til.  To  examine  this  method  in  itself,  and  independently 
of  the  principles  from  which  we  have  just  deduced  it,  it  must 
appear  indifferent  whether  we  take  tiie  approximate  values 
of  f^9  f^,  ft",  &c  less,  or  greater  than  the  real  values  ;  since, 
in  whatever  way  we  take  these  values,  those  of  r,  «,  /,  &c. 
must  m  on  decreasing  to  0.     (Art.  6.) 

WaUis'also  expressly  says,  that  we  may  employ  the  limits 
for  ft,  ft',  ft'',  &c.  either  in  plus^  or  in  minus^  at  pleasure  ;  and 
he  even  proposes  this,  as  the  proper  means  often  of  abridging 
the  calculation.  This  is  likewise  remarked  by  Euler,  Art. 
102,  et  scq:  of  the  chapter  just  now  quoted.  However,  the 
ollowing  example  will  shew,  that  by  setting  about  it  in  this 


882  ADDITIONI.  €UJkK  Till. 


frmy,  we  may  run  the  rifk  of  never  arriTÎng  •!  ihm 
the  equation  proposed. 

Let  us  take  the  example  of  Art.  101  of  that  duipler»  ia 
which  it  is  required  to  resolve  an  equation  of  this  fiorm, 
|)*=:6g«+l,  orp*-6y*  =  l.  Wehavep=^(6jr  +  1): 
and,  neglecting  the  constant  term  \,  pzz  q  y/  6 ;   wpcrefcw 

-^=:^672,za    Let  us  uke  the  limit  in  «mm»  wmi 

make  f^  =:  2,  and  then  p  =  2^  -|-  r  ;  substituting  this  valoiw 
therefore,  we  shall  have  —  k^  +  4}r  +  r*  =  1  ;  wbcBCs^ 

^  = ;  or,  rejecting  the  constant  term   —  %, 

y  = g —  ;  whence,-^  =  — ^  7  2,    ^.  8.     Let  «s 

again  take  the  limit  in  mint/«,  and  make  q^9r^ê  ;  the  last 
equation  will  then  become  r*  —  4r#  —  Äp  =:  1  ;  where  wr 
at  once  perceive,  that  we  may  suppose  #  =  0,  and  r  n  1  ; 
so  that  we  shall  have  q^9^  and  p  =  5. 

Let  us  now  resume  the  former  transformation» 

-V  +  4yr  +  f-=l, 
where  we  found  -^7  0,  and   ü  8  ;  and,  instead  of  takii^ 

the  limit  in  mtnta,  let  us  take  it  in  plus^  that  is  to  say,  let  as 
suppose  q  ^  ^6r  -\-  8  \  or,  since  s  iiuist  then  be  a  m-gative 
quantity,  7  =  Sr  —  «.  we  shall  then  have  the  following 
transformation,    —  ^r'^  -f  Srs  —  2#*  =  1,   which    will   giTt 

r  =  ' ;    wherefore,   neglecting  the   consCiot 

term  5,  r  = v ,  and  —  =  — = —   7  1,  and  z  2. 

Let  us  again  take  the  limit  in  plus,  and  make  r  ^9s  ^  t. 
we   shall   now   have    ~  (ur^  +  i^st  —  5/^  =  1;    therefcte 

s  =   ^ ;  80  that,  rejecting  the  term  —6, 

s  =  ;. ,  and  —  =  I  -h  — ^  7  1,  z  X. 

Let  us  continue  taking  the  limits  in  piuSy  and  make 
/  s  2/  —  u,  we  »hall  next  have  —  5/*  -f  lîi/ti  —  On-  =  |  ; 
wherefore, 

/  = — ;  and  —= — ;; —   7  1.  /  t. 


CHAF.  IX.  ADDITIONS.  '         58S 

Let  U8,  therefore,  in  the  same  manner,  make  /  =  2m  —  x^ 
and  we  shall  have  —  2u^  +  8ux  —  5x^  =»  1  ;  wherefore,  &o. 

Continuing  thus  to  take  the  limits  always  in  plus^  we  shall 
never  come  to  a  transformed  equation,  in  which  the  coefficient 
of  the  first  term  is  equal  to  unity,  which  is  necessary  to  our 
finding  a  solution  of  the  equation  proposed. 

The  same  thing  must  happen,  whenever  we  take  the  first 
limit  in  minua^  and  all  the  succeeding  in  plus  ;  the  reason  of 
this  mi^t  be  given  a  priori  ;  but  as  the  reader  can  easily 
deduce  it  from  the  principles  of  our  theory,  I  shall  not  dweU 
on  it  It  is  sufficient  for  the  present  to  have  shewn  the 
necessity  of  investigating  these  problems  more  fully,  and 
more  rigorously,  than  has  hitherto  been  done. 


CHAP.  IX. 


Of  the  maimier  qfßndinff  Algebraic  Functions  ^  all  De^ 
greea,  whichywhen  fnuliiplied  iogeiher,  may  always  produce 
Similar  Functions. 

[appendix    to   chap.    XI.    AND    XII.] 

88.  I  believe  I  had,  at  the  same  time  with  M.  Euler,  the 
idea  of  employing  the  irrational,  and  even  imaginary  factors  of 
formulas  of  the  second  degree,  in  finding  the  conditions, 
which  render  those  formulas  eoual  to  squares,  or  to  any 
powers.  On  this  subject,  I  read  a  Memoir  to  the  academy 
m  1768,  which  has  not  been  printed;  but  of  which  I  have 
given  a  summary  at  the  end  of  my  researches  on  Indeter" 
minaie  Problems,  which  are  to  be  found  in  the  volume  foe 
the  year  1767,  printed  in  1769,  before  even  the  Grerman 
translation  of  M.  Euler's  Alsebra. 

In  the  place  now  quoted,  I  have  shewn  how  the  same 
method  may  be  extenaed  to  formulas  of  higher  dimensions 
than  the  second  ;  and  I  have  by  these  means  given  the  solu- 
tion of  some  equations,  which  it  would  perhaps  have  been 
extremely  (üfficult  to  resolve  in  any  other  way.  It  is  here 
intended  to  generalise  this  method  still  more,  as  it  seems  to 
deserve  the  attention  of  mathematicians,  from  its  novelty 
and  singularity. 

SQ.  Let  a  and  ß  be  the  two  roots  of  the  quadratic  equation, 

**  —  OS  +  6  =  0, 
and  let  us  consider  the  product  of  these  two  ÜEKtors, 


JiM  .ADDITIONS.  CIIAF.  U. 

(X  +  ay)  X  (x  +  ßy), 
which  must  be  a  real  product  ;  being  equal  to 

NoWy  we  have  a  +  j3  =  a,  and  aß  =  b^  from  the  naturvef 
the  equation,  ^  —  at +  i  =  0;  therefore  weahidl  bftvethii 
formula  of  the  second  degree^ 

which  is  composed  of  the  two  factors, 

X  -|-  ay,  and  x  +  ßy. 
Now,  it  is  evident,  that  if  we  have  a  nmilar  farmuL^ 

and  wish  to  multiply  them,  the  one  by  the  other,  we  have 
only  to  multipl V  together  the  two  factors  x  +  m,  x'  -|-  ap^, 
and  also  the  other  two  factors  x  -|-  jSy,  x'  -|-  ßy^  and  dies 
the  two  products,  the  one  by  the  other.  Now,  the  pfodoct  cf 
X  -f  ay  by  Jcf  ^'  aj/  is,  x^  +  a(xj/  ^yjf)  +  a^y^\  bol 
since  a  is  one  of  the  roots  of  the  equation,  «*  —  a#  +  A  =  0, 
we  shall  have  a*  —  oa  +  i  =  0;  whence,  a*  r=  a«  —  A;  and, 
substituting  this  value  of  a*,  in  the  preceding  formula,  h  wil 
become,  xP  —  byj/  +  a(xy  +  yJ  -f  ayj/)  ;  so  that,  inofdcr 
to  simplify,  making 

X  =  xx'  —  iyy 

Y  -^J  -^yj^  +  ^y 

the  product  of  the  two  factors  x  +  «y,  x^  +  ay\  will  be 
X  4-  aY  ;  and,  consequently,  of  the  same  form  as  each  of 
them.  In  the  same  manner,  we  shall  find,  that  the  product 
of  the  two  other  factors,  j*  -|-  %,  and  ^  -h  3,t/y  m-ill  be  x  i  ^r  ; 
so  that  the  whole  product  will  be  (x  +  av)  x  (\  -¥  6^\i 
that  is,  X*  +  flxv  +  ÄY%  which  is  the  product  oif  the  two 
similar  formulae, 

x*  -h  axy  +  &v*<  ona  J*'  +  «-rV  -h  &>•. 
If  we  wislied  to  Imve  the  product  of  these  three  similar 
formula*, 

X«  -H  aiy  +  fcy,  J«  4  oxy  +  6j^,  i-  +  Jxy  -f-  by\ 
we  sliould  only  have  to  find  that  uf  the  formula,  x^  i-  oxT  ^  6t*, 


M  W 


by   the  la.Ht,  x'  +  ory  -f  /;y-  ;  and   it  is  evident,  from  Urn 
foregoing  formuldr,  that  by  making 

x'  =  xy'  —  ^y, 

Y*  =  xy  -f  YJ?  +  ayy^ 


CHAP.  IX.  APDITIOKS.  585 

the  product  sought  would  be 

X*  -h  axY  +  oy\ 

In  the  same  manner»  we  might  find  the  product  of  four^  or 
i^  a  still  greater  number  of  formulœ  similar  to  this, 

and  these  products  likewise  will  always  have  the  same  tonti» 

90.  If  we  make  x  -=.  x^  and  ^  =  ^,  we  shall  have 

X  =  X«  —  fty*,  Y  =  ary  +  ^*; 
andy  consequently, 

{x^  +  axy  +  fiy^«  =  x«  +  axx  +  AY*. 

Therefore,  if  we  wish  to  find  rational  values  of  x  and  r, 
«ucb,  that  the  formula  x*+  axY  -f  ir^may  become  a  square, 
"we  shall  only  have  to  give  the  preceding  values  to  x  and  y, 
and  we  shall  have,  for  the  root  of  the  square,  the  formula, 

a^  -I-  axy  +  6y*; 

X  and  y  beinff  two  indeterminate  numbers. 

If  we  farther  make  j:"  =:  ^  =:  or,  and  y  =y  =:  y,  we 
shall  have  x'  5=  xo:  —  b^y.  V  =  xy  -f  yo:  4-  orty  ;  that  is, 
by  substitudng  the  preceding  values  of  x  and  y, 

x'  =  a:»  -  Sixy*  +  aby^, 

y'  =  3x*y  +  Sooy«  +  (a«  -  %»; 

wherefore,  1  111 

(or*  +  fljy  +*/)'  =  X«  +  axY  +  ay«. 

Thus,  if  we  proposed  to  find  raüonal  values  of  x'  and  y', 

such,  that  the  formula  x*  +  axY  +  6y^  might  -become  a 

.  '  '  . 

cube,  we  should  only  have  to  give  to  x  and  y  the  foregoing 

values,  by  which  means  we  should  have  a  cube,  whose  root 
would  be  ar>  4"  ^^Jf  ^ày*;  x  and  y  being  both  indeter- 
minate. 

In  a  ûmilar  manner,  we  may  resolve  questions,  in  which 
it  is  required  to  produce  fourth,  fifth  powers,  &c  but  we 
may,  once  for  all,  find  general  formulœ  tor  any  power  what- 
ever, m,  without  passing  through  the  lower  powers. 

Let  it  be  proposed,  therefore,  to  find  rational  values  of  x 
and  Y,  such,  that  the  formula,  x'  -|-  axY  -|-  br-,  may  become 
a  power^  m;  that  is,  let  it  be  required  to  solve  the  equation, 

X*  4"  ÖXY  4"  *Y*  =  z**. 

As  the  Quantity  x'  -|"  ^'^^  +  ^*  ^  fiovmed  from  the  pro- 

'  duct  of  the  two  factors,  x  +  aY^midx  +$t/m  order  that 


586  ADDITION«.  C«Ar.  IX« 


this  quantity  may  become  a  power  of  the  dimeimofi  «t» 
of  its  factors  must  likewise  become  a  similar  power* 
Let  us,  therefore,  first  make 

X  +  aY  =  (x  -h  ay)-, 

and,  expressing  this  power  by  Newton's  theorem,  we  shaB 
have 

m(m— 1)  .  ^ 

Now,  since  a  is  one  of  the  roots  of  the  equation, 
1*  ~  Of  +  ft  %  0,  we  shall  also-  have  a*  ^  a«  -f  ft  s  0  ; 
wherefore,  a*  =  oa  -  ft,  a'  =3  a«*  —  6a  =  (a*  —  ft)«  —  mk^ 
o^  s  (a*  -  ft)a*  -  ofta  rr  (a> -  2aft) a  --  tf*ft  +  ft«;  and  a» 
on.  Thus,  we  shall  only  have  to  substitute  these  Values  in 
the  preceding  formula,  and  then  we  shall  find  it  to  be 
pounded  of  two  parts,  the  one  wholly  rational,  wfaidi 
shall  compare  to  x,  and  the  other  wholly  multiplied  by  the 
root  a,  which  we  shall  compare  to  ar. 
Ifi  in  order  to  simplify,  we  make 

a'  =  1  B*  =  0 

a'  =  a  B*  =  ft 

A*  =  oa"  —  be!  a*  =  flB*  —  fti' 

A*^  =  aK^ —  ftA*  B*'  =  AB*"  —  ftB* 

A^   =  OA'^—  ftA"',  B*    =  flB'^—  fta*', 

&c.  &c.  &c  we  shall  have, 
a  =  A'a  -  b' 
a*  =  A^a  —  b" 

a*=  A'^a  -  B*^ 


a 


=  A'^a—  B'%  &c. 


Wherefore,  substituting  these  values,  and  comparing, 
shall  have 

m{fn—  1) 


X  =  X-  -mx-->yB' — jr-«^»B' 

m(m-l)x(m--ä) 

f?i(»n— 1)     _^  -  - 
y  =  mx— >j/a'  +  ~~ — x*-yA' 

m(w-l)x(m— 2) 
+ ^^ x-yA--h,&c. 

Now,  as  the  root  a  docs  not  enter  into  the  «^ptvaaiotia  at' 


CHAP.  IX.  ADDITIONS.  Bê% 

X  and  Y,  it  is  evident,  that,  having  x  4-  äy  =  (^  +  w)% 
we  shall  likewise  have,  x  +  ßy  =  (x  -|-  ßj^)"  ;  wheremre^ 
multiplying  these  two  equatioas  together,  we  shall  have» 

X«  +  axY  +  *Y*  =  (ir^  +  axv  +  iv*)*; 
and,   consequently,  a  =  ^  +•  ory  +  oj^^.     The  problem, 
therefore,  is  solved. 

If  a  were  =  0,  the  foregoing  formulae  would  become 
simpler;  for  we  should  have  a' =3 1,  a"  =  0,  a'''=— i^ 
A*^  =  0,  A^  =  bS  A^  =  0,  A^*  =  -  **,  &c.  and,  likewise, 
b'  =  0,  b"  =  b,  b'"  =  0,  B»^  =—  *«,  B^  =  0,  B'^  =  *»,  &c. 

Therefore,  x  =  a?« ^  ^     ^af^i/^b  + 

2x3x4  ^     2^^       '*''• 

m(m-l)x(m~2) 
Y  =  nur^^y  +  g-^^-g Är"-yÄ  -|- 

fn(m-l) X  (m-2)  x  (m-3)  x  (m-4) 

And  these  values  will  satisfy  the  equation, 

X»  -f  Ay«  ==  (;c«  +  ^«r- 

91.  Let  us  now  proceed  to  the  formulse  of  three  di»- 
mensions  ;  in  order  to  which,  we  shall  denote  by  a,  ß^  y, 
the  three  roots  of  the  cubic  equation,  ê^-^as^-^-bs  —  c  =  0, 
and  we  shall  then  consider  the  product  of  these  three 
factors, 

(a?  +  ay  +  «•«)  X  (^  +  j3y  +  ß^z)  x  ( J?  +  oy  +  y«z), 
which  must  be  rational,  as  we  shall  peroeiv^.    The  multipUomi 
tion  being  performed,  we  shall  have  the  foUowing  product» 

a^+(a^ß  +y)d?^  4-  (a« +/32  +y V*» +(«/5+ay+/3y)xyt 
+(«*ß+aV-fj8*a4-i3V  +  y*«+y*i3^y5f+ 

Now,  from  the  nature  of  equations,  we  have 

a  -h  ß  +  y  =  a,  ajS  +  ay  -f  /3y  =  6,  ajSy  =  c. 

Farther,  we  shall  find 

a*  +  ß«-l-y«=(a+ß+y)«-2(aß-f-ay-|-/3y)=a*-aft, 

a*/î+«*y+/3*«+|3*y +y«a+y«i3=(a+/3+y)  X  (ai3-hay+i8y) 

—8a|9y=ai-3c;  and  a*i3«+aV-^ßy"(«i3+«r+/3y)8 

-Ä(a-f  i8+y)a^=Ä*— 2flc;  also,  a*/3y+ß*«y+y*ai3= 

(a4-i3+y)a/3y=ac,  and  a«j3V+*V*i9+/3V«= 

(aß  +  ay + i3y)«/3y = Ac. 


688  ADDITIONS.  CHAF.  Ä 

Therefore,  making  these  substitutions»  the  product  in 
tion  will  be 

X* + (ijr«y + (a*  -  8&)x*r +&r^ + (ai--Sc)x^ -f  (  A«-.Star)n* 

And  this  formula  will  have  the  propertj,  that  if  wm  ani- 
tiplj  together  as  many  similar  formulae  as  we  diOGae,  the 
product  will  always  be  a  nmilar  formula. 

Let  us  suppose  that  the  product  of  the  foregotujg  fcfwwik 
by  the  following  was  required,  namely, 

x^  +  flJ^y  +  («•  -  Äe)*V  -l-&iy«  +  {ab  —  SeVry:' 

+(&•  —  2ac)xz^  +  ^  +  «yV  +  fcyx*  +  c«i*; 

it  is  evident,  that  we  have  only  to  seek  the  product  of  these 
six  factors, 

^+ay-^a^2f,    x'  +  ^  +  ^V,     x'+yy  +  ^i 

if  we  first  multiply  x  -f  oy  -f  ^%  ^  '^  +  «y  +  •*«',  ^« 
shall  have  this  partial  product, 

now,  a  being  one  of  the  roots  of  the  equation» 

we  shall  have  a'  —  aa*  -)-  As  ~  c  =  0  ;  consequently, 

a'  =  am,*  —  ba-^  c;  whence, 
a*  =  aa»  —  fta-  +  ra  =  {a*  -  é)a*  -  (oft  »  r)a  4-  oc; 

so  that  substituting  these  values,  and,  in  order  to  abridgi, 
making 

X  =  xx'  —  r(  ys'  4"  '}/)  +  acz::^, 

Y  =  xs/+j^x'-%2'+ry)-(flft-.  f  )iy,     , 

z  =xz'  +  5x'+5y  +  a(jf/+2y)  +  (a«-é)a, 

the  product  in  question  will  become  of  this  form,  x-^-^v-f***'  - 
tliat  is  to  say,  of  the  same  form  as  each  of  those  from  which 
it  has  been  produced.  Now,  as  the  root  a  does  not  ent^ 
into  the  values  of  x,  y,  z,  it  is  evident,  that  these  ciuantitini 
will  be  the  same,  if  we  change  a  into  0,  or  y  ;  wherefore, 
since  we  already  have 

{x  +  ay  +  a^z)  X  (^  +  ay'4.  a*  r')  =  x  +  «t  +  ••!, 
we  shall  likewise  have,  by  changing  a  into  0, 

(x  +  ßy+ßU)  X  (y  +  %'  +  ß'zO  =  x+ßy  +  e^zi 
and,  by  changing  a  into  y, 

(■«^  +  ry  +  r**)  ^  (j^  +  yy  +  r'«')  =  x  +  yr  +  y'a; 


CHAP.  IX.  ADDITIONS.  <     589 

therefore,  by  multiplying  these  three  equations  together,  we 
shall  have»  on  the  one  side,  the  product  of  the  two  given 
formulae,  and  on  the  other,  the  formula, 

X»  -h  ax«Y  +(a*  -  26)x*z  +  ôxy'  -h  {ab  —  8c)xyz  + 

(*«  —  2ac)xz«  +  CY^  +  acY^z  +  ôcyz«  +  ^^^9 

which  will  therefore  be  equal  to  the  product  required  ;  and 
is  evidently  of  the  same  form  as  each  of  the  two  formulae  of 
which  it  is  composed. 

If  we  had  a  third  formula,  such  as 

x^  +  ojf y  +  (a  -  2i)a:«2^  +  bxy^  +  (ai  -  3c)jr''y V 

UU  U  It  u»  u 

and  if  we  wished  to  have  the  product  of  this  formula  and 
the  two  preceding,  it  is  evident,  that  we  should  only  have 
to  make 

x'  =  Tiof  —  ciy:?  +  zy")    +  «czz", 

Y*  s=x^  +  yafl     —  fc(Y;K"  -f  zj/*  )  -  (oô  -  c)za?, 

Tf  =^  xz"  -^  zx"      +  Yy     +  a(Y2^  +  z^^^-  (a«  —  *)z2^, 

and  we  should  have,  for  the  product  required, 

X*  +  axV  +  (a«  —  26)x«z'  +  Jxy«  +  (o*  —  3c)xVz' 

el  I  I  II  I 

H-(Ä«  —  2ac)xz«  +  CY*  -h  acY^z*  +  6cyz«  +  c«z*. 

92.  Let  us  now  make  ^r^  ==  x,  y  =  ^,  5/  =  «,  and  wa 
shall  have, 

X  =    a:*  —  2cya?  +  ocx*, 

y  =  äry  —  2^z  —  {ab  —  c):«, 

z  =  AT«  +     y  +  2ayz-f  (o«  —  i)2;*  ; 

and  these  values  will  satisfy  the  equation, 

X*  -f  ax^Y  +  6xY«  +  cy*  +  (û*  --  26)x«z 

+  {ab  -  3c)xYZ  +  acY«z  +  (6«  —  2ac)xz* 

+  ÄCYZ*  +  c*z*  =  V*,  by  taking 

V  =  j:*  +  aj^t/  +  bxy'^  +  cy  ■\'{a'^--9h)x'^z  +  (a&— Sc)xy;s 

+a<yz  +  (4*  —  2flc)arÄ«  -f  ic^i?«  +  cV; 

wherefore,  if  we  had,  for  example,  to  resolve  an  equation  of 
this  form,  x'  +  ax*Y  +  Axy«  +  cy^  zi  v«,  a,  A^  c  being  any 
given  quantities,  we  should  only  have  to  destroy  z,  by 
making  Ärx  +  y.+  %ayz  -f  (o«  —  6*)««  s  0,  whence  we 

J    .                  y+2av2+(a«-6«);fc»        j      ._   .     . 
denve  a?  =  —  *^^ 9^ »  and,  substitutiDg  this 


890  ADDITI0X8.  CrWAF.  t\. 

▼alue  of  X  in  the  foregoiiig  expremons  oTx,  t,  and  y,  «« 
shall  have  very  ^[eneral  values  ox  these  quantities,  which  «ill 
satisfy  the  equation  proposed. 

This  solution  de8er%'es  particular  attenticn,  ao  acrooni 
of  its  generality,  and  the  manner  in  which  we  have  arrived 
at  it;  which  is,  perhaps,  the  only  way  in  which  it  can  be 
eaâly  resolved. 

We  should  Fikewise  obtain  the  solution  of  the  equatioo» 

X'  +  cix'y'  +  (a«  -  26)x«z'  +  bx\^  +  (ab  -  8c)xV/ 

+  (*»  -  2jc)xz«  +  ct*  +  flCT^z*  +  Änr2«  +  c4»  =  r», 
by  making,  in  the  foregoing  formulas, 

J^  =  ^  =  ^,    y=y=j^,    «^  =  ysr, 
and  taking 
V  =  x^  -f  ax^y  -f  (a«  —  2Ä)j-*r  -f  hxy*  4.  (a&  —  ScUyz 

And  we  might  resolve,  successively,  the  cases  ia  whicà, 
instead  of  the  third  power  v^,  we  sliould  have  v\  \-^,  ^. 
But  we  are  going  to  consider  these  questions  in  a  gciiml 
manner,  as  we  have  done  Art.  90. 

93.  Let  it  be  proposed,  therefore,  to  resolve  aa  eq[ualiaa 
of  this  form, 

X«  +  flx^Y  +  {q}  -  2b)\'z  -f  *XY^  +  (ab  -  3r)  xti  - 
(If  —  2/ir)xz*  -f  rv*  +  acYZ  -H  />cyz*  +  r^'z'  =  v*. 

Since  the  quantity,  which  forms  the  first  side  of  this  equa- 
tion, is  notiiing  more  tlian  the  product  of  these  tLrf«> 
factors, 

(x  +  a  Y  1   a«z)  X  (X  +  ^Y  ■»-  ß-z)  x  (x  +  yT  +  -/i  U 

it  is  evident  that,  in  order  to  render  tliis  quantity  equal  lit  4 
power  of  the  dünension  m,  we  have  only  to  make  each  of  \\s 
factors  separately  e(]ual  to  such  a  power. 

Let  then       x  -I-  av  +  a-z  =  (x  -♦-  ay  -I-  a^z)^. 

We  shall  begin  by  expressing  the  mth  p)wer  of  x-f-oy-f  a*: 
aooording  to  Newton's  theorem,  which  will  give 

viim — I) 
m(m— l)x(m — 2)  v,  ,         * 

«^  X  o 

Or  ratlier,  forming  the  (iilîcrcnt  |H)wer5i  of  1/  +  a:^  and  ihcn 
arranging  them,  according  to  the  dimen^ion8  of  a. 


fHAF.  IX.  ADDITIONS.  591 

+  (f7i(m  —  l)jr--»yÄ+  -^ ^^ 'af^y')a^-V,  &c. 

But  as  in  this  formula  we  do  not  easily  perceive  the  law 
of  the  terms,  we  shall  suppose,  in  general, 

(ar  +  ay  +  a«z)-  =  p  +  p a  +  P^a«  -h  P^'a'  +  P'^o*  +,  8cc. 
and  we  shall  find, 

p    =:  af^f 

„  _  (wi-l)yp^+2twgp 
Ar 

^_  (m-%p^^+(gmT-l)^ 

(t/i>-3)yp^^-K2m->2>p^ 

« 
which  may  easily  be  demonstrated  by  the  differential  cal- 
culus. 

Now,  since  a  is  one  of  the  roots  of  the  equation, 

#*  —  «•  +  é*  —  c  =r  0,  we  shall  have 

a'  —  aa*  +  ba  —  c  =  0  ;  whence, 

fl'  zr  oa*  —  ba-\-  c;  wherefore, 

a*  =  aa*  —  6a* -f  ca  =:  (a*  —  6)a'  —  (fl6  —  c)a  +  oc, 

«»  =  (a«  -  é)a^  —  (j6  —  c)a«  +  oca  =  (a'  -  8aô  +  c)a* 

—  (a*é  —  Ô'  —  ac)a  -f  (a*  —  b)c;  and  so  on. 

So  that  if,  in  order  to  simplify,  we  make 
a'  =  0        A»^  =  aA'"  -  Ja"  +  ca' 
a"  =  1         A^  z=  ûA»^  -  ÄA*'  +  ca" 
A'^r:  a         a^*  =  aa^  -  ôa»^  +  ca^  &c. 

b'  =  1  c'  =  0 

B*  ss  0  C*  =  0 

b"'  =  Ô  c""  =  c 

B^^=  öb"'  —  in"  -h  cb'  c'^  =  ac^  —  éc"  -f  cc' 

B''  =  M^"  hsF  '\-  cvP  c^  =  oc'^  —  bc^  +  cc" 

B^*  =  avi^  —  6b*^  +  CB*',  &c.      c"^  =  oc^  —  6c'^  +  cc'",  8cc. 

we  shall  have, 

a  =  A'a»  -  B'a  4-  c'  a'  =  A^'a«  -^  B'^a  -f  c«' 

a*=  aV  —  b"«  +  c''  a*  =  A'V—  B»^a  +  c*%  &c. 

Substituting  these  values,  therefore,  in  the  expresinon 


SQâ  ADDITIONS.  CRAF.  11. 

(x  +  ay  +  a'ar)",  it  will  be  found  compoicd  cyT  three  parts 
one  all  rational,  another  all  multiplied  by  a,  and  the  thtrd 
all  multiplied  by  a^  ;  so  that  we  shall  only  have  to  coropaie 
the  first  to  x,  the  second  to  ar,  and  the  third  to  «*z,  and, 
by  these  means,  we  shall  have 

X  =  F  +  p'c'  +  p«'c''  +  P^c"  +  p*^c^  fcc 
y  =  -  Fl'  —  p^B*'  —  p''b''  -  P*^B*S  &€• 
s  =  fV  +  p'a"  +  p^a'^  +  p^'a'^,  &c. 

These  values,  therefore,  will  satisfy  the  equatkio« 

X  +  ay  +  a*z  =  (x  +  ay  -h  a'z)*  ; 

and  as  the  root  œ  does  not  enter  into  the  expresnons  of  x, 
Y,  and  z,  it  is  evident,  that  we  may  change  a  into  S^  or 
into  Y  ;  so  that  we  shall  have  both 

X  +  /3y  +  /3«z  =  (x  -f  0y  -f  /S«z)-,  and 

X  -h  rv  +  y*z  =  (j^  +  r^  +  r**)"- 

If  we  now  multiply  these  three  equations  together,  it  is 
evident,  that  the  first  member  will  he  the  same  as  that  of 
the  given  equation,  and  that  the  second  will  be  equal  to  a 
power  fit,  the  root  of  which  being  called  v,  we  shall  have 

V  =  j:^  +  ftx^i/  +  (a*  —  2Ä)x«s  -f  bxi/*  +  (o*  —  9r)jys 

Thus,  we  shall  have  the  values  required  of  x,  r,  a,  and 
V,  which  will  amtain  three  indelerminalcis  j,  ^,  r. 

9*^.  If  we  wished  to  find  formula;  of  four  dimensâoQ!^ 
having  the  same  properties  as  those  wc  have  now  examioed« 
it  would  be  necessary  to  consider  the  product  of  four  factor» 
of  this  fi>rm, 

Jr  ^  ßy  +  e^z  +  0H 

J^  +  yy  -H  y'z  +  /< 

supposing  a,  13,  y,  ^  to  be  the  roots  of  a  Inquadratic  equation« 
such  as  *•  —  ai^  +  A.f*  —  c*  -j-  J  =  0  ;  we  shall  thu5  ha\e 

aß  +  ay-^  ai  +  ßy  -^  ei  -^  Y^  -  *» 

CL0yi  =  (/, 

by  which  means  we  may  détermine  all  the  coefficients  of  the 
different  terms  of  the  pHnluct  in  question,  without  knowing 
the  roots  a»  P,  i,  y.     Hut  as  this  m)uircs  difTerrot  nr- 


CHAP.  IX«  ADDITIONS.  593 

ductions,  which  are  not  easily  performed,  we  may  set  about 
it,  if  it  be  judged  more  convenient,  in  the  following  manner. 
Let  us  suppose,  in  general, 

X  -h  ST/  -{-  s^z  +  ^3^  —  ^ . 
and,  as  s  is  determined  by  the  equation, 

Ä*  -  o^  +  6«*  —  CÄ  -h  d  =  0, 

let  us  take  away  s  from  these  two  equations  by  the  common 
rules,  and  the  equation,  which  results,  after  expunging  «, 
being  arranged  according  to  the  unknown  quantity  f,  will 
rise  to  the  fourth  degree  ;  so  that  it  may  be  put  into  this 
form,  f*  —  Nf^  -f  p^*  —  Qf  -f  E  =  0. 

Now,  the  cause  of  this  equation  in  g  rising  to  the  fourth 
degree  is,  that  s  may  have  the  four  values  a,  |S,  y,  ^; 
ana  also  that  f  may  likewise  have  these  four  corresponding 
values, 

a:  +  ay  +  a*z  +  at 

a:  +  a[y  +  »«r  +  IH, 

which  are  nothing  but  those  factors,  the  product  of  which  is 
required.  Wherefore,  since  the  last  term  R  must  be  the 
product  of  all  the  four  roots,  or  values  of  f,  it  follows,  that 
this  quantity,  r,  will  be  the  product  required. 

But  we  have  now  said  enough  on  tliis  subject,  which  we 
might  resume,  perhaps,  on  some  other  occasion. 

I  shall  here  close  tliese  Additions,  which  the  limits  I  pre- 
scribed to  myself  will  not  permit  me  to  carry  any  farther; 
perhaps  tliey  have  already  been  found  too  long  :  but  the 
subjects  I  have  considered  being  rather  new  and  little  known, 
I  thought  it  incumbent  on  me  to  enter  into  several  details, 
necessary  for  the  full  illustration  of  the  methods  which  I 
have  explained,  and  of  their  different  uses. 


THE  END. 


Q  a 


] 


LONDON: 


i 

1 


I      I 


/ 


■» 


^« 


J  2044  020  347  340