ESSAYS 


ON 


GOVERNMENT 
JURISPRUDENCE 
LIBERTY OF THE PRESS 


AND 


LAW OF NATIONS 


BY 


JAMES MILL 
[ 1825 ] 


LIBRARY 
DUNIOR COLLEGS DISTRIC? 


M645E 
ESSAYS ON GOVERNMENT, JURISPRUDENCE, LIBERTY OF 
THE PRESS, ANDLAW.. = / MILL, JAME 


St. Louis Community College 


320 M645e M 
MILL 
ESSAYS ON GOVERNMENT 
JURISPRUDENCE, LIBERTY... 7.50 


WITHDRAWN 


Bei St.Louis Community 
ee College 


5801 Ison Ave’ 


' St. Louis, Missouri 63110 a 
; 


aan. a eee re 


Library | 
H 
i 


Ns 


4 
d yy ie Inte Y ot Archive” 
h fund ding from 5 


as 
https /larchive.c r ils) aysongovernmeO000jame 


REPRINTS OF ECONOMIC CLASSICS 


ESSAYS on GOVERNMENT, JURIS- 
PRUDENCE, LIBERTY OF THE 
PRESS ¢ LAW OF NATIONS 


Also Published In 
REPRINTS OF ECONOMIC CLASSICS 


By James Mill 
ANALYSIS OF THE PHENOMENA OF THE 
HUMAN MIND, 2 VOLS. [1869] 
COMMERCE DEFENDED [1808] 


ELEMENTS OF POLITICAL ECONOMY [1844] 


AN ESSAY ON THE IMPOLICY OF A BOUNTY ON 
THE EXPORTATION OF GRAIN [1804] 


ESSAYS 


ON 
GOR Vel aia allie Nel) 
JURISPRUDENCE 


GERBER TY OF THE PRESS 
AND 


LAW OF NATIONS 


BY 
JAMES MILL 


[1825 | 


ReEpRINTS OF Economic CLaAssiIcs 


Avucustus M. KELLEY: PUBLISHERS 
NEW YORK + 1967 


The Essays were written for the 
Supplement of the Encyclopedia Britannica 
and appeared in the years 1816-1823 


First Innes Edition 1825 


(London: J. Innes, Printer, 61 Wells - Street, 
Oxford Street, 1825) 


Reprinted 1967 by 
AUGUSTUS M. KELLEY : PUBLISHERS 


Library of Congress Catalogue Card Number 


66 - 21685 


PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMBRICA 
by SENTRY PRESS, NEW YORK, N. Y, 10019 


ESSAYS 


ON 


GOVERNMENT, 
JURISPRUDENCE, 


LIBERTY OF THE PRESS, 


AND 


LAW OF NATIONS. 


WRITTEN FOR 
THe Supplement to the Enepclopadia Writamnica, 
AND PRINTED BY PERMISSION OF 


THE PROPRIETORS OF THE ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


BY JAMES MILL, ESQ. 


AUTHOR OF THE HISTORY OF BRITISH ANDIA. 
i -” 


NOT FOR SAEE. 


a SES 


JL DON : 


THE ARTICLE 


GOVERNMENT, 


REPRINTED FROM 
THE SUPPLEMENT 


TO THE 


ENCYCLOPEDIA BRITANNICA. 


” 
> 


TAM 


at: Vou 
% — 


~~ . 


GOVERNMENT. 


I. 
The End of Government; viz. the Good or Benefit for the Sake of 


which it exists. 


PPE question with respect to Government is a question about the adap- 

_ tation of means to an end. Notwithstanding the portion of discourse 
which has been bestowed upon this subject, it is surprising to find, on 
a close inspection, how few of its principles are settled. The reason is, 
that the ends and means have not been analyzed; and it is only a general 
and undistinguishing conception of them, which is found in the minds of 
the greatest number of men. Things, in this situation, give rise to inter- 
minable disputes; more especially when the deliberation is subject, as 
here, to the strongest action of personal interest. 

In a discourse, limited as the present, it would be obviously vain to 
attempt the accomplishment of such a task as that of the analysis we have 
mentioned. ‘The mode, however, in which the operation should be con- 
ducted, may perhaps be described, and evidence enough exhibited to 
shew in what road we must travel, to approach the goal at which so 
many have vainly endeavoured to arrive. 

The end of Government has been described in a great variety of ex- 
pressions. By Locke it was said to be “the public good ;” by others it 
has been described as being “ the greatest happiness of the greatest 
number.” These, and equivalent expressions, are just; but they are 
defective, inasmuch as the particular ideas which they embrace are indis- 
tinctly announced; and different conceptions are by means of them 
raised in different minds, and even in the same mind on different occasions. 

It is immediately obvious, that a wide and difficult field is presented, 
and that the whole science of human nature must be explored, to lay a 
foundation for the science of Goverment. 

To understand what is included in the happiness of the greatest 
number, we must understand what is included in the happiness of the 
individuals of whom it is composed. 


4 


That dissection of human nature which would be necessary for ex- 
hibiting, on proper evidence, the primary elements into which human 
happiness may be resolved, it is not compatible with the present design 
to undertake. We must content ourselves with assuming certain results. 

We may allow, for example, in general terms, that the lot of every 
human being is determined by his pains and pleasures ; and that his 
happiness corresponds with the degree in which his pleasures are great, 
and his pains are small. 

Human pains and pleasures are derived from two sources :—They are 
produced, either by our fellow-men, or by causes independent of other men. 

We may assume it as another principle, that the concern of Govern- 
ment is with the former of these two sources ; that its business is to 
increase to the utmost the pleasures, and diminish to the utmost the 
pains, which men derive from one another. 

Of the laws of nature, on which the condition of man depends, that 
which is attended with the greatest number of consequences, is the neces- 
sity of labour for obtaining the means cf subsistence, as well as the 
means of the greatest part of our pleasures. ‘This is, no doubt, the 
primary cause of Government; for, if nature had produced spontanéously 
all the objects which we desire, and in sufficient abundance for the desires 
of all, there would have been no source of dispute or of injury among 
men; nor would any man have possessed the means of ever acquiring 
authority over another. 

The results are exceedingly different, when nature produces the 
objects of desire not in sufficient abundance for all. ‘The source of dis- 
pute is then exhaustless; and every man has the means of acquiring 
authority over others, in proportion to the quantity of those objects which 
he is able to possess. 

In this case, the end to be obtained, through Government as the means, 
is, to make that distribution of the scanty materials of happiness, which 
would insure the greatest sum of it in the members of the community, 
taken altogether, preventing every individual, or combination of indi- 
viduals, from interfering with that distribution, or making any man to 
have less than his share. 

When it is considered that most of the objects of desire, and even 
the means of subsistence, are the product of Jabour, it is evident that 
the means of insuring labour must be provided for as the foundation 
of all. 

The means for the insuring of labour are of two sorts; the one made 
out of the matter of evil, the other made out of the matter of good. 

The first sort is commonly denominated force ; and, under its applica- 
tion, the labourers are slaves. ‘Chis mode of procuring labour we need 
not consider ; for, if the end of Government be to produce the greatest 
happiness of the greatest number, that end cannot be attained by making 
the greatest number slaves. 

The other mode of obtaining labour is by allurement, or the advantage 
which it brings. To obtain all the objects of desire in the greatest possible 


os) 


quantity, we must obtain labour in the greatest possible quantity; and, 
to obtain labour in the greatest possible quantity, we must raise to the 
greatest possible height the advantage attached to labour.  {t is 
impossible to attach to labour a greater degree of advantage than 
the whole of the product of Jabour. Why so? Because, if you 
give more to ove man than the produce of his labour, you can do so 
only by taking it away from the produce of some other man’s labour. 
The greatest possible happiness of society is, therefore, attained by in- 
suring to every man the greatest possible quantity of the produce of 
his labour. 

How is this to be accomplished? for it is obvious that every man, 
who has not all the objects of his desire, has inducement to take them 
from any other man who is weaker than himself: and how is he to be 
prevented ? 

_ One mode is sufficiently obvious; and it does not appear that there 
is any other: The union of a certain number of men, to protect one 
another. ‘The object, it is plain, can best be attained when a great 
number of men combine, and delegate to a small number the power 
necessary for protecting them all. ‘This is Goverument. 

_ With respect to the end of Government, or that for the sake of which 
it exists, it is not conceived to be necessary, on the present occasion, that 


the analysis should be carried any further. What follows is an attempt 
to analyze the means. 


LT 


The Means of attaining the End of Government ; viz. Power, and 
Securities against the Abuse of that Power. 


Two things are here to be considered ; the power with which the small 
number are entrusted ; and the use which they are to make of it. 

With respect to the first, there is no difficulty. The elements, out of 
which the power of coercing others is fabricated, are obvious to all. Of 
these we shall, therefore, not lengthen this article by any explanation. 

All the difticult questions of Government relate to the means of re- 
straining those, in whose hands are lodged the powers necessary for the 
protection of all, from making a bad use of it. 

Whatever would be the temptations under which individuals would lie, 
if there was no Government, to take the objects of desire from others 
weaker than themselves, under the same temptations the members of 
Government lie, to take the objects of desire from the members of 
the community, if they are not prevented from domg so. Whatever, 
then, are the reasons for establishing Government, the very same exactly 
are the reasons for establishing securities, that those entrusted with the 
powers necessary for protecting others make use of them for that pur- 
pose solely, and not for the purpose of taking from the members of the 
community the objects of desire. 


6 


Ill. 


That the requisite Securities against the Abuse of Power, are not found 
in any of the simple Forms of Government. 


There are three modes in which it may be supposed that the powers for 
the protection of the community are capable of being exercised. The com- 
munity may undertake the protection of itself, and of its members. ‘The 
powers of protection may be placed in the hands of a few. And, lastly, 
they may be placed in the hands of an individual. The Many, The Few, 
The One; These varieties appear to exhaust the subject. It is not possible 
to conceive any hands, or combination of hands, in which the powers 
of protection can be lodged, which will not fall under one or other of 
those descriptions. And these varieties correspond to the three forms of 
Government, the Democratical, the Aristocratical, and the Monarchical. 

It will be necessary to look somewhat closely ut each of these forms 
in their order. 

1, THe DemocraTicaL.—lt is obviously impossible that the com- 
munity in a body can be present to afford protection to each of its mem- 
bers. It must employ individuals for that purpose. Employing indivi- 
duals, it must choose them; it must lay down the rules under which 
they are to act; and it must punish them, if they act in disconformity to 
those rules. In these functions are included the three great operations 
of Government— Administration, Legislation, and Judicature. ‘he com- 
munity, to perform any of these operations, must be assembled. This 
circumstance alone seems to form a conclusive objection against the 
democratical form. To assemble the whole of a community as often as 
the business of Government requires performance would almost pre- 
clude the existence of labour; hence that of property; and hence the 
existence of the community itself. 

_There is another objection, not less conclusive. A whole commu- 
nity would form a numerous assembly. But all numerous assemblies 
are essentially incapable of business. It is unnecessary to be tedious in 
the proof of this proposition. In an assembly, every thing must be done 
by speaking and assenting. But where the assembly is numerous, xo 
many persons desire to speak, and feelings, by mutual inflammation, 
become so violent, that calm and effectual deliberation is impossible. 

It may be taken, therefore, as a position, from which there will be 
no dissent, that a community in mass is ill adapted for the business of 
Government. There is no principle more in conformity with the senti- 
ments and the practice of the people than this. "The management of the 
Joint affairs of any considerable body of the people they never undertake 
for themselves. What they uniformly do is, to choose a certain number of 
themselves to be the actors in their stead. Even in the case of a common 
Benefit Club, the members choose a Committee of Management, and 
content themselves with a general controul. 

2. THE ARisTocraATicaL.—This term applies to all those cases, in 
which the powers of Governinent are held by any number of persons 


7 


intermediate between a single person and the majority. When the num- 
ber is small, it is common to call the Government an Oligarchy ; when 
it is considerable, to call it an Aristocracy. The cases are essentially 
the same; because the motives which operate in both are the same. 
This is a proposition which carries, we think, its own evidence along 
with it. We, therefore, assume it as a point which will not be disputed. 

The source of evil is radically different, in the case of Aristocracy, 
from what it is in that of Democracy. 

The Community cannot have an interest opposite to its interest. 
To affirm this would be a contradiction in terms. The Community 
withm itself, and with respect to itself, can have no sinister interest. 
One Community may intend the evil of another; never its owu. This is 
an indubitable proposition, and one of great importance. The Com- 
munity may act wrong from mistake. ‘lo suppose that it could from 
design, would be to suppose that human beings can wish their own 
misery. 

The circumstances, from which the inaptitude of the community, as a 
body, for the business of Government, arises, namely, the inconvenience of 
assembling them, and the inconvenience of their numbers when assembled, 
do not necessarily exist in the case of Aristocracy. If the number of 
these who hold among them the powers of Goverrment is so great, as to 
make it inconvenient to assemble them, or impossible for them to deli- 
berate calmly when assembled, this is only an objection to so extended 
an Aristocracy, and has no application to an Aristocracy not too nume- 
rous, when assembled, for the best exercise of deliberation. 

The question is, whether such an Arijstrocracy may be trusted to make 
that use of the powers of Government which is most conducive to the end 
for which Government exists? 

There may bea strong presumption that any Aristocracy, monopolizing 
the powers of Government, would not possess intellectual powers in any 
very high perfection. Intellectual powers are the oftspring of labour. 
But an hereditary Aristrocracy are deprived of the strongest motives to 
labour. The greater part of them will, therefore, be defective in those 
mental powers. This is one objection, and an important one, though 
not the greatest. 

We have already observed, that the reason for which Government 
exists is, that one man, if stronger than another, will take from him 
whatever that other possesses and he desires. But if one man will do 
this, so will several. And if powers are put into the hands of a com- 
paratively small number, called an Aristocracy, powers which make them 
stronger than the rest of the community, they will take from the rest of 
the community as much as they please of the objects of desire. 
They will, thus, defeat the very end for which Government was in- 
stituted. The unfitness, therefore, of an Aristocracy to be entrusted 
with the powers of Government, rests on demonstration. 

3. Tue MonaRrcuicaL.—lt will be seen, and therefore words to make 
it manifest are unnecessary, that, in most respects, the Monarchical form 


5 


of Government agrees with the Aristocratical, and is liable to the same 
objections. 

If Government is founded upon this, as a law of human nature, that a 
man, if able, will take from others any thing which they have and 
he desires, it is sufficiently evident that when a man is called a King, 
it does not change his nature; so that when he has got power to 
enable him to take from every man what he pleases, he will take what- 
ever he pleases. To suppose that he will not, is to affirm that Govern- 
ment is unnecessary ; and that human beings will abstain from injuring 
one another of their own accord, 

It is very evident that this reasoning extends to every modification of 
the smaller number. Whenever the powers of Government are placed 
in any hands other than those of the community, whether those of one 
man, of a few, or of several, those principles of human nature which 
imply that Government is at all necessary, imply that those persons will 
make use of them to defeat the very end for which Government exists. 


IV. 
An Objection stated — and answered. 

One observation, however, suggests itself. Allowing, it may be said, 
that this deduction is perfect, and the inference founded upon it indis- 
putable, it is yet true, that if there were no Government, every man 
would be exposed to depredation from every man; but, under an Aris- 
tocracy, he is exposed to it only from a few; under a Monarchy, only 
from one. 

This is a highly-important objection, and deserves to be minutely in- 
vestigated. 

It is sufficiently obvious, that, if every man is liable to be deprived of 
what he possesses at the will of every man stronger than himself, the ex- 
istence of property is impossible ; and, if the existence of property is 
impossible, so also is that of labour, of the means of subsistence for an 
enlarged community, and hence of the community itself. If the mem- 
bers of such a community are liable to deprivation by only a few hun- 
dred men, the members of an Aristocracy, it may not be impossible to 
satiate that limited number with a limited portion of the objects belong- 
ing to all. Allowing this view of the subject to be correct, it follows, 
that the smaller the number of hands into which the powers of Govern- 
ment are permitted to pass, the happier it will be for the community : 
that an Oligarchy, therefore, is better than an Aristocracy, and a Mo- 
narchy better than either. 

This view of the subject deserves to be the more carefully considered, 
because the conclusion to which it leads is the same with that which has 
been adopted and promulgated, by some of the most profound and most 
benevolent investigators of human affairs. That Government by one man, 
altogether unlimited and uncontrolled, is better than Government by any 


9 


modification of Aristocracy, is the celebrated opinion of Mr. Hobbes, 
and of the French Economists, supported on reasonings which it is not 
easy to controvert. Government by the many, they with reason consi- 
dered an impossibility. They inferred, therefore, that, of all the pos- 
sible forms of Government, absolute Monarchy is the best. 

_ Experience, if we look only at the outside of the facts, appears to be 
divided on this subject. Absolute Monarchy, under Neros and Caligulas, 
under such men as Emperors of Morocco and Sultans of Turkey, is the 
scourge of human nature. On the other side, the people of Denmark, 
tired out with the. oppression of an Aristocracy, resolved that their King 
should be absolute, and, under their absolute Monarch, are as well 
governed as any people in Europe. In Greece, notwithstanding the 
defects of Democracy, human nature ran a mote brilliant career than it 
has ever done in any other age or country. 

As the surface of history affords, therefore, no certain principle of de- 
cision, we must go beyond the surface, and penetrate to the springs 
within. 

When it is said that one man, or a limited number of men, will soon 
be satiated with the objects of desire, and, when they have taken from 
the community what suffices to satiate them, will protect its members in 
the enjoyment of the femainder, an important element of the calculation 
is left out. Human beings are not a passive substance. If human beings, 
in respect to their rulers, were the same as sheep in respect to their shep- 
herd; and if the King, or the Aristocracy, were as totally exempt from 
all fear of resistance from the people, and all chance of obtaining more 
obedience from severity, as the shepherd in the case of the sheep, it 
does appear that there would be a limit to the motive for taking to one’s 
self the objects of desire. The case will be found to be very much 
altered when the idea is taken into the account, first, of the resistance to 
his will which one human being may expect from another; and secandly, 
of that perfection in obedience which fear alone can produce. 

That one human being will desire to render the person and property 
of another subservient to his pleasures, notwithstanding the pain or loss 
of pleasure which it may occasion to that other individual, is the founda- 
tion of Government. ‘The desire of the object implies the desire of the 
power necessary to accomplish the object. ‘The desire, therefore, of that 
power which is necessary to render the persons and properties of human 
beings subservient to our pleasures, is a grand governing law of human 
nature. 

What is implied in that desire of power; and what is the extent 
to which it carries the actions of men; are the questions which it is 
necessary to resolve, in order to discover the limit which nature has set 
to the desire on the part of a King, or an Aristocracy, to inflict evil 
upon the community for their own advantage. 

Power is a means to anend. ‘The end is every thing, without excep- 
tion, which the human being calls pleasure, and the removal of pain. 
The grand instrument for attaining what a man likes is the actions of 


10 


other men. Power, in its most appropriate signification, therefore, nreans 
security for the conformity between the will of one man and the acts 
of other men. This, we presume, is not a proposition which will be 
disputed. The master has power over his servant, because when he wills 
him to do so and so,—in other words, expresses a desire that he would 
do so and so, he possesses a kind of security that the actions of the 
man will correspond to his desire. The General commands his soldiers 
to perform certain operations, the King commands his subjects to act in 
a certain manner, and their power 1s complete or not complete, in 
proportion as the conformity is complete or not complete between the 
actions willed and the actions performed. ‘The actions of other men, 
considered as means for the attainment of the objects of our desire, are 
perfect or imperfect, in proportion as they are or are not certainly and 
Invariably correspondent to our will. There is no limit, therefore, to the 
demand of security for the perfection of that correspondence. A man is 
never satisfied with a smaller degree if he can obtain a greater. And as 
there is no man whatsoever, whose acts, in some degree or other, in 
some way or other, more immediately or more remotely, may not have 
some influence as means to our ends, there is no man, the conformity of 
whose acts to our will we would not give something to secure. ‘The de- 
mand, therefore, of power over the acts of other men is really boundless. 
It is boundless in two ways; boundless in the number of persons to whom 
we would extend it, and boundless in its degree over the actions of each. 

It would be nugatory to say, with a view to explain away this 
important principle, that some human beings may be so remotely con- 
nected with our interests as to make the desire of a conformity between 
our will and their actions evanescent. It is quite enough to assume, 
what nobody will deny, that our desire of that conformity is unlimited, 
in respect to all those men whose actions can be supposed to have any 
influence on our pains and pleasures, With respect to the rulers of a 
community, this at least is certain, that they have a desire for the uni- 
formity between their will and the actions of every man in the com- 
munity. And for our present purpose, this is as wide a field as we 
need to embrace. 

With respect to the community, then, we deem it an established truth, 
that the rulers, one or a few, desire an exact conformity between their 
will and the acts of every member of the community. It remains for 
us to inquire to what description of acts it is the nature of this desire to 
give existence. 

There are two classes of means by which the conformity between the 
will of one man and the acts of other men may be accomplished. The 
one is pleasure, the other pain. 

With regard to securities of the pleasurable sort for obtaining a con- 
formity between one man’s will and the acts of other men, it is evident, 
from experience, that when a man possesses a command over the objects 
of desire, he may, by imparting those objects to other men, insure, to 
a great extent, conformity between his will and their actions. It fol- 


11 


Jows, and is also matter of experience, that the greater the quantity of 
the objects of desire, which he may thus impart to other men, the greater 
is the number of men between whose actions and his own will he cat 
insure a conformity. As it has been demonstrated that there is no limit 
to the number of men whose actions we desire to have conformable to 
our will, it follows, with equal evidence, that there is no limit to the 
command which we desire to possess over the objects which ensure this 
result. 

It is, therefore, not true, that there is in the mind of a King,-or in the 
minds of an Aristocracy, any point of saturation with the objects of 
desire. ‘The opinion, in examination of which we have gone through 
the preceding analysis, that a King or an Aristocracy may be satiated 
with the objects of desire, and, after being satiated, leave to the 
members of the community the greater part of what belongs to them, 
is an opinion founded upon a partial and incomplete view of the laws of 
human nature. 

We have next to consider the securities of the painful sort which may 
be employed for attaining conformity between the acts of one man and 
the will of another. 

We are of opinion, that the importance of this part of the subject has 
not been duly considered ; and that the business of Government will be 
ill understood, till its numerous consequences have been fully developed. 

Pleasure appears to be a feeble instrument of obedience in com~ 
parison with pain. It is much more easy to despise pleasure than pain. 
Above all, it is important to consider, that in this class of instruments is 
included the power of taking away life, and with it of taking away not 
only all the pleasures of reality, but, what goes so far beyond them, all 
the Aibadiewor hope. This class of securities is, therefore, incomparably 
the strongest. He who desires obedience, to a high degree of exactness, 
cannot be satisfied with the power of giving pleasure, he must have the 
power of inflicting pain. He who desires it, to the highest possible de+ 
gree of exactness, must desire power of inflicting pain sufficient at least 
to insure that degree of exactness; that is, an unlimited power of 
inflicting pain,; for, as there is no possible mark by which to distinguish 
what is sufficient and what is not, and as the human mind sets no bounds 
to its avidity for the securities of what it deems eminently good, it is 
sure to extend, beyond almost any limits, its desire of the power of 
giving pajn to others. 

It may, however, be said, that how inseparable a part soever of 
human nature it may appear to be, to desire to possess unlimited power 
of inflicting pain upon others, it does not follow, that those who possess 
it will have a desire to make use of it. 

This is the next part of the inquiry upon which we have to enter; and 
we need not add that it merits all the attention of those who would pos- 
sess correct ideas upon a subject which involves the greatest interests of 
mankind. 

The chain of inference, in this case, is close and strong, to a most un- 


12 
usual degree. A man desires that the actions of other men shail be 
instantly and accurately correspondent to his will. He desires that the 
actions of the greatest possible number shall be so. ‘Terror is the 
grand instrument. ‘Terror can work only through assurance that evil 
will follow any want of conformity between the will and the actions willed. 
Every failure must, therefore, be punished. As there are no bounds to 
the mind’s desire of its pleasure, there are of course no bounds to its 
desire of perfection in the instruments of that pleasure. ‘There are, 
therefore, no bounds to its desive of exactness in the conformity between 
its will and the actions willed; and, by consequence, to the strength 
of that terror which is its procuring cause. Every, the most minute, 
failure, must be visited with the heaviest infliction: and, as failure 10 
extreme exactness must frequently happen, the occasions of cruelty 
must be incessant. 

We have thus arrived at several conclusions of the highest possible 
importance. We have seen, that the very principle of human nature 
upon which the necessity of Government is founded, the propensity of 
one man to possess himself of the objects of desire at the cost of another, 
leads on, by infallible sequence, where power over a community 1s at- 
tained, and nothing checks, not only to that degree of plunder which 
leaves the members (excepting always the recipients-and instruments of 
the plunder) the bare means of subsistence, but to that degree of cruelly 
which is necessary to keep in existence the most intense terror. 

The world affords some decisive experiments upon human nature, mn 
exact conformity with these conclusions. An English Gentleman may 
be taken as a favourable specimen of civilization, of knowledge, of 
humanity, of all the qualities, in short, that make human nature esti- 
mable. ‘The degree in which he desires to possess power over his fellow- 
creatures, and the degree of oppression to which he finds motives for 
carrying the exercise of that power, will afford a standard from which, 
assuredly, there can be no appeal. Wherever the same motives exist, 
the same conduct, as that displayed by the English Gentleman, may be 
expected to follow, in all men not farther advanced in human excellence 
than him. In the West Indies, before that vigilant attention of the 
English nation, which now, for thirty years, has imposed so great a 
check upon the masters of slaves, there was not a perfect absence of all 
check upon the dreadful propensities of power. But yet it is true, 
that these propensities led English Gentlemen, not only to deprive their 
slaves of property, and to make property of their fellow-creatures, but 
to treat them with a degree of cruelty, the very descriptiow of which 
froze the blood of their countrymen, who were placed in less unfavourable 
circumstances. The motives of this deplorable conduct are exactly those 
which we have described above, as arising out of the universal desire to 
render the actions of other men exactly conformable to our will. It is of 
great importance to remark, that not one item in the motives which had 
led English Gentlemen to make slaves of their fellow-creatures, and to 
reduce them to the very worst condition in which the negroes have been 


13 


found in the West Indies, can be shown to be wanting, or to be less 
strong in the set of motives, which universally operate upon the men who 
have power over their fellow-creatures. It is proved, therefore, by the 
closest deduction from the acknowledged laws of human nature, and by 
direct and decisive experiments, that the ruling One, or the ruling Few, 
would, if checks did not operate in the way of prevention, reduce the 
great mass of the people subject to their power, at least to the condition 
of negroes in the West Indies.* 

We have thus seen, that of the forms of Government, which have been 
called the three simple forms, not one is adequate to the ends which 
Government is appointed to secure; that the community itself, which 
alone is free from motives opposite to those ends, is incapacitated by its 
numbers from performing the business of Government; and that whether 
Government is intrusted to one or a few, they have not only motives 
opposite to those ends, but motives which will carry them, if unchecked, 
to inflict the greatest evils. 

These conclusions are so conformable to ordinary conceptions, that it 
would hardly have been necessary, if the development had not been of 
importance for some of our subsequent investigations, to have taken any 
pains with the proof of them. Iu this country, at least, it will be remarked, 
m conformity with so many writers, that the imperfection of the three 
simple forms of Government is apparent; that the ends of Government 
can be attamed in perfection only, as under the British Constitution, by 
an union of all the three. 


i ie 


That the requisite Securities are not found in a Union of the Three 
simple Forms of Government ; — Doctrine of the Constitutional 
Balance. 


The doctrine of the union of the three simple forms of Government is 
the next part of this important subject which we are called upon to 
examine. 

The first thing which it is obvious é0 remark upon it, is, that it has been 
customary, in regard to this part of the inquiry, to beg the question. 
The good effects which have been ascribed to the union of the three simple 
forms of Government, have been supposed; and the supposition has 
commonly been allowed. No proof has been adduced ; or if any thing 
have the appearance of proof, it has only been a reference to the British 
Constitution. The British Constitution, it has been said, is an union of 
the three simple forms of Government; and the British Government is 
excellent. To render the instance of the British Government in any 
degree a proof of the doctrine in question, it is evident that three points 
must be established; 1st, That the British Government is not in show, 

* An acute sense of this important truth is expressed by the President Montesquieu : 


‘+ C’est une experience eternelle, que tout homme qui a du pouvoir est porte a en abuser; 
il va jusqu’a ce qu’il trouve de limites,’’—Esp. de Lota, IL. 4, : 


14 


but in substance, an union of the three simple forms; @dly, That it has 
peculiar excellence; and, Sdly, ‘That its excellence arises from the 
union so supposed, and not from any other cause. As these points have 
always been taken for granted without examination, the question with 
respect to the effects of an union of the three simple forms of Govern- 
ment may be considered as yet unsolved. 

The positions which we have already established with regard to human 
nature, and which we assume as foundations, are these: That the actions 
of men are governed by their wills, and their wills by their desires: That 
their desires are directed to pleasure and relief from pain as ends, and to 
wealth and power as the principal means: That to the desire of these 
means there is no limit ; and that the actions which flow from this unlimited 
desire are the constituents whereof bad Government is made. Reason- 
ing correctly from these acknowledged laws of human nature, we shall 
presently discover what opinion, with respect to the mixture of the 
different species of Government, it will be incumbent upon us to 
adopt. 

The theory in question implies, that of the powers of Government, one 

ortion is held by the King, one by the Aristocracy, and one by the people. 
It also implies, that there is on the part of each of them a certain unity 
of will, otherwise they would not act as three separate powers. ‘This 
being understood, we proceed to the inquiry. 

From the principles which we have already laid down, it follows, That 
of the objects of human desire—and, speaking more definitely, of the 
means to the ends of human desire, namely, wealth and power—each of 
the three parties will endeavour to obtain as much as possible. 

After what has been said, it is not suspected that any reader will deny 
this proposition ; but it is of importance that he keep in his mind a very 
clear conception of it. 

If any expedient presents itself to any of the supposed parties, effec- 
tual to said end, and not opposed to any preferred object of pursuit, we 
may infer, with certainty, that it will be adopted. One effectual expe- 
dient is not more effectual than obvious. Any two of the parties, 
by combining, may swallow up the third. That such combination 
will take place, appears to be as certain as any thing which depends 
upon human will; because there are strong motives in favour of it, and 
none that can be conceived in opposition to it. Whether the portions of 
power, as originally distributed to the parties, be supposed to be equal or 
unequal, the mixture of three of the kinds of Government, it is thus 
evident, cannot possibly exist. 

This proposition appears to be so perfectly proved, that we do not think 
it necessary to dwell here upon the subject. As a part, however, of this 
doctrine, of the mixture of the simple forms of Government, it may be 
proper to inquire, whether an union may not be possible of two of them. 

Three varieties of this union may be conceived; the union of the 
Monarchy with Aristocracy, or the union of either with Democracy. 

Let us first suppose that Monarchy is united with Aristocracy. ‘Their 
power is equal or not equal, If it is not equal, it follows, as a necessary 


1g 


Consequence, from the principles which we have already established, that 
the stronger will take from the weaker, till it engrosses the whole. The 
only question, therefore, is, What will happen when the power is equal, 

In the first place, it seems impossible that such equality should ever 
exist. How is it to be established? Or by what criterion is it to be 
ascertained >? If there is no such eriterion, it must, in all cases, be the 
result of chance. If so, the chances against it are as infinite to one. 
The idea, therefore, is wholly chimerical and absurd. 

Besides, A disposition to overrate one’s own advantages, and underrate 
those of other men, is a known law of human nature. Suppose, what 
would be little less than miraculous, that equality were established, this 
propensity would lead each of the parties to conceive itself the strongest. 
The consequence would be that they would go to war, and contend till 
one or other was subdued. Either those laws of human nature, upon 
which all reasoning with respect to Goverament proceeds, must be denied, 
and then the utility of Government itself may be denied, or this conelu- 
sion is demonstrated. Again, if this equality were established, is there a 
human being who can suppose that it would last? If any thing be 
known about human affairs it is this, that they are in perpetual change. 
If nothing else interfered, the difference of men in respect of talents, 
would abundantly produce the effect. Suppose your equality to be 
established at the time when your King is a man of talents, and suppose 
his successor to be the reverse; your equality no longer exists. The 
moment one of the parties is superior, it begins to profit by its supe- 
riority, and the inequality is daily increased. It is unnecessary to extend 
the investigation to the remaining cases, the union of democracy with 
either of the other two kinds of Government. It is very evident that the 
same reasoning would lead to the same results. 

In this doctrine of the mixture of the simple forms of Government, 
is included the celebrated theory of the Balance among the component 
parts of a Government. By this, it is supposed, that, when a Government 
is composed of Monarchy, Aristocracy, and Democracy, they balance one 
another, and by mutual checks produce good government. A few words 
will suffice to show, that, if any theory deserve the epithets of “ wild, 
visionary, chimerical,” it is that of the Balance. If there are three 
powers, how is it possible to prevent two of them from combining to 
swallow up the third ? 

The analysis which we have already performed, will enable us to trace 
rapidly the concatenation of causes and effects in this imagined case. 

We have already seen that the interest of the community, considered 
in the aggregate, or in the democratical point of view, is, that each indi- 
vidual should receive protection, and that the powers which are con- 
stituted for that purpose should be employed exclusively for that purpose. 
As this is a proposition wholly indisputable, it is also one to which all 
correct reasoning upon matters of Government must have a perpetual 
reference. 

We have also seen that the interest of the King, and of the governing 
Aristocracy, is directly the reverse; it is to have unlimited power over 
the rest of the community, and to use it for their own advantage. In 


16 


the supposed case of the balance of the Monarchical, Aristocratical, 
and Democratical powers, it cannot be for the interest of either the 
Monarchy or the Aristocracy to combine with the Democracy ; because 
it is the interest of the Democracy, or community at large, that neither 
the King nor the Aristocracy should have one particle of power, or one 
particle of the wealth of the community, for their own advantage, 

The Democracy or Community have all possible motives to endeavour 
to prevent the Monarchy and Aristocracy from exercising power, or obtain- 
ing the wealth of the community, for their own advantage: ‘The Monarchy 
and Aristocracy have all possible motives for endeavouring to obtain 
unlimited power over the persons and property of the community: ‘The 
consequence is inevitable ;_ they have all possible motives for combining 
to obtain that power, and unless the people have power enough to be a 
match for both, they have no protection. ‘The balance, therefore, is a 
thing, the existence of which, upon the best possible evidence, is to be 
regarded as impossible. ‘The appearances which have given colour to 
the supposition are altogether delusive. 


Ome. Ee Oe ere eemanae 
Vi: 


In the Representative System alone the Securities for good Government 
are to be found. 


What then is to be done? For, according to this reasoning, we may 
be told that good Government appears to be impossible. ‘The people, 
as a body, cannot perform the business of Government for themselves. 
If the powers of Government are entrusted to one man, or a few men, 
and a Monarchy, or governing Aristocracy, is formed, the results are 
fatal: And it appears that a combination of the simple forms is im- 
possible. 

Notwithstanding the truth of these propositions, it is not yet proved 
that good Government is impossible. For though the people, who can- 
not exercise the powers of Government themselves, must entrust them to 
some one individual or set of individuals, and such individuals will in- 
fallibly have the strongest motives to make a bad use of them, it is pos- 
sible that checks may be found sufficient to prevent them. The next sub- 
ject of inquiry, then, is the doctrine of checks. It is sufficiently con- 
formable to the established and fashionable opmions to say, that, upon 
the right constitution of checks, all goodness of Government depends. 
To this proposition we fully subscribe. Nothing, therefore, can ex- 
ceed the importance of correct conclusions upon this subject. After 
the developements already made, it is hoped that the inquiry will be 
neither intricate nor unsatisfactory. 

In the grand discovery of modern times, the system of representation, 
the solution of all the difficulties, both speculative and practical, will 
perhaps be found. If it cannot, we seem to be forced upon the extra- 
ordinary conclusion, that good Government is impossible. For as there 
is no individual, or combination of individuals, except the community 
itself, who would not have an interest in bad Government, if entrusted with 


17 

its powers ; and as the community itself is incapable of exercising those 
powers, and must entrust them to some individual or combination of 
individuals, the conclusion is‘obvious : The Community itself must check 
those individuals, else they will follow their interest, and produce bad 
Government. 

But how is it the Community can check ? The community can act only 
when assembled: And then it is incapable of acting. 

The community, however, can chuse Representatives: And the ques- 


oe is, whether the Representatives of the Community can operate as a 
check ? 


YES 


What is required ina Representative Body to make it a Security for 
good Government ? 

We may begin by laying down two propositions, which appear to in- 
volve a great portion of the inquiry ; and about which it is unlikely that 
there will be any dispute. 

I. ‘The checking body must have a degree of power sufficient for the 
business of checking. 

If. It must have an identity of interest with the community ; otherwise 
it will make a mischievous use of its power. 

I. ‘To measure the degree of power which is requisite upon any occasion, 
we must consider the degree of power which is necessary to be overcome. 
Just as much as suffices for that purpose is requisite, and no more. We 
have then to inquire what power it is which the Representatives of the 
community, acting as a check, need power to overcome. The answer 
here is easily given. It is all that power, wheresoever lodged, which they, 
in whose hands it is lodged, have an interest in misusing. We have 
already seen, that to whomsoever the community entrusts the powers 
of Government, whether one, or a few, they have an interest in misusing 
them. All the power, therefore, which the one or the few, or which the one 
and the few combined, can apply to insure the accomplishment of their 
sinister ends, the checking body must have power to overcome, otherwise 
its check will be unavailing. In other words, there will be no check. 

This is so exceedingly evident, that we hardly think it necessary to 
say another word in illustration of it. If a King is prompted by the 
inherent principles of human nature to seek the gratification of his will ; 
and if he finds an obstacle in that pursuit, he removes it, of course, if 
he can. If any man, or any set of men, oppose him, he overcomes them, 
if he is able; and to prevent him, they must, at the least, have equal 
power with himself. 

The same is the case with an Aristocracy. ‘To oppose them with 
success in pursuing their interest at the expense of the community, the 
checking body must have power successfully to resist whatever power 
they possess. If there is both a King and an Aristocracy, and if they 
would combine to put down the checking force, and to pursue their 


18 


mutual interest at the expense of the community, the checking body must 
have sufficient power successfully to resist the united power of both King 
and Aristocracy. 

These conclusions are not only indisputable, but the very theory of 
the British Constitution is erected upon them. The House of Commons, 
according to that theory, is the checking body. It is also an admitted 
doctrine, that if the King had the power of bearing down any opposition 
to his will that could be made by the House of Commons; or if the 
King and the House of Lords combined had the power of bearing down 
its opposition to their joint will, it would cease to have the power of 
checking them; it must, therefore, have a power sufficient to overcome 
the united power of both. 

II. All the questions which relate to the degree of power necessary to be 
given to that checking body, on the perfection of whose operations all the 
goodness of Government depends, are thus pretty easily solved. ‘The 
grand difficulty consists in finding the means of constituting a checking 
body, whose powers shall not be turned against the community for whose 
protection it is created. 

There can be no doubt, that if power is granted to a body of men, 
called Representatives, they, like any other men, will use their power, 
not for the advantage of the community, but for their own advantage, 
if they can. ‘The only question is, therefore, how they can be prevented? 
in other words, how are the interests of the Representatives to be iden- 
tified with those of the community ? ABCs. 

Each Representative may be considered in two capacities ; in his 
capacity of Representative, in which he has the exercise of power over 
others, and in his capacity of Member of the Community, in which others 
have the exercise of power over him. 

If things were so arranged, that, in his capacity of Representative, it 
would be impossible for him to do himself so much good by misgovern- 
ment, as he would do himself harm in his capacity of member of the com- 
munity, the object would be accomplished. We have already seen, that 
the amount of power assigned to the checking body cannot be diminished 
beyond a certain amount. It must be sufficient to overcome all resist- 
ance on the part of all those in whose hands the powers of Govern- 
ment are lodged. But if the power assigned to the Representative cannot 
be diminished in amount, there is only one other way in which it can 
be diminished, and that is, in duration. 

This, then, is the instrument; lessening of duration is the instrument, 
by which, if by any thing, the object is to be attained. The smaller 
the period of time during which any man retains his capacity of Repre- 
sentative, as compared with the time in which he is simply a member of 
the community, the more difficult it will be to compensate the sacrifice 
of the interests of the longer period, by the profits of misgovernment 
during the shorter. 

_ This is an old and approved method of identifying as nearly as pos- 
sible the interests of those who rule with the interests of those who 
are ruled. It is in pursuance of this advantage, that the Members of the 


19 


British House of Commons have always been chosen for a limited period. 
If the Members were hereditary, or even if they were chosen for life, 
every inquirer would immediately pronounce that they would employ, 
for their own advantage, the powers entrusted to them; and that they 
would go just as far in abusing the persons and properties of the people, 
as their estimate of the powers and spirit of the people to resist them 
would allow them to contemplate as safe. 

As it thus appears, by the consent of all men, from the time when 
the Romans made their Consuls annual, down to the present day, that 
the end is to be attained by limiting the duration, either of the acting, 
or (which is better) of the checking power, the next question is, to 
What degree should the limitation proceed? 

The general answer is plain. It should proceed, till met by overba- 
lancing inconveniences on the other side. What then are the incon- 
veniences which are likely to flow from a too limited duration? 

‘They are of two sorts; those which affect the performance of the 
service, for which the individuals are chosen, and those which arise from 
the trouble of election. It is sufficiently obvious, that the business 
of Government requires time to perform it. The matter must be pro- 
posed, deliberated upon, a resolution must be taken, and executed. If the 
powers of Government were to be shifted from cne set of hands to another 
every day, the business of Government could not proceed. Two conclu- 
sions, then, we may adopt with perfect certainty ; that whatsoever time is 
necessary to perform the periodical round of the stated operations of 
Government, this should be allotted to those who are invested with the 
checking powers; and secondly, that no time, which is not necessary 
for that purpose, should by any means be allotted tothem. With respect 
to the inconvenience arising from frequency of election, though, it is 
evident, that the trouble of election, which is always something, should 
not be repeated oftener than is necessary, no great allowance will need 
to be made for it, because it may easily be reduced to an inconsiderable 
amount. 

As it thus appears, that limiting the duration of their power is a security 
against the sinister interest of the people's Representatives, so it appears 
that it is the only security of which the nature of the case admits. The 
only other means which could be employed to that end, would be 
punishment on account of abuse. It is easy, however, to see, that punish- 
ment could not be effectually applied. In order for punishment, definition 
is required of the punishable acts; and proof must be established of the 
commission. But abuses of power may be carried to a great extent, 
without allowing the means of prov:ng a determinate offence. No part of 
political experience is more perfect than this. es 

If the limiting of duration be the only security, It 1s unnecessary to 
speak of the importance which ought to be attached to it. ; 

In the principle of limiting the duration of the power delegated to the 
Representatives of the people, is not included the idea of changing them. 
The same individual may be chosen any number of times. ‘The check 
of the short period, for which be is chosen, and during which he can pro- 


20 


mote his sinister interest, is the same upon the man who has been chosen 
and re-chosen twenty times, as upon the man who has been chosen for the 
first time. And there is good reason for always re-electing the man who has 
done bis duty, because the longer he serves, the better acquainted he be- 
comes with the business of the service. Upon this principle of rechoosing, 
or of the permanency of the individual, united with the power of 
change, has been recommended the plan of permanent service with 
perpetual power of removal. ‘This, it has been said, reduces the period 
within which the Representative can promote his sinister interest to the 
narrowest possible limits; because the moment when his Constituents 
begin to suspect him, that moment they may turn him out. On the 
other hand, if he continues faithful, the trouble of election is performed 
once for all, and the man serves as long as he lives. Some disadvan- 
tages, on the other hand, would accompany this plan. ‘The present, 


however, is not the occasion on which the balance of different plans 1s 
capable of being compared. 


VILL. 


What is required in the Elective Body to secure the requisite Properties 
in the Representative Body. 


Having considered the means which are capable of being employed for 
identifying the interest of the Representatives, when chosen, with that of 
the persons who choose them, it remains that we endeavour to bring to 
view the principles which ought to guide im determining who the persons 
are by whom the act of choosing ought to be performed. 

It is most evident, that, upon this question, every thing depends. It can 
be of no consequence to insure, by shortness of duration, a conformity 
between the conduct of the Representatives and the will of those who 
appoint them, if those who appoint them have an interest opposite to that 
of the community; because those who choose will, according to the 
principles of human nature, make choice of such persons as will act 
according to their wishes. As this is a direct inference from the very prin- 
ciple on which Government itself is founded, we assume it as indisputable. 

We have seen already, that if one man has power over others placed in 
his hands, he will make use of it for an evil purpose; for the purpose of 
rendering those other men the abject instruments of his will. If we, then, 
suppose, that one man has the power of choosing the Representatives of 
the people, it follows, that he will choose men who will use their power as 
Representatives for the promotion of this his sinister interest. 

We have likewise seen, that when a few meu have power given them 
over others, they will make use of it exactly for the same ends, and to 
the same extent, as the one man. It equally follows, that, if a small 
number of men have the choice of the Representatives, such Represen- 
tatives will be chosen as will promote the interests of that small number, 


by reducing, if possible, the rest of the community to be the abject and 
helpless slaves of their will. 


9) 


In all these cases, it is obvious and indisputable, that all the benefits 
of the Representative system are lost. ‘The Representative system is, 
in that case, only an operose and clumsy machinery for doing that 
which might as well be done without it; reducing the community to 
subjection, under the One, or the Few. 

When we say the Few, it is seen that, in this case, it is of no importance 
whether we mean a few bundreds, or a, few thousands, or even many 
thousands. The operation of the sinister interest is the same; and the 
fate is the same of all that part of the community over whom the power 
is exercised. A numerous Aristocracy has never been found to be less 
oppressive than an Aristocracy confined to a few. 

The general conclusion, therefore, which is evidently established is 
this ; that the benefits of the Representative system are lost, in all cases in 
which the interests of the choosing body are not the same with those 
of the community. 

It is very evident, that if the community itself were the choosing body, 
the interest of the community and that of the choosing body would be 
the same ‘Tbe question is, whether that of any portion of the community, 
if erected into the choosing body, would remain the same? 

One thing is pretty clear, that all those individuals whose interests 
are indisputably included in those of other individuals, may be struck off 
without inconvenience. In this light may be viewed all children, up 
to a certain age, whose interests are involved in those of their parents. 
In this light, also, women may be regarded, the interest of almost all 
of whom is involved either in that of their fathers or in that of their 
husbands. 

Having ascertained that an interest identical with that of the whole 
community, is to be found in the aggregate males, of an age to be 
regarded as sui juris, who may be regarded as the natural Repre- 
sentatives of the whole population, we have to go on, and inqutre, 
whether this requisite quality may not be found in some less number, 
some aliquot part of that body. 

As degrees of mental qualities are not easily ascertained, outward and 
visible signs must be taken to distinguish, for this purpose, one part of 
these males frém another. Applicable signs of this description appear 
to be three; Years, Property, Profession or Mode of Life. 

According to the first of these means of distinction, a portion of the 
males, to any degree limited, may be taken, by prescribing an advanced 
period of life at which the power of voting for a Representative should 
commence. According to the second, the elective body may be limited, 
by allowing a vote to those only who possess a certain amount of pro- 
perty or of income. According to the third, they may be limited, by 
allowing a vote only to such persons as belong to certain professions, 
or certain connexions and interests. What we have to inquire is, if the 
interest of the number, limited and set apart, upon any of those principles, 
as the organ of choice for a body of Representatives, will be the same 
with the interest of the community ? 

With respect to the first principle of selection, that of age, it would 


22 


appear that a considerable latitude may be taken without inconventence. 
Suppose the age of forty were prescribed, as that at which the right 
of Suffrage should commence; scarcely any laws could be made for the 
benefit of all the men of forty which would not be laws for the benefit of 
all the rest of the community. 

The great principle of security here is, that the men of forty have a 
deep interest in the welfare of the younger men; for otherwise it might be 
objected, with perfect truth, that, if decisive power were placed in the 
hands of: men of forty years of age, they would have an interest, just 
as any other detached portion of the community, in pursuing that 
career which we have already described, for reducing the rest of the 
community to the state of abject slaves. But the great majority of old 
men have sons, whose interest they regard as an essential part of their 
own. This is a law of human nature. ‘There is,.therefore, no great 
danger that, in such an arrangement as this, the interests of the young 
would be greatly sacrificed to those of the old. 

We come next to the inquiry, whether the interest of a body of electors, 
constituted by the possession of a certain amount of property or income, 
would be the same with the interest of the community? ; 

It will not be disputed, that, if the qualification were raised so high 
that only a few hundreds possessed it, the case would be exactly the same 
with that of the consignment of the Electoral Suffrage to an Aristocracy. 
This we have already considered, and have seen that it differs in form 
rather than substance from a simple Aristocracy. We have likewise 
seen, that it alters not the case in regard to the community, whether the 
Aristocracy be some hundreds or many thousands. One thing is, there- 
fore, completely ascertained, that a pecuniary qualification, unless it were 
very low, would only create an Aristocratical Government, and produce 
all the evils which we have shown to belong to that organ of mistule. 

This question, however, deserves to be a little more minutely con- 
sidered. Let us next take the opposite extreme. Let us suppose that 
the qualification is very low, so low as to include the great majority of 
the people. It would not be easy for the people who have very little 
property, to separate their interests from those of the people who have 
none. It is not the interest of those who have little property to give 
undue advantages to the possession of property, which those who have 
the great portions of it would turn against themselves. 

It may, therefore, be said, that there would be no evil in a low quali- 
fication. It can hardly be said, however, on the other hand, that there 
would be any good; for if the whole mass of the people who have some 
property would make a good choice, it will hardly be pretended that, 
added to them, the comparatively small number of those who have none, 
and whose minds are naturally and almost necessarily governed by the 
minds of those who have, would be able to make the choice a bad one. 

We have ascertained, therefore, two points. We have ascertained that 
a very low qualification is of no use, as affording no security for a good 
choice beyond that which would exist if no pecuniary qualification 
was required. We have likewise ascertained, that a qualification so high 


23 


as to constitute an Aristocracy of wealth, though it were a very numerous 
one, would leave the community without protection, and exposed to all 
the evils of unbridled power. ‘Ihe only question, therefore, is, whether, 
between these extremes, there is any qualification which would remove 
the night of Suffrage from the people of small, or of no property, and yet 
constitute au elective body, the interest of which would*be identical with 
that of the community? 

It is not easy to find any satisfactory principle to guide us in our 
researches, and to tell us where we should fix. The qualification must 
either be such as to embrace the majority of the population, or some thing 
less than the majority. Suppose, in the first place, that it embraces the 
majority, the question is, whether the majority would have an interest in 
oppressing those who, upon this supposition, would be deprived of poli- 
tical power? If we reduce the calculation to its elements, we shall see 
that the interest which they would have, of this deplorable kind, though 
it would be something, would not be very great. Each man of the 
majority, if the majority were constituted the governing body, would have 
something less than the benefit of oppressing a single man. If the majority 
were twice as great as the minority, each man of the majority would only 
have ove-half the benefit of oppressing a single man. In that case, the 
benefits of goad Government, accruing to all, might be expected to over- 
balance to the several members of such an elective body the benefits of 
misrule peculiar to themselves. Good Government, would, therefore, have 
a tolerable security. Suppose, in the second place, that the qualification 
did not admit a body of electors so large as the majority, in that case, 
taking again the calculation in its elements, we shall see that each man 
would have a benefit equal to that derived from the oppression of more 
than one man; and that, in proportion as the elective body constituted a 
smaller and smaller minority, the benefit of misrule to the elective body 
would be increased, and bad Government would be insured. 

It seems hardly necessary to carry the analysis of the pecuniary quali- 
fication, as the principle for choosing an elective body, any farther. 

We have only remaining the third plan for constituting an elective 
body. According to the scheme in question, the best elective body is 
that which consists of certain classes, professions, or fraternities. The 
notion is, that when these fraternities or bodies are represented, the 
community itself is represented. ‘The way in which, according to the 
patrons of this theory, the effect is brought about, is this. ‘Though it 
is perfectly true, that each of these fraternities would profit by misrule, 
and have the strongest interest in promoting it; yet, if three or four such 
fraternities are appointed to act in conjunction, they will not profit by 
misrule, and will have an interest in nothing but good Government. 

This theory of Representation we shall not attempt to trace farther 
back than the year 1793. In the debate on the motion of Mr. (now 
Earl) Grey, fora Reform in the System of Representation, on the 6th of 
May, of that year, Mr. Jenkinson, the present Earl of Liverpool, brought 
forward this theory of Representation, aud urged it in opposition to all 
idea of Reform in the British House of Commons, in terms as clear and 


Q4 


distinct as those in which it has recently been clothed by leading men on 
both sides of that House. We shall transcribe the passage from~the 
speech of Mr. Jenkinson, omitting, for the sake of abbreviation, all those 
expressions which are unnecessary for conveying a knowledge of the 
plan, and of the reasons upon which it was founded. ; 
“ Supposing it agreed,” he said, “ that the House of Commons 1s 
meant to be a legislative body, representing all Wescriptions of men 
in the country, he supposed every person would agree, that the landed 
interest ought to have the preponderant weight. ‘The landed interest 
was, in fact, the stamina of the country. In the second place, in a com- 
mercial country like this, the manufacturing and commercial interest 
ought to have a considerable weight, secondary to the landed interest, 
but secondary to the landed interest only. But was this all that was 
necessary? ‘There were other descriptions of people, which, to dis- 
tinguish them from those already wnentioned, he should style professional 
people, and whom he considered as absolutely necessary to the com- 
position of a House of Commons. By professional people, he meant 
those Members of the House of Commons who wished to raise themselves 
to the great offices of the State; those that were in the army, those that 
were in the navy, those that were in the law.” He then, as a reason for 
desiring to have those whom he calls “ professional people” in the com- 
position of the House of Commons, gives it as a fact, that country Gen- 
tlemen and Merchants seldom desire, and seldom have motives for 
desiring, to be Ministers and other great Officers of State. ‘These Mini- 
sters and Officers, however, ought to be made out of the House of 
Commons. ‘Therefore, you ought to have “ professional people” of whom 
to make them. Nor was this all. ‘There was another reason why these 
person$ were absolutely necessary. We were constantly in the habit of 
discussing in that House all the important concerns of the State. It 
was necessary, therefore, that there should be persons in the practice 
of debating such questions.” ‘ There was a third reason, which, to his 
mind, was stronger than all the rest. Suppose that in that House there 
were only country Gentlemen, they would not then be the Representatives 
of the nation, but of the landholders. Suppose there were in that House 
only commercial persons, they would not be the Representatives of the 
nation, but of the commercial interest of the nation. Suppose the landed 
and commercial interest could both find their way into the House. The 
landed interest would be able, if it had nothing but the commercial interest 
to combat with, to prevent that interest from having its due weight in the 
Constitution. All descriptions of persons in the country would thus, in 
fact, be at the mercy of the landholders.” He adds, “ the professional 
persons are, then, what makes this House the Representatives of the 
people. ‘They have collectively no esprit de corps, and prevent any esprit 
de corps from affecting the proceedings of the House. Neither the landed 
nor commercial interest can materially affect each other, and the inte- 
rests of the different professions of the country are fairly considered. 
The Honourable Gentleman (Mr. Grey), and the petition on this table, 
rather proposed uniformity of election. His idcas were the reverse— 


95 


that the modes of election ought to be as varied as possible, because, if 
there was but one mode of election, there would, generally speaking, be 
but one description of persons in that House, and by a varied mode of 
election-only could that variety be secured.” 

There is great vagueness undoubtedly in the language here employed; 
and abundant wavering and uncertainty in the ideas. But the ideas 
regarding this theory, appear in the same half-formed state in every 
speech and writing in which we have seen it adduced. ‘The mist, in- 
deed, by which it has-been kept surrounded, alone creates the difficulty ; 
because it cannot be known precisely how any thing is good or bad, till 
it is precisely known what it is. 

According to the ideas of Lord Liverpool, the landholders ought to 
be represented ; the merchants and manufacturers ought to be repre- 
sented ; the officers of the army and navy ought to be represented ; 
and the practitioners of the law ought to be represented. Other patrons 
of the scheme have added, that literary men ought to be represented. 
And these, we believe, are almost all the fraternities which have been 
named for this purpose by any of the advocates of representation by clubs. 
To insure the choice of Representatives of the landholders, landholders 
must be the choosers ; to insure the choice of Representatives of the mer- 
chants and manufacturers, merchants and manufacturers must be the 
choasers ; and so with respect to the other fraternities, whether few or many. 
Thus it must be at least in substance; whatever the form, under which the 
visible acts may be performed. According to the scheme in question, these 
several fraternities are represented direct/y, the rest of the community is 
not represented directly ; but it will be said by the patrons of that scheme, 
that it isrepresented virtual/y, which, in this case, answers the same purpose. 

From what has already been ascertained, it will appear certain, that 
each of these fraternities has its sinister interest, and will be led to seek the 
benefit of misrule, if it is able to obtain it. This is frankly and distinctly 
avewed by Lord Liverpool. And by those by whom it is not avowed, it 
seems impossible to suppose that it should be disputed. 

Let us now, then, observe the very principle upon which this theory 
must be supported. ‘Three, or four, or five, or more clubs of men, have 
unlimited power over the whole community put into their hands. ‘These 
clubs have, each, and all of them, an interest, an interest the same with 
that which governs all other rulers, in misgovernment, in converting the 
persons and properties of the rest of the community wholly to their own 
benefit. Having this interest, says the theory, they will not make use of 
it, but will use all their powers for the benefit of the community. Unless 
this proposition can be supported, the theory is ove of the shallowest 
by which the pretenders to political wisdom have ever exposed themselves. 

Let us resume the proposition. ‘Three, or four, or five fratermities of 
men, composing a small part of the community, have all the powers of 
government placed in their hands. If they oppose and contend with 
one another, they will be unable to convert these powers to their own 
benefit. If they agree they will be able to convert them wholly to their 
own benefit, and to do with the rest of the community just what they please. 


26 


The patrons of this system of Representation assume, that these frater- 
nities will be sure to take that course which is contrary to their interest. 
The course which is according to their interest, appears as if it had 
never presented itself to their imaginations ! 

There being two courses which the clubs may pursue, one contrary 
to their interest, the other agreeable to it, the patrons of the club system 
must prove, they must place it beyond all doubt, that the clubs will follow 
the first course, and not follow the second: if not, the world will 
laugh at a theory which is founded upon a direct contradiction of one of 
the fundamental principles of human nature. 

In supposing that clubs or societies of men are governed, hke men 
individually, by their interests, we are surely following a pretty complete 
experience. In the idea that a certain number of those clubs can unite 
to pursue a common interest, there is surely nothing more extraordinary, 
than that as many individals should unite to pursue a common interest. 
Lord Liverpool talks of an esprit de corps belonging to a class of land- 
holders, made up of the different bodies of landholders in every county in 
the kingdom. He talks of an esprit de corps in a class of merchants and 
manufacturers, made up of the different bodies of merchants and manu- 
facturers in the several great towns and manufacturing districts in the 
kingdom. What, then, is meant by an esprit de corps? Nothing else but 
a union for the pursuit of a common interest. To the several clubs sup- 
posed in the present theory, a common interest is created by the very 
circumstance of their composing the representing and represented bodies. 
Unless the patrons of this theory can prove to us, contrary to all expe- 
rience, that a common interest cannot create an esprit de corps in men in 
combinations, as well as in men individually, we are under the necessity 
of believing, that an esprit de corps would be formed in the classes sepa- 
rated from the rest of the community for the purposes of Representation ; 
that they would pursue their common interest; and inflict all the evils upon 
the rest of the community to which the pursuit of that interest would lead. 

It is not included in the idea of this union for the pursuit of a common 
interest, that the clubs or sets of persons appropriated to the business of 
Representation should totally harmonize. ‘There would, no doubt, be a 
great mixture of agreement and disagreement among them. But there 
would, if experience is any guide, or if the general laws of human nature 
have any power, be sufficient agreement to prevent their losing sight of 
the common interest ; in other words, for insuring all that abuse of power 
which is useful to the parties. by whom it is exercised. 

The real effect of this motley Representation, therefore, would only be 
to create a motley Aristocracy; and, of course, to insure that kind of 
misgovernment which it is the nature of Aristocracy to produce, and to 
produce equally, whether it is a uniform, ora variegated Aristocracy ; 
whether an Aristocracy all of landowners; or an Aristocracy in part 
Jandowners, in part merchants and manufacturers, in part officers of the 
army and navy, and in part lawyers. 

We have now, therefore, examined the principles of the Representative 
system, and have found in it all that is necessary to constitute a security 


27 


for good government: We have seen in what manner it is possible to 
prevent in the Representatives the rise of an interest different from that 
of the parties who choose them, namely, by giving them little time, 
not dependent upon the will of those parties: We have likewise seen in 
what manner identity of interest may be insured between the electoral 
body and the rest of the community: We have, therefore, discovered 
the means by which identity of interest may be insured between the 
Representatives and the community at large. We have, by consequence, 
obtained an organ of Government which possesses that quality, without 
which there can be no good Government. 


I. Objection: That a perfect Representative System, i established, 
would destroy the Monarchy, and the House of Lords. 


The question remains, Whether this organ is competent to the perform- 
ance of the whole of the business of Government? And it may be certainly 
answered, that it is not. It may be competent to the making of laws, 
and it may watch over their execution: but to the executive functions 
themselves, operations in detail, to be performed by individuals, it is 
manifestly not competent. ‘The executive functions of Government con~ 
sist of two parts, the administrative and the judicial. The administrative, 
in this country, belong to the King; and it will appear indubitable, 
that, if the best mode of disposing of the administrative powers of 
Government be to place them in the hands of one great functionary, 
not elective, but hereditary; a King, such as ours, instead of being incon- 
sistent with the Representative system, in its highest state of perfection, 
would be an indispensable branch of a good Government ; and, even if it 
did not previously exist, would be established by a Representative body 
whose interests were identified, as above, with those of the nation. 

The same reasoning will apply exactly to our House of Lords. Sup- 
pose it true, that, for the perfect performance of the business of Legisla- 
tion, and of watching over the execution of the Jaws, a second delibe- 
rative Assembly is necessary; and that an Assembly, such as the British 
House of Lords, composed of the proprietors of the greatest landed estates, 
with dignities and privileges, is the best adapted to the end: it follows, that 
a body of Representatives, whose interests were identified with those of 
the nation, would establish such an Assembly, if it did not previously 
exist : for the best of all possible reasons ; that they would have motives 
for, and none at all against it. 

Those parties, therefore, who reason against any measures necessary 
for identifying the interests of the Representative body with those of the 
nation, under the plea that such a Representative body would abolish 
the King and the House of Lords, are wholly inconsistent with themselves. 
They maintain that a King and a House of Lords, such as ours, are im- 
portant and necessary branches of a good Government. It is demonstra~ 
tively certain that a Representative body, the interests of which were 


28 


identified with those of the nation, would have no motive to abolish them, 
if they were not causes of bad government. Those persons, therefore, 
who affirm that it would certainly abolish them, affirm implicitly that 
they aré causes of bad, and not necessary to geod government. This 
oversight of theirs is truly surprising. 

The whole of this chain of deduction is dependent, as we stated at the 
beginning, upon the principle that the acts of men will be conformable to 
their interests. Upon this principle, we conceive that the chain 1s com- 
plete and irrefragable. The principle, also, appears to stand upon a 
strong foundation. It is indisputable that the acts of men follow their 
will; that their will follows their desires; and that their desires are 
generated by their apprehensions of good or evil; in other words, by 
their interests. 


we ee eee: Cae nie oe ee 
> 


II. Objection: That the People are not capable of acting agreeably to 
their Interest. 


The apprehensions of~the people, respecting good and evil, may be 
just, or they may be erroneous. If just, their actions will be agreeable 
to their real interests. If erroneous, they will not be agreeable to their 
real interests, but to a false supposition of interest. 

We have seen, that, unless the Representative Body are chosen by a 
portion of the community the interest of which cannot be made to differ 
from that of the community, the interest of the community will infallibly 
be sacrificed to the interest of the rulers. 

The whole of that party of reasoners who support Aristocratical 
power affirm, that a portion of the community, the interest of whom can- 
not be made to differ from that of the community, will not act according 
to their interest, but contrary to their interest. All their pleas are 
grounded upon this assumption. Because, if a portion of the commu- 
nity whose interest is the same with that of the community, would act 
agreeably to their own interest, they would act agreeably to the interest 
of the community, and the end of Government would be obtained. 

If this assumption of theirs is true, the prospect of mankind is de- 
plorable. ‘To the evils of misgovernment they are subject by inexorable 
destiny. If the powers of Government are placed in the hands of per- 
sons whose interests are not identified with those of the community, the 
interests of the community are wholly sacrificed to those of the rulers. 
If so much as a checking power is held by the community, or by any 
part of the community, where the mterests are the same as those of the 
community, the holders of that checking power will not, according ta the 
assumption In question, make use of it in a way agreeable, but in a way 
contrary to their own interest. According to this theory, the choice is 
placed between the evils which will be produced by design, the design of 
those who have the power of oppressing the rest of the community, and 
an interest in doing it; and the evils which may be produced by mistake, 


29 


the mistake of those who, if they acted agreeably to their own interest, 
would act well, 

Supposing that this theory were true, it would still be a question, be- 
tween these two sets of evils, whether the evils arising from the design of 
those who have motives to employ the powers of Government for the 
purpose of reducing the community to the state of abject slaves of their 
will, or the evils arising from the misconduct of those who never produce 
evil but when they mistake their own interest, are the greatest evils. 

Upon the most general and summary view of this question, it appears 
that the proper answer cannot be doubtful. They who have a fixed, 
invariable interest in acting ill, will act ill invariably. They who act ill 
from mistake, will often act well, sometimes even by accident, and in every 
case in which they are enabled to understand their interest, by design. 

There is another, and a still more important ground of preference. 
The evils which are the produce of interest and power united, the evils on 
the one side, are altogether incurable: the effects are certain while that 
conjunction which is the cause of them remaiits. ‘The evils which arise 
from mistake are not incurable; for, if the parties who act contrary to 
their interest had a proper knowledge of that interest, they would act 
well. What is necessary, then, is knowledge. Knowledge, on the part 
of those whose interests are the same as those of the community, would 
be an adequate remedy. But knowledge is a thing which is capable of 
being increased: and the more it is increased the more the evils on this 
side of the case would be reduced. 

Supposing, then, the theory of will opposed to interest to be correct, 
the practical conclusion would be, as there is something of a remedy to 
the evils arising from this source, none whatever to the evils arising from 
the conjunction of power and sinister interest, to adopt the side which 
has the remedy, and to do whatever is necessary for obtaining the 
remedy in its greatest possible strength, and for applying it with the 
greatest possible efficacy. 

It is no longer deniable that a high degree of knowledge is capable 
of being conveyed to such a portion of the community, as would have in- 
terests the same with those of the community. ‘This being the only resource 
for good governmeat, those who say that it is not yet attained stand in 
this dilemma ; either they do not desire good government, which is the 
case with all those who derive advantage from bad; or they will be 
seen employing their utmost exertions to increase the quantity of know- 
ledge in the body of the community. 

The practical conclusion, then, is actually the same, whether we 
embrace or reject the assumption that the community are little capable 
of acting according to their own interest. 

That assumption, however, deserves to be considered. And it would 
need a more minute consideration than the space to which we are con- 
fined will enable us to bestow upon it. 

One caution, first of all, we should take along with us ; and it is this, 
That all those persons who hold the powers of Government, without 
haying an identity of interests with the community, and all those persons 


30 


who share in the profits which are made by the abuse of those powers, 
and all those persons whom the example and representations of the two 
first classes influence, will be sure tc represent the community, or a part 
having an identity of interest with the communtty, as incapable ins the 
highest degree, of acting according to their own interest; it being clear 
that they who have not an identity of interest with the community, ought 
to hold the power of Government no longer, if those who have that 
identity of interest could be expected to act in any tolerable conformity 
with their interest. All representations from that quarter, therefore, of 
their incapability so to act, are to be received with suspicion. They 
come from interested parties, they come from parties who have the 
strongest possible interest to deceive themselves, and to endeavour to 
deceive others. 

It is impossible that the interested endeavours of all those parties 
should not propagate, and for a long time successfully uphold, sueh 
an opinion, to whatever degree it might be found, upon accurate inquiry, 
to be without foundation. 

A parallel case may be given. It was the interest of the priesthood, 
when the people of Europe were all of one religion, that the laity should 
take their opinions exclusively from them; because, in that case, the 
laity might be rendered subservient to the will of the Clergy, to any 
possible extent; and as all opinions were to be derived professedly from 
the Bible, they withdrew from the laity the privilege of reading it. When 
the opinions which produced the Reformation, and all the blessings which 
may be traced to it, began to ferment, the privilege of the Bible was de- 
manded. The demand was resisted by the Clergy, upon the very same 
assumption which we have now under contemplation. ‘“ The people did 
not understand their own interest. ‘They would be sure to make a bad 
use of the Bible. They would derive from it not right opinions, but all 
sorts of wrong opinions.” * 

There can be no doubt that the assumption, in the religious case, was 
borne out by gtill stronger appearance of evidence, than it is in the 
political, ‘The majority of the people may be supposed less capable of 
deriving correct opinions from the Bible, than of judging who is the best 
man to act as a Representative. 

Experience has fully displayed the nature of the assumption in regard 
to religion. The power bestowed upon the people, of judging for them- 
selves, has been productive of good effects, to a degree which has 
totally altered the condition of human nature, and exalted man to what 
may be called a different stage of existence. 

For what reason then, is it, we are called upon to believe, that, if a 
portion of the community, having an identity of interests with the whole 
community, have the power of choosing Representatives, they will act 
wholly contrary to their interests, and make a bad choice? 

Experience, it will be said, establishes this conclusion, We see that 


* A most instructive display of these and similar artifices for the preservation of mis- 
chievous power, after the spirit of the times is felt to be hostile to it, may be seen in 
Father Paul’s History of the Council of Trent. 


31 


the people do not act according to their interests, but very often in oppo- 
sition to them. 

The question is between a portion of the community, which, if en- 
trusted with power, would have an interest in making a bad use of it, and 
@ portion which, though entrusted with power, would not have an interest 
in making a bad use of it. he former are any small number what- 
soever ; who, by the circumstance of being entrusted with power, are 
constituted an Aristocracy. 

From the fréquency, however great, with which those who compose 
the mass of the community act in opposition to their interests, no con- 
clusion can, in this case, be drawn, without a comparison of the frequency 
with which those, who are placed in contrast with them, act in opposition 
to theirs. Now, it may with great confidence be affirmél, that as great 
a proportion of those who compose the Aristocratical body of any 
country, as of those who compose the rest of the community, are dis- 
tinguished for a conduct unfavourable to their interests. Prudence is a more 
general characteristic of the people who are without the advantages of 
fortune, than of the people who have been thoroughly subject to their 
corruptive operation. It may surely be said, that if the powers of 
Government must be entrusted to persons incapable of good conduct, 
they were better entrusted to incapables who have an interest in good 
government, than to incapables who have an interest in bad. 

It will be said that a conclusion ought not to be drawn from the 
unthinking conduct of the great majority of an Aristocratical body, 
against the capability of such a body for ecting wisely in the management 
of public affairs; because the body will always contain a certain pro- 
portion of wise men, and the rest will be governed by them. Nothing 
but this can be said with pertinency. And, under certain modifications, 
this may be said with truth. The wise and good in any class of men do, 
to ail general purposes, govern the rest. ‘The comparison, however, must 
go on. Of that body, whose interests are identified with those of the 
community, it may also be said, that if one portion of them are unthink- 
ing, there is another portion wise ; and that, in matters of state, the less 
wise would be governed by the more wise, not less certainly than in that 
body, whose interests, if they were entrusted with power, could not be 
identified with those of the community. 

If we compare in each of these two contrasted bodies the two descrip- 
tions of persons, we shall not find that the foolish part of the Democra- 
tical body are more foolish than that of the Aristocratical, nor the wise 
part less wise. 

Though, according to the opinions which fashion has propagated, it 
may appear a little paradoxical, we shall probably find the very reverse. 

‘That there is not only as great a proportion of wise men in that part 
of the community which is not the Aristocracy, as in that which is; but 
that, under the present state of education, and the diffusion of know- 
ledge, there is a much greater, we presume, there are few persons who 
will be disposed to dispute. It is to be observed, that the class which is 
universally described as both the most wise and the most virtuous part 


32 


of the community, the middle rank, are wholly included im that part of 
the community which is not the Aristocratical. It is also not disputed, 
that in Great Britain the middle rank are numerous, and form a large 
proportion of the whole body of the people. Another proposition may 
be stated, with a perfect contidence of the concurrence of ail those men 
who have attentively considered the formation of opinions in the great 
body of society, or, indeed, the principles of human nature in general. 
It is, that the opinions of that class of the people, who are below the 
middle rank, are formed, and their minds are directed by that intelligent 
and virtuous rank, who come the most immediately in contact with them, 
who are in the constant habit of intimate communication with them, 
to whom they fly for advice and assistance in all their numerous diffi- 
culties, upon whom they feel an immediate and daily dependence, in 
health and in sickness, in infancy and in old age; to whom their children 
look up as models for their imitation, whose opinions they hear daily 
repeated, and account it their honour to adopt. ‘There can be no doubt 
that the middle rank, which gives to science, to art, and to legislation 
itself, their most distinguished ornaments, the chief source of all that has 
exalted and refined human nature, is that portion of the community of 
which, if the basis of Representation were ever so far extended, the 
opinion would ultimately decide. Of the people beneath them, a vast 
majority would be sure to be guided by thew advice and example. 

The incidents which have been urged as exceptions to this general 
rule, and even as reasons for rejecting it, may be considered as contri- 
buting to its proof. What signify the irregularities of a mob, more than 
half composed, in the greater number of instances, of boys and women, 
and disturbing, for a few hours or days, a particular town? What signi- 
ties the occasional turbulence of a manufacturing district, peculiarly 
unhappy from a very great deficiency of a middle rank, as there the popu- 
Jation almost wholly consists of rich manufacturers and poor workmen ; 
with whose minds no pains are taken by anybody; with whose afflictions 
there is no virtuous family of the middle rank to sympathize; whose 
children have no good example of such a family to see and to admire; 
and who are placed in the highly unfavourable situation of fluctuating 
between very high wages in one year, and very low wages in another ? 
It is. altogether futile with regard to the foundation of good government 
to say that this or the other portion of the people, may at this, or the 
other time, depart from the wisdom of the middle rank. It is enough 
that the great majority of the people never cease to be guided by that 
rank; and we may, with some confidence, challenge the adversaries of 
the people to produce a single instance to the contrary in the history 
of the world, 


(FE. F.) 


THE ARTICLE 


JURISPRUDENCE, 


REPRINTED FROM 
THE SUPPLEMENT 


TO THE 


ENCYCLOPEDIA BRITANNICA. 


» (ik OF 
er “eS 


aw. ia et 3 


wey | d+ oie dee ate 
; » ¢ Sar 
hea * : 


nb poe Seg Wy 
a ee Gearhe Sow 
= i ores < . 


oh Rae Brera: 
k a? ane 


' S07, ow it ep) oli ee, 
ro oan ro Repeieee_ ; i 


‘ aie hae pet 
SP eas 
Sess 4 : toves |} 
arti > ae 


On teat a 
“4 


see 22l (rica, ge, 
mals Oy feted Te oe 
ld Soe a 


JURISPRUDENCE. 


| 


if 


The end of Jurisprudence, viz. the Protection of Rights.—Importance 
of the Inquiry, as involving Human Happiness.— Confusion in the 
vulgar uses of the word Right —Use of the term Right, in the Science 
of Jurisprudence.—The principal ideas involved in the Jurispru- 
dential sense of the word Right.— All Rights respect Objects de- 
sired; and desired as means to an end.—The Objects of Rights are 
twofold, viz. either Persons or Things. —Rights, when closely in- 
spected, mean Powers—legalized Powers.—Powers over Persons, 
and Powers over Things.x—Every Right imports a corresponding 
Obligation.—No Creation of Good, by Rights, without the Creation 
of Evil. 

PPE object and end of the science which is distinguished by the 

name of Jurisprudence, is the protection of rights. 

The business of the present discourse is, therefore, to ascertain the 
means which are best calculated for the attainment of that end. 

What we desire to accomplish is, The protection of rights: What we 
have to inquire is, The means by which protection may be afforded. 

That rights have hitherto been very ill protected, even in the most 
enlightened countries, is matter of universal acknowledgment and com- 
plaint. That men are susceptible of happiness, only in proportion as 
rights are protected, is a proposition, which, taken generally, it is un- 
necessary to prove. The importance of the inquiry, therefore, is 
evident. 

It is requisite, as a preliminary, to fix, with some precision, what we 
denote by the expression 77ghts. There is much confusion in the use of 
this term. ‘That disorderly mass, the Roman law, changes the mean- 
ing of the word in stating its division of the subject, Jura Per- 
sonarum, and Jura Rerum. In the first of these phrases, the word 
Jura means a title to enjoy; in the second, it must of necessity mean 
something else, because things cannot enjoy. Lawyers, whose nature it 


4, 


is to trudge, one after another, in the track which has been made or 
them; and to whose eyes, that which is, and that which ought to be, have 
seldom any mark of distinction, have translated the jargon into English, 
as well as into other modern languages. 

This is not all the confusion which has been incurred in the use of the 
word right. It is sometimes employed in a very general way, to denote 
whatever ought to be; and in that sense is opposed to wrong. ‘There 
are also persons—but these are philosophers, pushing on their abstrac- 
tions—who go beyond the sense in which it is made to denote generally 
whatever ought to be, and who make it stand for the foundation of what- 
ever ought to be. These philosophers say, that there is a right and a 
wrong, original, fundamental ; aud that things ought to be, or ought not 
to be, according as they do, or do not, couform to that standard. IEf 
asked, whence we derive a knowledge of this right and wrong in the 
abstract, which is the foundation and standard of what we call nght and 
wrong in the concrete, they speak dogmatically, and convey no clear 
ideas.* In short, writers of this stamp give us to understand, that we 
must take this standard, like many other things which they have occasion 
for, upon their word. After all their explanations are given, this, we find, 
is what alone we are required, or rather commanded, to trust to. The 
standard exists,—Why?: Because they say it exists; and it is at our peril 
if we refuse to admit the assertion. ‘hey assume a right, like other 
despots, to inflict punishment, for contumacy, or contempt of court. To 
be sure, hard words are the only instrument of tyranny which they have 
it in their power to employ. They employ them, accordingly ; and 
there is scarcely an epithet, calculated to denote a vicious state of the in- 
tellectual, or moral part, of the human mind, which they do not employ 
to excite an unfavourable opinion of those who refuse subscription to 
their articles of faith. 

With right, however, in this acceptation, we have at present, no farther 
concern than to distinguish it clearly from that sense in which the word 
is employed in the science of jurisprudence. ‘To conceive more exactly 
the sense in which it is employed im that science, it is necessary to revert 
to what we established, in the article GOVERNMENT, with regard to the 
end or object of the social union, for to that, every thing which is done 
in subservience to the social union, must of course bear a reference. 

In that article it appeared, that, as every man desires to have for him- 
self as many good things as possible, and as there is not a sufliciency of 
good things for all, the strong, if left to themselves, would take from the 
weak every thing, or at least as much as they pleased; that the weak, 
therefore, who are the greater number, have an interest in conspiring to 
protect themselves against the strong. It also appeared, that almost all 
the things, which man denominates good, are the fruit of human labour ; 
and that the natural motive to labour is the enjoyment of its fruits, 

That the object, then, of the social union, may be obtained; in other 


* See the writings of Kant and his followers, passim ; see also Degerando, and others 
of his school, in various parts of their works. 


5 


words, that the weak may not be deprived of their share of good things, 
it is necessary to fix, by some determination, what shall belong to each, 
and to make choice of certain marks by which the share of each may be 
distinguished, This is the origin of right. It is created by this sort of 
determination, which determination is either the act of the whole society, 
or of some part of the society which possesses the power of determining 
for the whole. Right, therefore, is factitious, and the creature of will. 
It exists, only because the society, or those who wield the powers of the 
society, will that it should exist ; and before it was so willed, it had no 
existence. 

It is easy to see what is the standard, in conformity with which the 
rights in question ought to be constituted; meaning by ought, that 
which perfect benevolence would desire. It is the greatest happiness of 
the greatest number. But whether rights are constituted, that is, whether 
the shares of good things are allotted to each, according to this standard, 
or not according to this standard, the allotment is still the act of the 
ruling power of the community ; and the rights, about which the science 
of jurisprudence treats, have this alone for the cause of their existence. 

In this complicated term, it is obvious that there is involved, on the 
one hand, the idea of the person to whom a share is allotted, and on the 
other hand, an idea of the things which are allotted. The one is the 
owner of the right, the person to whom it belongs ; the other is the ob- 
ject of the right, famely, the person or thing over which certain powers 
are given. 

All rights of course are rights to objects of human desire,—of nothing 
else need shares be allotted. All objects which men desire, are desired, 
either as the end, or as means. ‘The pleasurable state of the mind is the 
end; consisting of the feelings of the mind.  [t-would be absurd, how- 
ever, to speak of giving a man a right to the feelings of his own mind, 
The objects of desire, therefore, which are the objects of night, are not 
the pleasurable feelings themselves, which are desired as the end, but the 
objects which are desired as the means to that end, 

Objects of desire, as means to that end, may be divided into the class 
of persons and the class of things. Both may be the object of rights. 
In framing our language, therefore, we may say, that all rights are 
the rights of persons; but they may be rights é0, either persons, or 
things. 

All that men desire, either with persons or things, is to render them 
subservient to the end, for which they are desired as means. ‘They are 
so rendered by certain powers over them. All rights, then, when the 
term is closely investigated, are found to mean powers; powers with 
respect to persons, and powers with respect to things. What any one 
means when he says that a thing is his property, is, that he has the power 
of using it In a certaim way. 

Ii is no part of the present inquiry to ascertain what rights ought to be 
constituted, or what rights perfect benevolence would choose to see con- 
stituted That belongs to the question how government should be con- 


6 


stituted ; in other words, how the powers which are necessary for the 
general protection ought to be distributed, and the advantages of the union 
to be shared. At present our sole endeavour is to ascertain the most effec- 
tual means which the governing power of the state can employ for pro- 
tecting the rights, whatever they are, which it has seen meet to create. — 

Rights, it must be remembered, always import obligations. ‘This 1s 
a point of view, which, in the consideration of rights, has not, in general, 
attracted sufficient attention. If one man obtains a right to the services 
of another man, an obligation is, at the same time, laid vpon this other 
to render those services. If a right is conferred upon one man to use 
and dispose of a horse, an obligation is laid upon other men to abstain 
from using him. It thus appears, that it is wholly impossible to create a 
right, without at the same time creating an obligation. _ 

The consequences of this law of nature are in the highest degree 1m- 
portant. Every right is a benefit; a command to a‘certain extent over 
the objects of desire. Every obligation is a burthen; an interdiction 
from the objects of desire. ‘The one is in itself a good; the other is in 
itself an evil. It would be desirable to increase the good as much as 
possible. But, by increasing the good, it necessarily happens that we 
increase the evil. And, if there be a certain point at which the evil 
begins to increase faster than the good, beyond that point all creation of 
rights is hostile to human welfare. 

The end in view is a command over the objects of desire. If no 
rights are established, there is a general scramble, and every mau seizes 
what he can. A man gets so much, and he is interdicted by the scramble 
from all the rest. If rights are established, he also gets so much, and is 
interdicted by his cbligations from the rest. If what he obtains by his 
rights exceeds what he would have obtained by the scramble, he is a 
gainer by the obligations which he sustains. 

If it is proposed to create rights in favour of all the members of a 
community, the limits are strict. You cannot give all your advantages 
to every one ; you must share them out. If you do not give equal rights 
to all, you can only give more than an equal share to some, by diminish- 
ing the share of others, of whom, while you diminish the rights, you in- 
crease the obligations. This is the course which bad governments 
pursue ; they mcrease the rights of the few, and diminish the rights of 
the many, till, in the case of governments virtually despotic, it is all 
right on the one side, all obligation on the other. 

It may be necessary to say a word, to prevent misconstruction of the 
term “ equal rights.” Rights may truly be considered as equal, if all the 
sorts of obligation under which a man lies with respect to other men, 
they are placed under with respect to him: if all the abstinence which 
he 1s obliged to practise with respect to their property, they are obliged 
to practise with respect to his; if all the rules by which he is bound not 
to interfere with their actions bind them equally not to interfere with his. 
It is evident, that inequality of fortune is not excluded by equality of 
rights. It is also evident, that, from equality of rights must always be 


7 


excepted those who are entrusted with the powers of the community for 
the purposes of government. ‘They have peculiar rights, and the rest of 
the community are under corresponding obligations. It is equally 
evident, that those must be excepted who are not sui juris, as children in 
non-age, who must be under the guidance of others. Of two such 
classes of persons the relation to one another, that is, their reciprocal 
rights and obligations, need to be regulated by particular rules. 

It is presumed that these illustrations will suffice to fix, in the minds 
of our readers, the exact meaning which is intended, in the present dis- 
course, to be attached to the word rights. The sequel is to be occupied 
in discovering the means which are most proper to be employed for 
affording protection to those rights. 


—— 
II. 


Meaning of the Word Protection, in the Jurisprudential Phrase, Pro- 
tection of Rights—The first Requisite to the Protection of Rights is 
to make them capable of being known.— Definition of Rights, the 
Jirst Instrument of Protection—Definition of the Acts by which 

~ Rights are violated, and the Application of Preventive Motives, 
another Instrument of Protection—Civil and Penal Codes,—What. 


ech of Procedure,—What.—Corpus Juris, or Body of Law,— 
hat. 


In the term protection, it is hardly necessary to give notice, that we do 
not here mean protection against foreign enemies ; that protection which 
is to be yielded by employing armies against invaders. The protection, 
of which it is the business of jurisprudence to find out and to describe 
the means, is that which is required by one member of the community 
against the other members. ‘The members of the community, each of 
whom endeavours to have as much as possible of the objects of desire, 
will be disposed to take those objects one from another; to take them, 
either by force, or by fraud. The means of presevvation must, therefore, 
be found. Certain members of the community, as organs of government, 
are furnished with powers for that purpose. The question is, what 
powers are required ; and in what manner are they to be employed? 

In proceeding to present what may be called a sort of skeleton-map 
of the ill-explored country of Jurisprudence, it is necessary to warn the 
reader, that he must supply, by his own.attention, what the limits of the 
work did not permit to be done for him. The several topics are rather 
indicated, than expounded. It is hoped they are indicated so clearly, 
that there will be no difficulty in spreading out the ideas in detail. It is 
necessary, however, that the reader should do this for himself. As the 
writer bas not been able to dwell upon the several topics, though of the 
utmost importance, long enough to stamp the due impression of them 
upon the mind; unless the reader takes time to do this, by reflection on 
each topic, as it arrives, he will pass to the succeeding ones without due 


3 


preparation, and the whole will be perused without interest, and without 
profit. 

That a man’s rights may be effectually secured, it is obviously neces- 
sary, in the first place, that they should be made capable of being 
accurately known. ‘This seems to be so undeniable, that it would 
answer little purpose to enlarge in its illustration. It is, however, 
exceedingly necessary that the importance of this requisite should be 
clearly and adequately conceived. How can a man’s nights be protected 
from encroachment, if what are his rights be uncertain or unknown? = If 
the boundary by which his rights are distinguished is clear and con- 
spicuous, it is in itself a protection. It warns off invaders ; it serves to 
strike them with awe; for it directs the eyes and indignation of mankind 
immediately and certainly to the offender. Where the boundary, on the 
other hand, is obscure and uncertain, so far scope is allowed for 
encroachment and invasion. When the question, to which of two men 
an article of property belongs, comes for decision to the judge, it 
is easy, if accurate marks are affixed, to point out and determine 
the rights of each. If no marks are attached, or such only as are 
obscure and variable, the decision must be arbitrary and uncertain. To 
that extent the benefit derived from the creation and existence of rights is 
diminished. 

It is, therefore, demonstrable, and we may say demonstrated (the 
demonstration not being difficult), that, in the inquiry respecting the 
means of protecting rights, the Definition of Rights may be entered at 
the head of the list. Without this, as the ground-work, all other means 
are ineffectue'. In proportion as rights can be ascertained, are the 
judicial functions, and judicial apparatus, capable of being employed to 
any beneficial purpose: in proportion to the facility with which they can 
be ascertained, is the extent of the benefit which the judicial functions 
are enabled to secure. 

Such, then, is the first of the means necessary for the protection of 
rights: That they may receive the most perfect possible protection, they 
must be as accurately as possible defined. 

In supposing that rights have need of protection, we suppose that 
there are acts by which rights are violated. With regard to those acts, 
the object is twofold; to redress the evil of the act when it has taken 
place ; and to prevent the performance of such acts in future. To pre- 
vent the performance, two classes of means present themselves; to 
watch till the act is about to be committed, and then to interpose ; or, 
to create motives which shall prevent the will to commit. It is but a 
small number of cases im which the first can be done; the latter is, 
therefore, the grand desideratum. From the view of these circumstances 
we discover two other articles in the catalogue of means. ‘Those acts by 
which rights are violated require to be made accurately known; in other 
words to be defined; and the motives which are fitted to prevent them 
must be duly applied. Motives sufficient to that end can only be found 
in the painful class; and the act by which they are applied is denomi- 


9 


nated punishment. The definition, therefore, of offences, or of the acts 
by which rights are violated and which it is expedient to punish; and 
the definition of the penalties by which they are prevented, are equally 
necessary with the definition of rights themselves, ‘The reasons which 
demonstrate this necessity are so nearly the same with those which de- 
monstrate the necessity of the definition of rights, that we deem it 
superfluous to repeat them. 

The definition of rights constitutes that part of law which has been 
generally denominated the Civil Code. The definition of offences and 
punishments constitutes that other part of law which has been generally 
denominated the criminal or Penal Code. 

When rights are distributed, and the acts by which they may be 
violated are forbidden, an agency is required, by which that distribution 
may be maintained, and the violators of it punished. ‘That agency is 
denominated judicature. The powers, by which that agency is con- 
stituted, require to be accurately defined ; and the mode in which the 
agency itself is to be carried on must be fixed and pointed out by clear 
and determinate rules, These rules and definitions prescribe the form 
and practice of the courts, or mode in which the judicial functions are 
performed ; and-constitute that branch of law which has been called the 
Code of Procedure. 

These three codes, the civil code, the penal code, and code of pro- 
cedure, form together the whole subject of jurisprudence. Of the three, 
it sufficiently appears, that the last exists only for the sake of the other 
two. Courts and their operations are provided that the provisions of 
the civil and penal codes may not be without their effect. It is to be 
considered, therefore, as subordinate, and merely instrumental, in respect 
to the other two. They form the main body of the law; this is an 
accessary to the main body, though an accessary of indispensable use. It 
would be of great advantage to aflix characteristic names to distinguish 
from one another the main and accessary parts of law. Unexceptionable 
names, however, it is not easy to find. Mr. Bentham, the great improver 
of this branch of knowledge, has called the civil and penal codes 
together, by the name of “ substantive law,” the code of procedure by 
that of “ adjective law ;” not, we may be satisfied, because he approved 
of those names, but because the language hardly afforded others to which 
equal objections would not apply. In the very sense in which either the 
term accessary, or the term adjective can be applied to the code of pro- 
cedure, both may be applied to the penal code, as it respects the civil. 
The penal code exists purely for the sake of the civil; that the rights, 
which are ordained by the legislature, and marked out by the terms of 
the code, may be saved from infringement. The civil code is there- 
fore the end and object of all the rest. The code of procedure, 
however, is auxiliary to each of the other two; the penal code to no 
more than one. 

Having now explained the nature of the three codes which constitute 
the body of law necessary for the protection of rights, it remains that 


10 


we illustrate, as much in detail as our limits will permit, what is re- 
quired for the perfection of each. 


III. 


What is required for the perfection of the Civil Code—Operations 
preliminary to the Definition of Rights—Two Things necessary for 
the Definition of a Right:—First, a Description of tts Extent ; 
Secondly, a Description of the Facts which give it a Beginning and 
an End. 

The grand object of the civil code is the definition of rights. Rights 
are sometimes more, sometimes less extensive. Thus the right of a 
man to a horse, may solely extend to use him in riding from one stage 
to another; or it may extend to the power of doing with him as he 
pleases. In like manner, the rights of a man with respect to a person 
may extend only to some momentary service, or they may go the length 
of slavery. Even slavery itself does not imply rights always equally 
extensive. In some cases, it implies rights as extensive over the slave 
as over the inferior animals. 

All rights, when the essence of them is spoken of, are powers; 
powers to an individual, which the governing members of the com- 
munity guarantee; powers, more or less extensive, of making either a 
person or a thing subservient to the gratification of his desires. To be 
made to gratify the desire of an individual, is to be made to render him 
a service. And the term service may, fortunately, be applied to both 
persons and things. A man receives a service from the field when it 
produces a crop, as well as from the servant and the horse who ploughed 
it. In one meaning of the word service, it implies only active service, 
or that rendered by the voluntary operations of sentient beings. In the 
present case, however, it is employed to denote both active and passive 
services. It is evident, that in every case in which any thing inanimate 
is rendered subservient to the gratification of a desire, the service is, 
properly speaking, a passive service. It is also evident, that even ani- 
mate beings are rendered subservient to the gratification of desires in a 
way which may equally be called passive. 

It is necessary to request attention to the explanation which is here 
given of the meaning in which the term service is to be employed ; as 
both the English and the Roman lawyers use it in a very restricted sense. 
Here it is employed to denote the whole of that ministration to the gra- 
tification of our desires, which we are entitled, in consequence of rights, 
to derive either from persons or from things. Rights are powers, and 
the powers are means for the obtaining of services. We have now, 
therefore, a language, by the help of which we may speak with tolerable 
clearness. 

Our object is to define rights, and rights are powers. But these 
powers can be defined, only by a reference to the services which they are 
the means of obtaining. 


ll 


The first thing, therefore, to be done for the definition of rights is, to 
make out a list of all the kinds of services, which the legislature permits 
an individual to derive, first, from persons, and secondly, from things. 
This would not be a matter of very great difficulty. It would be right 
to begin with the most simple cases, and go on to the more complex. 
Thus, of the services derivable from a person, some are limited to a 
single species of act, and that within a limited time, and at a particular 
place. Others are services, consisting of various acts, limited or not 
limited in space and time. And lastly, are the whole services which a 
man is capable of rendering ; without limitation as to either space or 
time. Considerable pains would be necessary to make the list complete ;. 
and not only considerable pains, but considerable logic would be neces- 
sary, to classify the services, in other words, make them ur into lots, the 
most convenient for the purpose in question; and to fix the extent of 
each by an exact definition. It is obvious, that as soon as all the pos- 
sible gradations, in the services which one human being can render to 
another, are exhibited by such enumeration and assortment, it is easy for 
the legislature to point out exactly whatever portion of these services it 
is its will to give any individual a right to. 

The same considerations apply to the class of things. In being made 
subservient to the gratification of our desires, they also render services. 
In proportion as a man has the right to derive those services from them, 
they are said to be his property. ‘The whole of the services, which are 
capable of being derived from them, may, without much difficulty, be 
enumerated and classified ; and when they are so, those which it may be 
the pleasure of the legislature to make any one’s property, may be very 
easily and distinctly pointed out. 

We may take land for an example. All the different services which 
are capable of being derived from the land may be enumerated, and, 
being classed under convenient heads, may be referred to with perfect 
certainty; and any portion of them, which is made the property of any 
individual, may thus be accurately described. A man may have a right 
simply to pasture a field; to pasture it for a day, or a year, or a hun- 
dred years. He may have a right to crop it; and that either in a par- 
ticular manner, or in any manner he pleases; for a year, or for any other 
time. He may have a right to use it for any purpose, and that during a 
limited time, or an unlimited time, ‘The services which it is capable of 
rendering may belong to him in common with a number of other per- 
sons, or they may all belong to himself. 

In illustration of this subject we may notice a classification of the 
services derivable from the land, made, though very rudely, by the En- 
glish law. Blackstone, who, like other English lawyers, has, on this, 
as on all other occasions, no idea of any other classification, than that 
which is made by the technical terms of the English law, has distin- 
guished certain lots of the services derivable from the land, under the 
name of “ Estates therein; Estates with respect to, 1st, Quantity of 
interest; @d/y, Time of Enjoyment; 3d/y, Number and connection of 


12 


the tenants :* That is, estates in fee simple, comprehending the whole 
of the services which are capable of being derived from the land, un- 
limited in point of time; estates in fee tail, implying always limitation in 
point of time, and often a limitation in respect to some of the services ; 
estates for years; estates at will; estates at sufferance ; estates on con- 
dition ; estates in remainder; estates in reversion; estates in jointenancy ; 
estates in coparcenary ; estates in common. The Roman Jaw has made 
no enumeration or classification of the services derivable from any thing, 
not even from the land. It speaks of property in the abstract, and in 
two states; property in possession, and property in action. The En- 
glish law does the same thing in regard to all other property but the land. 
“ Property, in chattels personal, is either in possession or in action,” 
says Blackstone. He does, indeed, add, “ The property of chattels 
personal is liable to remainders, if created by will, to joimtenancy, and 
to tenancy in common.” 

The services derivable from other articles of property than land, need 
not be divided under many heads. A piece of plate, for example, may 
render certain services without alteration of its form; it may be inca- 
pable of rendering other services till it has received an alteration of its 
form. It is chiefly, therefore, by limitation of time, that the various 
quantities of interest in such articles need to be determined. A man’s 
right may extend to the use of a silver cup, for a day, or a year, or for 
his life. During this time the different services which it is capable of 
rendering have no occasion to be divided. They go naturally altogether. 
An unlimited right to its services implies the power of using it, either 
with or without alteration of its form, and without limitation of time. In 
most instances the limited right would be called Joan, though, in the case 
of heirlooms and some others, there is a limited use to which the term 
loan is not customarily applied. 

In speaking of the rights which a man may have to persons ; as master, 
as father, as husband, and so on; there is one case so remarkable, that 
it requires a few words to be added in its explanation. It is that of one’s 
own person. In this case the rights of the individual have na proper 
limitation beyond the obligations under which he is laid, in consequence 
either of the rights conferred upon others, or of the means which are 
thought necessary for protecting them. 

If we have enabled our readers to form a tolerable conception of what 
we desire to be accomplished under the title of an enumeration and 
commodious classification of the services derivable from persons and 
things, we have performed what we proposed. ‘The enumeration and 
classification, themselves, are evidently incommensurate with the design 
of an article in the present work. ‘That they are practicable may be 
confidently taken for granted. In fact, they amount to nothing more 
than a description of the different degrees in which the property of a 
thing may be possessed; a point which is decided upon in every legal 
dispute. If this be done, from time to time, for one article after ano- 
ther, it may be done once for all. 


13 


We have already said, that rights are powers, powers for the obtaining 
of certain services. We have also said, that those powers can be de- 
fined only by a reference to the services which they are the means of 
obtaining. When those services are enumerated and classified, what 
remains is easy. A right to those services must begin ; and it must end. 
The legislature has only to determine what fact shall be considered as 
giving a beginning to each right, and what shall be considered as putting 
an end to it, and then the whole business is accomplished. 

It is evident that, for the definition of rights, two things are neces- 
sary. ‘The first is, an exact description of the extent of the right; the 
second is, the description of the fact which gives birth to it. The 
&xtent of the right is described by reference to the lots of services, in the 
title to which services all rights consist. The facts, which the con- 
venient enjoyment of rights has pointed out as the fittest for giving com- 
mencement to rights, have been pretty well ascertained from the earliest 
period of society; and there has, in fact, been a very great conformity 
with respect to them in the laws of all nations. 

The following is an imperfect enumeration of them :— An expression 
of the will af the legislature, when it makes any disposition with regard 
to property; Occupancy, when a man takes what belongs to nobody ; 
Labour; Donation; Contract; Succession. Of these six causes of the 
commencement of a right there is a remarkable distinction between the 
first three and the last three. The first three give commencement to a 
right in favour of one individual, without necessarily putting an end to 
a right enjoyed by any other individual. The last three give commence- 
ment to a night in favour of one individual, only by making the same 
right to cease in favour of another individual. When a man, by donation, 
gives a horse to another man, the horse ceases to be the property of the 
one man by the very same act by which he becomes the property of the 
other; so in the case of sale, or any other contract. 

It is necessary for the legislature, in order that each man may know 
what are the objects of desire which he may enjoy, to fix, not only what 
are the facts which shall give commencement to a right, but what are 
the facts which shall put an end to it. In respect to these facts, also, 
there is a great harmony in the laws of all nations. 

There is first the will of the legislaiure. When it confers a right, it 
may confer it, either for a limited, or for an unlimited time. In the 
term unlimited time; we include the power of tradition, or transfer, in 
all its shapes. If the time is limited, by the declaration of the legis- 
lature, either to a certain number of years, or the life of the party, the 
fact which terminates the right is obvious. If a man possesses a right, 
unlimited in point of time, the events are three by which it has been com- 
monly fixed that it may be terminated ; 1. some expression of his own will, 
in the way of gift or contract; 2. some act of delinquency ; or 3. his death. 

The possessor of a right, unlimited in point of time, may, in the way 
of gift or contract, transfer his right either for a limited or for an unli- 
mited time. ‘Thus the owner of a piece of Janud may lease it for a term 


14. 


of years. He may also, in this way, convey the whole of the services 
which it is capable of rendering, or only a part of them. In this trans- 
action, one event gives birth to a right in favour of the man who receives 
the lease, and terminates a right which was possessed by the man who 
gives it; and another event, namely, the arrival of the period assigned 
for the termination of the lease, terminates the nght of the man who 
had received the lease, and revives the former right of the man who gave it. 

Acts of delinquency have been made to terminate rights, by the laws 
of most nations, in the various modes of forfeiture and pecuniary 
penalty. 

The mode in which the evenc of death should terminate rights has been 
variously regulated. Sometimes it has been allowed to terminate them 
simply ; and what a man left at his death was open to the first occu- 
pant. All but rude nations, however, have determined the persons to 
whom the rights which a man possessed without limitation of time 
shall pass at his death. The will of the former owner, when expressed, 
is commonly allowed to settle the matter. When that is not expressed, 
it has by most legislators been regulated, that his rights shall pass to his 
next of kin. 

What is the extent of each right ; by what event it shall receive its 
commencement; and by what event it shall be terminated ;—this is all 
which is necessary to be pre-determined with respect to it. To do this 
is the-duty of the legislature. When it is done, the inquiry of the judge 
is clear and simple. Does such a right belong to such aman? ‘This 
question always resolves itself into two others. Did any of the events, 
which give commencement to a right, happen in this case? And did any 
of those events, which terminate a right, not happen in this case? These 
are questions of fact, as distinguished from law; and are to be determined 
by the production of evidence. If a man proves that an event which 
gives commencement to a right, happened in his case, and if another man 
cannot prove that an event which terminates a right happened subse- 
quently in that case, the right of the first man is established. 

If we have now ascertained the importance and practicability of a civil 
code, and have shown what is to be done in order to obtain the benefit 
of it, we shall conclude, with some confidence, that we have rendered a 
great service to mankind. We proceed to the consideration of the penal 
ee The object of that code is, the acts by which rights may be vio- 

ated. 


IV, 


What is necessary to the Perfection of the Penal Code— Acts meet for 
Punishment.—What is required to the Definition of an Offence. 


In the term violation, we include all those acts by which the powers, 


conveyed by a right, are prevented from operating according to the will 
of the owner, 


15 


With respect to a part of such acts, all that it is found convenient to 
do, through the instrumentality of judicature, is, to remove the obstruc- 
tion which prevents the enjoyment of the right, without inflicting any 
penalty for creating it. Thus, if a debt is not paid when due, the right 
is violated of the man who ought to receive it. Enough, however, is in 
this case supposed to be done, if the mau who owes the debt is con- 
stramed to make payment. ‘The act of secretly abstracting, with a view 
to appropriate, a property of perhaps less value, would be an act which 
the laws of all nations would punish as theft. 

Of injurious acts, those alone, to the commission of which it has 
been deemed expedient that penalties should be annexed, are considered 
as the object of the penal code. Of injurious acts so perfect an analysis 
has been exhibited by Mr. Bentham; so perfectly, too, have the grounds 
been laid down upon which those acts which are destined for punishment 
should be selected from the rest; and so accurately have the principles, 
according to which punishment should be meted out, been established, by 
that great philosopher, that, on this part of the subject, the philosophy 
of law is not far from complete. 

As acts are declared to be offences, and are made subject to punish- 
ment, solely for the protection of rights, it is evident, that all acts which 
enter into the penal code, are acts which infringe upon rights, either 
directly, or indirectly. Those which infringe upon rights directly, are 
those by which injury is done to some individual or individuals; a blow, 
for example, an act of theft, and so on. We include also, under this 
division, all acts the effects of which produce an immediate infringement 
of rights; destroying a mound, for example, to inundate the lands of 
another man; importation of infection, by which the health or lives of 
others may be destroyed. Those acts by means of which rights are 
affected indirectly, are those which bear immediately upon the means 
which the state has provided for the protection of mghts. ‘The means 
which the state has provided for the protection of rights, are the opera- 
tions of government generally. All acts, therefore, meet for punish- 
ment, are acts which disturb either individuals in the enjoyment of their 
rights, or the operations required for the protection of those nights. 
‘Lhe latter, though mediately, and not immediately hurtful, are apt to be 
more extensively mischievous than the former. An act which infringes 
upon a right immediately, is commonly injurious only to one individual, 
or a small number of individuals; an act which prevents any of the 
operations of government from proceeding in its natural course is in- 
jurious to all those individuals to whose protection the due course of that 
operation is useful. Permit acts which interrupt all the operations of 
government, and all rights are practically destroyed. 

If, as it thus appears, acts are meet for punishment, only because they 
infringe upon a right, or because they interrupt the operations provided 
for the protection of rights, it is evident, that, in the definition of one set 
of those acts, must be included the specification of the right which is 
infringed ; and, in the definition of the other, must be included the speci- 


16 


fication of the operation disturbed. Before, therefore, an accurate penal 
code can exist, there must exist an accurate civil code, and also what we 
may call a constitutional er political code; the latter consisting of an 
accurate definition of the powers created for the purposes of govern- 
ment, and of the limitations. applied to their exercise. 

From what has been said, it may appear, that the definition of offences 
by which name we shall hereafter distinguish punishable acts, consists 
necessarily of two parts. The first part is the specification of the right 
infringed, or the operation of government disturbed; and the second 
part is the definition of the mode. ‘Thus, for the definition of an act of 
theft, the right which the act has violated must be distinctly marked, and 
also the mode in which the violation has been committed. In the same 
class of offences, those against property for example, the mode in 
which the violation is performed is that chiefly which constitutes the dif- 
ference between one offence and another. In a theft and a robbery, the 
right violated may be exactly the same; the mode in which the violation 
was effected constitutes the difference. ; ' 

For several purposes of the penal code, it is useful, that, in the speci- 
fication of the right violated, the value of what has been violated, in 
other words, the amount of the evil sustained, should sometimes be in- 
cluded. It is evident, that the value of rights can be judged of ultimately, 
only by a reference to human feelings. Of these feelings, however, cer- 
tain outward marks must be taken as the standard. In offences which 
concern property the modes of aluation are familiarly known. In 
injuries to the person, those marks which denote injuries regarded by 
mankind in general as differing in magnitude; the size, for example, or 
position, of a wound ; in injuries to reputation, the words used, and the 
occasion when, and so forth, are the only means of distinction which can 
be employed. 

It may be necessary also to remark, that, in that part of the definition 
which relates to the mode, are to be distinguished the parties, when more 
than one, who engage in the same offence with different degrees of crimi- 
nality ; meaning, by different degrees of criminality, nothing more than 
demand for different degrees of punishment. The chief classes of such 
persons are those of principals and accessaries; and of accessaries both 
those before and those after the fact. 

In the definition of the mode, the act is first to be described in its 
ordinary shape. The act, however, may be attended with aggravating 
circumstances on the one hand, or extenuating circumstances on the 
other ; presenting a demand for increased punishment in the first case, 
and diminished punishment in the second. Mr. Bentham has logically 
remarked, that the circumstances which are to be regarded as aggravating, 
and the circumstances which are to be regarded as extenuating, being 
pretty nearly the same in all cases, they may be defined, in a separate 
chapter, once for all. ‘This being done, the code proceeds in the follow- 
ing manuer:—The definition is given of the offence in its ordinary 
shape, and the appropriate punishment is annexed; then immediately 


17 


follows the same offence with aggravating circumstances ; punishment 
sq much the more severe: the same offence with extenuating circum- 
stances ; punishment so much the less. 

Thus far we have spoken of the definition of offences, into which we 
have entered the less in detail, because we do not think there is much of 
controversy on the subject. Many persons, who doubt the possibility of 
framing a civil code, though, after the preceding exposition of the sub- 
Ject, it is a doubt which could not, we should imagine, very easily main- 
tain itself, allow, that offences may all be defined; and that it is possible 
to prevent the monstrous iniquity of punishing men for acts as offences 
which they have not the means of knowing to be such, 


V; 


The Doctrine of Punishment.—Satisfaction.— Penalties. 


After offences comes the consideration of the punishment to be 
annexed to them. ‘This is a subject of considerable detail; it has been, 
however, so fully and admirably treated by Mr. Bentham, that only some 
of the more general considerations, necessary to mark out the place and 
importance of the topic, need here to be introduced. 

When a right has been infringed, there are two things, it is evident, 
which ought to be done: ‘Vhe injury which has been sustained by the 
individual ought to be repaired: And means ought to be taken to pre- 
vent the occurrence of a like evil in future. 

The doctrine of Satisfaction is not at all difficult, as far as regards the 
regulating principles ;_ the complication is all in the detail. The greater 
number of injuries are those which concern property. A pecuniary 
value can generally be set upon injuries of this sort; though it is not 
very easy to determine the pretium affectionis, a matter of considerable 
importance, which the English law, so much made up of clumsiness in 
one part, and false refinement in another, wholly overlooks. For injuries 
to the person, also, it is most frequently in the pecuniary shape alone 
that any compensation can be made. In making these estimates, some 
general marks are all that can be conveniently defined by the law, and a 
considerable discretion must be left to the judge. Indeed, the question 
of damages is always a question of fact, which must~be determined by 
the evidence adduced in each instance. 

It accords with the feelings of every man to say, that he who has 
committed an injury, should be made to repair it. One part of punish- 
ment, therefore, ought, wherever special reason does not forbid, to consist 
in making satisfaction to the party injured. Pecuniary satisfaction, where 
the delinquent is rich, may be a small part of the due punishment ; still, 
however, there is an obvious propriety, in making it a part so far as it can 
go. In the cases in which the delinquent has no property, there is the 
same propriety in making his labour subservient to that end. Hard 
labour, with the most economical fare, till the produce of the labour 


18 


equals the amount of the satisfaction required, is, therefore, a species of 
punishment, recommended by the strongest considerations. It is uot 
said that labour so limited would always be sufficient punishment, and 
there are many cases in which it would be too much; but even then, 
it should go as far as it can in the one case, and as far as it ought in 
the other. i ode Ras 

When the injury is done to reputation, there is a manifest propriety 1n 
making the injurer contribute to the reparation, wherever it can be done. 
In many of the cases, too, the proper mode is abundantly obvious : all 
those, for example, where the publication of falsehood is the mjurious 
act. The author of the injury may, in a way as public as that of the 
offence, and as well calculated as possible for the reparation of the in- 
jury, be obliged to declare that he has been solemnly adjudged to have 
propagated a falsehood, and is condemned to publish his own shame. 

In the case of those offences which affect rights indirectly, namely, by 
affecting the securities provided for them, satisfaction seldom can have 
any place, because not any determinate individual or individuals have 
sustained an injury. mga : 

This may suffice, in exposition of the first thing which is desirable 
where an injury has been committed, namely, that reparation should be 
made. ‘The second is, that measures should be adopted for preventing 
the future occurrence of similar events. 

Acts are performed, only because there are motives to the perform- 
ance of them. Of course injurious acts are performed, only because 
there are motives to the performance of them. 

Corporal restraint being out of the question where all the members of 
the community are concerned, it is evident that only two means remain 
for preventing injurious acts; either, first, to take away the motives which 
provoke to them; or, secondly, to apply motives sufficient for the pre- 
vention of them. 

From the very nature of many of the acts it is impossible to take 
away the motives which provoke to them. From property stolen it is 
impossible to detach the value of the property; from vengeance it 
is impossible to detach the hope of that relief which is sought by the 
blow that is aimed. 

What is wanted, then, is a sufficiency of motive in each instance to 
counteract the motives which lead to the crime. Whatever the motives 
of the alluring kind which lead to an act, if you give stronger motives of 
the same kind to abstain from the act, the act will, of course, be pre- 
vented. ‘Che man who would steal from you 52. will assuredly not do 
so, if he knows that he shall receive 6/. for abstaining. 

The question may then be started, Why should uot all crimes be pre- 
vented in this way, since reward is much move desirable and humane 
than punishment? ‘Phe answer is most satisfactory, and is built upon a 
ground which ought to receive profound attention, on many occasious, on 
which it is treated with the most perfect disregard. No reward can be 
given to one man, or set of men, but at the expence of some other man 


19 


or set of men. What is reward to one is therefore punishment to others. 
If 6/. be given to the man who would steal 5/., it must be taken from 
some one or more individuals of the community. If one man is elevated 
by any title or distinction, all the rest with regard to him are degraded 
and depressed. ‘This is utterly unavoidable. The one event is neces- 
sarily included in the other. ‘The giving of rewards, therefore, is a 
matter of serious import. It is not that simple act, that pure creation 
of good, which it is often so fraudulently given out to be, and so 
credulously and foolishly admitted to be. 

_ Other reasons, which prove the insufficiency of rewards for preventing 
injurious acts, are too obvious to require to be mentioned. We shall 
not therefore dwell upon this topic. ‘This at least is sufficiently evident, 
that to counteract the motives which lead to the commission of an act, 
we have but two methods. If we cannot apply motives, of the pleasurable 
sort, to induce the party to abstain from committing the act, we must 
apply such motives, of the painful sort, as will outweigh the motives 
which prompt to the performance. ‘I’o prevent, by such means, a theft 
of 5/.; it is absolutely necessary to aflix to that act a degree of punish- 
ment which shall outweigh the advantage of possessing 5/, 

We have now, it is evident, obtamed the principle by which punish- 
ment ought to be regulated: We desire to prevent certain acts: ‘That is 
our end, and the whole of our end: We shall assuredly prevent any 
acts, if we attach to them motives of the painful kind, sufficient to out- 
weigh the motives of the opposite kind which lead to the performance. 
If we apply a less quantity of evil than is sufficient for outweighing 
those motives, the act will still be performed, and the evil will be in- 
flicted to no purpose; it will be so much suffering in waste. If we 
apply a greater quantity of evil than is necessary, we incur a similar 
inconvenience ; we create a quantity of evil which is absolutely useless ; 
the act, which it is the tendency of the motives of the pleasurable kind 
to produce, will be prevented, if the motives of the painful kind out- 
weigh them in the smallest degree, as certainly as if it outweigh them to 
any degree whatsoever. As soon, therefore, as the legislator has reached 
that point, he ought immediately to stop. Every atom of punishment 
which goes beyond is so much uncompensated evil, so much human 
misery created without any corresponding good. It is pure unmingled 
mischief. 

As no exact measure, indeed, can be taken of the quantity of pain 
which will outweigh a supposed quantity of pleasure, it is sometimes ne- 
cessary to risk going somewhat beyond the mark, in order to make sure of 
not falling short of it. And, in the case ef acts of which the evil is 
very great; of the higher order of crimes, in short ; it may be expedient 
to risk a considerable degree of excess in order to make sure of reaching 
the point of efficiency. an 

In estimating the quantity of evil which it may be necessary to create, 
in order to compensate the motive which leads to a mischievous act, two 
circumstances should be taken into the account. These are, certainty and 


20 


proximity. It is of the less importance here to enter far into the illus- 
tration of these topics, because they are now pretty generally understood. 
It is well known that the prospect of an evil which is to happen within 
an hour, or two hours, produces a much greater uneasiness, than the 
prospect of the very same evil removed to the distance of years. Every 
man knows that he will die within a certain number of years ; many are 
aware that they cannot live beyond a few years; and this knowledge 
produces no tneasiness. The effort, on the other hand, which enzbleg a 
man to behave with tranquillity, on the prospect of ‘immediate death, is 
supposed to be so difficult, that it is this which makes the hero. — It is, 
therefore, of the greatest importance, that punishment should be imme- 
diate ; because, in that case, a much smaller quantity of evil suffices. It 
is imperatively required, by the laws of benevolence, that, if evil is a 
necessary means to our end, every expedient should be used to reduce it to 
the smallest quantity possible. It is cruelty ; it belongs only to a malignant 
nature; to apply evil in a way which demands a quantity of it greater 
than would otherwise have been required. Suppose a law, that no act 
of theft should be punished or challenged till twenty years after the 
commission, or till the life of the thief was supposed to be near its end. 
It is evident that all punishment, in this case ; that death, in the greatest 
torture, would be nearly destitute of power. This is partly the ground 
of the complaint, of the little efficacy of religious punishment, though 
dreadful beyond expression in the degree. 

The want of certainty is a defect of equal importance. If it is a 
matter of doubt, whether a threatened evil will take place, the imagina- 
tion is prone to magnify the chance of its not happening; and, by in- 
dulgence, magnifies it to such a degree, that the opposite chance at last 
excites a comparatively feeble influence. This is a remarkable law of 
human nature, from the influence of which even the most wise and 
prudent of men are not exempt ; and of which the influence is predomi- 
nant in those inconsiderate minds which are the most apt to give way to 
the allurements of vice. To illustrate this law, the influence of the 
religious punishments affords the most instructive of all examples. The 
punishments themselves go far beyond what the imagination can con- 
ceive. It is the complaint of divines, and the observation of all the 
world, that, with the great body of men, the efficacy of them is exceed- 
ingly small. The reason is, that to the want of proximity is added the 
greatest uncertainty. 1f a man puts his finger in the candle, he knows 
that he will be punished, and immediately, by being burned. If a man 
commits even a heinous sin, he has no fear of receiving the religious 
punishment immediately, and he conceives that, in the mercy of his 
Judge, in repentance and faith, he has a chance of escaping it altogether. 
This chance his imagination exaggerates, and most men can, in this way, 
go on sinning with tranquillity, to the end of their days. If all punish- 
ments were as certain and immediate as that of putting a finger in the 
candle, the smallest quantity, it is evident, beyond what would form a 
counterbalance to the advantage of the forbidden act, would suftice for 


Q1 


its prevention. If uncertainty is admitted, to any considerable degree, 
no quantity of evil will suffice. It is a fact, which experience has most 
fully established, and which is now recognized in the most vulgar legis- 
lation, that undue severity of punishment runs counter to its end. This 
it does by increasing uncertainty; because men are indisposed to be the 
instruments of inflicting evil by which their feelings are lacerated. That 
legislation, therefore, is bad, which does not take measures for the 
greatest possible degree of proximity and certainty in the punishments 
which it applies. 

The sources are three, from which motives of the painful sort, appli- 
cable to the purposes of the legislator, are capable of being drawn :— 
1. The physical; 2dly, The moral; and, 3dly, The religious. 


I. Pains from the Physical Source may be communicated to a man 
through, 

1. His person, 

2. His connections, 

3. His property. 

Through his person, they may be communicated in four principal 
ways,—by death, disablement, restraint and constraint, simple pain. 

A man’s connections are either public or private; private, as spouse, 
parent, servant, master, &c.; public, as ruler, subject, teacher, scholar, 
and so on. 

The modes in which a man is punished through his property need no 
explanation. 


II. Pains, from the Moral Source, are the pains which are derived 
from the unfavourable sentiments of mankind, For the strength of the 
pains, derived from this source, we must refer to the writers who have 
treated of this part of human nature. It is sufficient here to advert to 
what is universally recognized, that these pains are capable of rising to a 
height, with which hardly any other pains, incident to our nature, can be 
compared; that there is a certain degree of unfavourableness in the sen- 
timents of his fellow creatures, under which, hardly any man, not below 
the standard of humanity, can endure to live. 

The importance of this powerful agency for the prevention of injurious 
acts, is too obvious to need to be illustrated. If sufficiently at command, 
it would almost supersede the use of other means. It is, therefore, one 
of the first objects to the legislator to know, in what manner he can 
employ the pains of the popular sanction with the greatest possible 
effect. 

To know how to direct the unfavourable sentiments of mankind, it is 
necessary to know in as complete, that is, in as comprehensive a way 
as possible, what it is which gives them birth. Without entering into 
the metaphysics of the question, it is a sufficient practical answer, for 
the present purpose, to say, that the unfavourable sentiments of men are 
excited by every thing which hurts them, They love that which gives 


29 


them pleasure; hate that which gives them pain. ‘Those acts of other 
men which give them pleasure or save them from pain, acts of benefi- 
cence, acts of veracity, and so on, they love. Acts, on the other hand, 
which give them pain, mendacity, and so on, they hate. These senti- 
ments, when the state of mind is contemplated out of which the acts are 
supposed to arise, are transformed into approbation and disapprobation, 
in all their stages and degrees; up to that of the highest veneration, down 
to that of the deepest abhorrence and contempt. 

The unfavourable sentiments, which the legislator would excite towards 
forbidden acts, must, therefore, in each man, arise from his conception 
of the mischievousness of those acts. ‘That conception depends upon 
three circumstances; Ist, The view which he himself takes of the act; 
2dly, The view which appears to be taken by other people; Sd/y, Every 
thing which operates to render more or less permanently present to his 
mind his own and other men’s conception of its mischievousness. From 
these circumstances, the practical rules for applying this great power, as 
an instrument of the legislator for the prevention of mischievous acts, are 
easily deduced. 1. Let the best measures be taken for giving the peo- 
ple a correct view of the mischievousness of the act; and then their un- 
favourable sentiments will be duly excited. 2. Let proper pains be taken 
that the people shall know every mischievous act that is committed, and 
know its author; that, so, no evil act may, by concealment, escape the 
punishment which their unfavourable sentiments imply. 3. Let the 
legislature, as the leading section of the public, make publication of its 
own unfavourable sentiments; let it brand the act with infamy. 4. Let 
the same publication of his own unfavourable sentiments be made by the 
judge in the shape of reprimand and other declarations. 5. The legis- 
Jature may increase the effect of these declarations, where the case re- 
quires it, by symbolical marks; or, 6, by personal exposure. 7. The 
legislature may so order matters in certain cases, that the mischievous 
act can be done only through another act already infamous; as when it is 
more infamous to break a vow to God than to make false declarations to 
men, a witness may be made to swear that he will tell the truth. 8. As 
the favourable sentiments of mankind are so powerfully excited towards 
wealth, a man suffers through the popular sauction when his property is 
so diminished as to lessen his rank, 


III. In pointing and proportioning the apprehension of divine punish- 
ment, the legislator can do three things : 

1, He can declare his dwn apprehension, and the measure of it, 
which should be as exactly proportioned as possible to the mischicvous- 
ness of the acts: 

2dly, He can hire other people to declare similar apprehensions, and 
to make the most of the means which are available for their propagation : 

Sdly, He may discountenance the pointing of religious apprehensions 
to any acts which are not mischievous; or the pointing of them more 
strongly to acts which are slightly, than to acts which are deeply mis- 


28 


chievous. Whatever power of restraining from mischievous acts may be 
lodged in religious apprehensions, is commonly misapplied and wasted. 
It would be worth the cost, therefore, of pretty forcible means to pre- 
vent such a misapplication and waste of religious fears. * 

In drawing from one, or more, of all these sources, a lot of punish- 
ment adapted to each particular case, the following properties, desirable 
in a lot of punishment, ought to be steadily borne in view. Every lot of 
punishment ought, as much as possible, to be, 

1. Susceptible of graduation, so as to be applied in different de- 
grees, 

2. Measurable, that the difference of degrees may be duly ascertained. 

$. Equable, that is, calculated to operate with uniform intensity upon 
all persons. 

4. Such, that the thought of the punishment may naturally excite the 
thought of the crime. 

5. Such, that the conception of it may be naturally vivid and intense. 

6. Public, addressed to the senses. 

7. Reformative. 

8. Disabling; viz. from crime. 

9. Remediable; viz. if afterwards found to be undeserved. 

10. Compensative; viz. to the party injured. 

11. Productive; viz. to the community, as Jabour. 

Of all the instruments of punishment which have yet occured to the 
ingenuity of man, there is none which unites these desirable qualities in 
any thing like an equal degree with the Panopticon Penitentiary, as 
devised and described by Mr. Bentham. 

One general rule applies, in the case of all the lots of punishment. 
It is this: That the private good which has operated as the motive to 
the injurious action, should, in all possible cases, be cut off, and the 
expected enjoyment prevented. Where this can be done completely, all 
the additional punishment necessary is only that which would suffice to 
coinpensate the want of certainty and proximity in the act of deprivation ; 
for no man would commit a crime which he was sure he could not 
profit by; uo man would steal, if he knew that tie property stolen 
would that minute be taken from him. ‘The interests which are 
capable of being promoted by a criminal act, may be summed up under 
the following titles : ; 

1. Money, or money’s worth. 


* Nothing which can in any degree interfere with the rights of conscience, including 
whatever interpretation any man may put upon the words of Scripture, is here under- 
stood. It is the object of the legislator to encourage acts which are useful, prevent acts 
which are hurtful, to society. But religious hopes and fears are often applied, not to 
promote acts which are useful, prevent acts which are hurtful, to society ; in which way, 
alone, they are capable of conducing to the views of the legislator ; but to mere cere- 
monies. And cases are not wanting in which they are applied to produce acts that are 
hurtful, prevent those that are useful, to society. As far as religious motives are at- 
tached to the useful, instead of the useless or hurtful objects, society is benefited. Itis 
this benefit which it is recommended to the legislator to pursue. 


2, Power. 

3. Revenge. 

4. Vanity, emulation. 

5. Sensual pleasure, chiefly venereal. 

6. Safety in respect to legal punishment. 

With respect to four of these interests, viz. money, power, vanity, and 
safety in respect to legal punishment, the contemplated benefit is capa- 
ble, in many cases, of being completely intercepted. 

In the case in which revenge has operated through the degradation of 
the party suffering, the evil doer may be disappointed by re-exaltation of 
the degraded party. ; 

Sensual pleasure, having been enjoyed, is beyond the reach of this 
operation. 

It is highly worthy of observation, that, among the advantages consti- 
tuting the motives to crime, those which can be cut off, and from the 
enjoyment of which the offender can be precluded, constitute by far the 
most frequeut incentives to crime. 

‘This must suffice as a summary of what should be said on the mode 
of applying pain most usefully for the prevention of certain acts. It 
only remains to add, that the following are the cases in which it may be 
pronounced unfit that pain should be employed for that purpose : 

1. Where the evil to the community does not overbalance the good to 
the individual. 

2, Where the evil necessary for the punishment would outweigh the 
evil of the act. 

3. Where the evil created is not calculated to prevent the act. 

4. Where the end could be obtained by other means. 


vis 


The Code of Procedure.—First stage of the Judicial Business——Se- 
cond stage of the Judicial Business. 


We have now, therefore, stated, what the limits of this discourse ena- 
ble us to adduce, on the subject of the main body of the law; the enact- 
ments of the legislature with respect to rights, and with respect to those 
acts by which nghts are violated. It remains that we consider that sub- 
sidiary branch of law, by which an agency is constituted for the purpose 
of carrying those enactments into effect. ‘The inquiry here is, 1. what are 
the operations essential to that agency; 2. by what agents are they most 
likely to be well performed; and 3. what are the best securities that can 
be taken for the good conduct of these agents. 

_ It most significantly illustrates the manner in which ignorance gropes 
its way in the dark, to observe, that the agency, the sole end of which 
1s to carry Into execution the civil and penal laws, was created first,’ and 
was In operation for ages, before the idea of the other branches of law 
was even tolerably framed. It is also worthy of remark, that the men, 


25 


whose wisdom rules our affairs, are in the habit of calling the mode in 
which ignorance gropes its way in the dark, by the name of experience; 
the mode of acting upon a plan, and with foresight, by the names of 
theory and speculation. 

There is instruction, in observing the mode, in which this inverted course 
of law-making was pursued. Men disputed ; and their disputes were at- 
tended with the most destructive consequences. Originally, the king, at 
the head of the military force, and his subordinates, each at the head of 
a section of that force, interfered in those disputes. After a time, the 
king appointed functionaries, under the name of judges, for that par- 
ticular service. These judges decided, without any rule, by their own 
discretion. The feelings of the community, grounded upon their expe- 
rience of what tended to good and evil upon the whole, pointed vaguely 
to certain things as right, to other things as wrong ; and to these the judge, 
as often as he was in bona fides, conformed his decision. ‘The mode was 
similar both in arbitrating, and in punishing. 

As punishing, especially in the severer cases, was an act which made 
a vivid impression upon the mind, the mode in which that act had been 
performed in previous cases was apt to be remembered: of the several 
modes, that which was most approved by the public would naturally be 
followed the most frequently; and at last there would be a species of 
scandal, if it was unnecessarily departed from. In this way a uniformity, 
more or less perfect, was established, in punishing the more heinous of- 
fences; and in regard to them custom first established what had some 
feeble portion of the attributes of a law. 

In those cases in which, without’a call for punishment, the authori- 
tative termination of a dispute was all that was required, the experience 
of what was necessary, not only for any degree of mutual comfort, but 
even for the means of subsistence, soon established a few leading points 
of uniformity. Thus, when a man had cultivated a piece of ground, 
which belonged to nobody more peculiarly than to himself, it was evi- 
dently necessary that the crop should be considered as belonging to him ; 
otherwise, no crops would be raised, and the community would be de- 
prived of the means of subsistence. 

These general feelings, with the remembrance, more or less perfect, 
of what had been done in similar cases, were the only guide; and it is 
surprising to what an extent, over the surface of the whole globe, law 
has, in all ages, remained in that state of imperfect existence, if, indeed, 
with any propriety, it can be called a state of existence. In every part 
of Asia, and in all ages, law bas remained in that state of existence, or 
non-existence. In Europe, where, at a pretty early period, it became 
the practice to record in writing the proceedings of the judges, the na- 
tural propensity of referring to the past asa rule for the present, begat in 
time a species of :ebligation of being directed by the examples which had 
already been set. This created a uniformity and certainty, which, how- 
ever imperfect, afforded something better than the arbitrary proceedings 
of Asiatic judges, Yet this was a benefit which bad a dreadful alloy. 


26 


A body, not of law, but of decisions, out of which, on each particular 
occasion, a law for that particular occasion, as out of the crude ore, was 
to be smelted, hammered, and wire-drawn, was the natural material out 
of which to manufacture a system of chicane. How accurately the sys- 
tem of law, in the several nations of Europe, has conformed to the cha- 
racter of a system of chicane, is matter of present and lamentable expe- 
rience. The uncertainty, the delay, the vexation and expence, and that 
immorality of the worst species with which they imundate the community, 
are not the only evils, great as they are, of laws constructed upon such 
a plan. A system of laws, so constructed, becomes an instrument of 
conversation for the barbarous customs and ideas of the times in which 
they were engendered; and infests society with the evils of an age, which 
it has left behind. 

To conceive the operations which are necessary to give effect to the 
enactments of the legislature, it is necessary to conceive the occasions 
which call for them. 

When the legislature has established rights, so long as there is no dis- 
pute about those rights, and so long as there is no complaint of any vio- 
lation of them, so long there is no occasion for any agency to give to the 
enactments of the legislature their effect. ‘The moment, however, one 
person says, the right to ‘that object 1s mine, and another person says no, 
but the right to that object 1s mine; or the moment any man complains 
that such or such a right belonging to him another man has violated, that 
moment occasion for the agency in question begins, 

It is evident, also, that the operations necessary to give effect to the 
enactments of the legislature are confined to those two occasions; namely, 
that on which a right is disputed, and that on which it has been violated. 
On the occasions on which a right is disputed, it is requisite to determine 
to whom it belongs. On the occasions on which a right has been vio- 
lated, it is sometimes only required to compel reparation to the injured 
party ; sometimes it is necessary, besides, to inflict punishment upon the 
offender. The question is, What are the operations required for these 
several results? 

Where a right is disputed, all possible cases may be resolved into that 
of A who affirms, and B who denies. That right is mine, says A, it is 
not yours, says B. 

The first question to be asked of A is, which, among those facts, 
which the legislature has determined shall give commencement to rights, 
happened in such a manner as to give commencement to that which is 
claimed as a right by him, 

If no such fact is affirmed, the right does not exist. If some such fact 
is affirmed, it may be met by the opponent in one of two ways, B 
either may deny the fact, and affirm that the right neyer had a com- 
mencement; or he may allow the fact, and admit that the right had a 
commencement, but affirm that there had subsequently happened one of 
those facts which put an end to rights: admitting that A bought the 
horse, and had a night to him in the month of July, he might aftirm that 


27 


A ai him again in August, and by that transaction put an end to his 
right. 

_ When B meets the affirmation of A in the first way, that is, by deny- 
ing the commencement of the right, he may do it in either of two ways. 
He may deny the investitive fact which A affirms, or not denying the fact, 
he may affirm some antecedent fact which deprived it of its investitive 
power. ‘Thus, if A affirmed that he got the property by occupancy, B 
may affirm that it was not open to occupancy, but the property of ano- 
ther person. If A affirmed that he got the property by succession to his 
father, B_ may allow the fact of the succession, but affirm that the pro- 
perty did not belong to the father of A at the time of his death. 

Whenever the legislature has accurately determined what are the facts 
which shall give commencement, and what those which shall give termi- 
nation to a right, the whole confused and intricate mass of what in En- 
glish law is cailed Pleading, reduces itself to these clear and simple 
elements. A begins, by affirming some one of the facts which gives 
commencement to a right. B may deny this fact directly: A affirms 
contract for example, B denies it; and then, of course, comes the evi- 
dence: Or, instead of denying it, B may affirm an antecedent fact 
which deprived the fact affirmed by A of its investitive force; or he may 
affirm a subsequent fact, which put an end to the right. In those two 
cases, in which B affirms a new fact, A must be called upon for a reply, 
in other words, asked whether he admits or denies it. IPf he admits, there 
is an end, of course, to the claim of A. If he denies, then again we 
have affirmation and denial upon a matter of fact, which is to be deter- 
mined by the production of evidence. 

This is the first part of the proceeding, neither intricate nor obscure. 
The next is, the adduction of evidence. A fact is disputed; affirmed on 
the one side, denied on the other. A produces evidence to prove the 
fact, B produces evidence to disprove it. The decision is on the one 
side or the other, and the dispute is at an end. 

If both parties obey the decision, there is no occasion for another act. 
If the losing party disobeys, force is necessary to compel obedience. 
This is called execution, and terminates the agency required. 

It is needless to particularize a penal proceeding; all the possible 
varieties of which fall under one or other of the cases illustrated. 

Thus, when a man is charged with a crime, the prosecutor affirms one 
of the acts violating rights, to which punishment is annexed by the legis- 
lator. The defendant can meet this affirmation in one of only two ways. 
First, he may deny the act, and then the second stage of proceeding, 
the adduction of evidence, immediately takes place. Or, not denying 
the act, he may affirm some previous act, which prevented it from having 
the effect of violating a right. Not denying the fact of taking the horse 
out of the field with a view to appropriate him, he may affirm a previous 
purchase, gift, &c. The adduction of evidence has nothing peculiar in 
the case of a penal proceeding at law. In the last stage, that of exe- 
cution, the peculiar act of inflicting punishment is required. 


28 


Having thus a view, though very summary, of the operations required, 
we shall be the better able to judge of the agents necessary for the 
performance. ; E 

The stages, we have observed, are three. The jirst 1s that in 
which the plaintiff adduces the fact on which he relies, and is met by 
the defendant either with a denial of the fact, or the affirmation of 
another fact, which, to maintain the suit, the plaintiff must deny. ‘The 
second is that in which evidence, to prove or disprove the fact on which 
the affirmation and denial of the parties ultimately rests, 1s adduced and 
decided upon. ‘The third is that in which the operations are performed 
necessary for giving effect to the sentence of the judge. 

What is desirable in the operations of the first stage 1s, 1st, 
That the affirmations and negations with respect to the facts should 
be true; and, 2d/y, That the facts themselves should be such as 
really to have the quality ascribed to them. For the first of these 
purposes, all the securities, which the nature of the case admits of, 
should be taken, for the veracity of the parties. ‘There is the same sort 
of reason that the parties should speak truly, as that the witnesses should 
speak truly. They should speak, therefore, under all the sanctions and 
penalties of a witness. They canuot, indeed, in many cases swear to 
the existence or non-existence of the fact; which may not have been 
within their cognizance. But they can always swear to the state of their 
belief with respect to it. For the second of the above purposes, 
namely, that it may be known whether the facts affirmed and denied are 
such as to possess the quality ascribed to them, two things are necessary ; 
the first is, that all investitive and divestitive facts and acts by which rights 
are violated should have been clearly predetermined by the legislature, in 
other words, that there should be a well-made code; the second is, that the 
affirmations and denials with respect to them should be made in tke 
presence of somebody capable of telling exactly whether they have the 
quality ascribed to them or not. The judge is a person with this know- 
ledge, and to him alone can the power of deciding on matters so 
essential to the result of the inquiry be entrusted. 

To have this important part of the business done, then, in the best 
possible way, it is necessary that the parties should meet in the very first 
instance in the presence of the judge. A is asked, upon his oath, to 
mention the fact which he believes confers upon him or has violated his 
right. If it is not a fact capable of having that effect, he is told so, and 
his claim is at an end. If it is a fact capable of having that effect, B is 
asked whether he denies it; or whether he affirms another fact, either 
one of those, which, happening previously, would prevent it from having 
its imputed effect, or in a civil case one of those which, happening sub- 
sequently, would put an end to the right to which the previous fact gave 
commencement. If he affirmed only a fact which could have neither of 
these effects, the pretension of B would be without foundation. 

Done in this manner, the clearness, the quickness, and the certainty of 
the whole proceeding are demonstrated. Remarkable it is, that every 


29 


one of the rules for doing it in the best possible manier, is departed 
from by the English law, and that to the greatest possible extent. No 
security whatsoever is taken that the parties shall speak the truth ;_ they 
are left with perfect impunity, aptly by Mr. Bentham denominated the 
mendacity-licence, to tell as many lies as they please. The legislature has 
never enumerated and defined the facts which give commencement, or 
put a period to or violate rights ; the subject, therefore, remains in a state 
of confusion, obscurity, and uncertainty. And, lastly, the parties do not 
make their affirmations and negations before the judge, who would tell 
them whether the facts which they allege could or could not have the 
virtue ascribed to them; they make them in secret, and in writing, each 
along with his attorney, who has a motive to make them not in the way 
most conducive to the interests of his client, but in the way most con- 
ducive to his own interests, and those of his confederates, from the bot- 
tom to the top of the profession. First, A, the plaintiff, writes what is 
called the declaration, an instrument for the most part full of irrelevant 
absurdity and lies; and this he deposits in an office, where the attorney 
of B, the defendant, obtains a copy of it, on paying a fee. Next B, the 
defendant, meets the declaration of A, by what is called a plea, the 
form of which is not less absurd than that of the declaration. ‘The plea 
is written and put into the same office, out of which the attorney of the 
opposite party obtains a copy of it on similar terms. The plea may be 
of two sorts; either, 1st, a dilatory plea, as it is called ; or, 2dly, a plea 
to the action. ‘To this plea the plaintiff may make a replication, pro- 
ceeding through the same process. ‘lo the replication the defendant 
may put in a rejoinder. ‘The plaintiff may answer the rejoinder by a 
sur-rejoinder. ‘Chis, again, the defendant may oppose by a rebuiter, and 
the plaintiff may answer him by a sur-rebutter. 

All this takes place without being once seen or heard of by the judge; 
and no sooner has it come before him, than some flaw is perhaps dis- 
coyered in it, wherexpon he quashes the whole, and sends it to be per- 
formed again from the beginning. 

This mischievous mess, which exists in defiance and mockery of 
reason, English lawyers inform us, is a strict, and pure, and beautiful 
exemplification of the rules of ‘logic. This is a common language of 
theirs. It is a language which clearly demonstrates the state of their 
minds, All that they see in the system of pleading is the mode of per- 
forming it. What they know of logic is little more than the name. 

‘The agency necessary for the performance of this portion of the busi- 
ness, is some person, who, when he hears a fact affirmed and denied, can 
tell whether it is one of those facts to which the legislature has attached 
the power of giving commencement or of putting a period to nights. It 
is evident, that on such occasion, any one person, with the requisite 
knowledge, attention, and probity, is as competent to the task as a 
hundred, If he is single, the attention and probity is hkely to be the 
greatest, as responsibility is not weakened merely, it is almost anni- 
hilated by being shared. There should be one judge, therefore, and 


30 


not more, to superintend that branch of procedure which consists of 
pleading. cs 

The agency best adapted to the business of the second stage of judi- 
cature, is that which next demands our attention. It is the business of 
taking evidence ; in other words, the deing all that is necessary to ascer- 
tain whether the disputed fact happened or did not happen. 

The subject of evidence is a matter of complexity in the detail. And 
where any thing complex is to be Stated in words, there is always diffi- 
culty in the expression, how plain soever the ideas, Such general con- 
siderations, however, as we can even here adduce, will, we hope, throw 
sufficient light upon the subject, to leave no doubt with respect to the 
conclusions which we have it in view to establish. This is one of 
the topics, connected with law, which Mr. Bentham has exhausted, 
though a small part only of what he has written upon it has yet seen 
the light.* A 

With respect to all facts, legally operative, that is, which give or take 
away rights, it is desirable that evidence, amounting to proof, should, 
if possible, always exist. With respect to a great proportion of them, 
it is in the power of the legislature to take measures, that evidence 
of them shall be collected at the moment of their happening, and shall 
be preserved. ‘This is the case with all those of which an evidentiary 
writing can be made and preserved by registration ; all contracts, births, 
deaths, marriages, and so on. The proportion is really very great of the 
whole number of facts, legally operative, in regard to which a legislature, 
by proper means, might secure the existence of evidence, and to that 
extent might either prevent disputes, or render the decision of them easy. 
‘That so little of this most important and obvious work has any where 
been done, only shows how ill the legislatures of the world have 
hitherto performed their duty. It is in the power of the legislature, by 
a proper classification, to have an accurate formulary, for the different 
species of contracts, wills, and other evidentiary writings. Those for- 
mularies properly made and printed with blanks to fill up, would render 
the business of Conveyancing, which, in England, is a boundless, track- 
less, and almost impenetrable jungle, abounding with expence, with 
delay and vexation to parties, with wealth and almost boundless power 
over the fortunes of other men to lawyers, a thing of the greatest sim- 
plicity, certainty and ease. 

Into the question of what might be, and ought to be done by the 
legislature, for making and preserving evidence of the principal facts by 
which rights are made to begin or to end, we cannot enter at length, on 
the present occasion. The great importance which belongs to the sub- 
ject, is evident from what we have thus shortly advanced. 

The business of him, who is only called upon to determine whether a 


* We are happy to say, there are hopes that this part of Mr. Bentham’s writings will 
soon be presented to the public by M. Dumont, the first of translators and redacteurs, 


in that happy form which he has given to other portions of that philosopher’s 
manuscripts, 


31 


disputed fact did or did not happen is, to make the best use of all the 
evidence which exists, whether it were, or were not desirable, that more 
had been made to exist. For the best use of that which exists, three 
things are necessary : 


1st, That the whole of it should be made to- bear, that is, should be 
taken and applied. 


2dly, ‘That it should be taken in those circumstances which are most 
conducive to trust-worthiness. 


3dly, That the proper value should be set upon each article, and upon 
the whole. 

1. That the evidence may be taken as completely as possible, two 
things are necessary. ‘The first is, that the judge should have power to 
send for, and to compel the attendance of, all persons and things which 
may be capable of affording evidence. The second is, that the evidence 
should all be taken, and nothing be omitted or lost. 

It is not necessary here to enter into any details with respect to the 
first of those requisites. The necessity of the powers is obvious, and 
the end to be attained is so precise and perspicuous, that there can be no 
difficulty in conceiving the mode of putting together and applying’ the 
means. ‘lhere is no limit, it is obvious, to the physical power which 
should be placed at the disposal of the judge. He ought to have the 
right of calling upon every man, upon the whole community, to aid him 
in any act which is necessary to the performance of any part of his 
judicial duty ; because any force, opposed to the performance of that 
duty, there ought to be a force sufficient promptly to overcome. It is 
convenient, however, to the community, instead of being liable to be 
called upon, individually, for the performance of the ordinary services 
auxiliary to the business of the judge, to provide him with a proper 
number of officers, paid for attending to execute his commands. Their 
principal business, as regards this stage of the judicial proceedings, is, 
to serve notice upon any persons whose own presence, or that of any 
writing or other thing which they may possess, is required by the judge. 
Persons or things, subjected immediately to the operations of judicature, 
have a particular name in English. They are said to be forthcoming, 
a word which has an exact equivalent in few other Janguages, and is ex- 
ceedingly appropriate and useful. It is of the greatest convenience, 
when a concrete term, the use of which is very frequent, has an abstract 
term corresponding to it; as good, has goodness; hard, hardness, and so 
on, There was not any word in the language corresponding in this way 
to forthcoming. Mr. Bentham, perceiving the great need of it, made 
the term forthcomingness ; not exceptionable on the score either of 
harshness or obscurity. The small wits thought proper to laugh at him. 
We shall, nevertheless—sorry at the same time that we cannot supply a 
defect in the language without offending them, make use of the word; in 
which we find great appropriateness and great convenience. This par- 
ticular branch, therefore, of the judicial agency is that which relates to 
forthcomingness ; and forthcomingness is required for two. purposes, 


52 


both for evidence and for justiciability ; for evidence, that a trne decision 
may be passed ; for justiciability, that the sentence of the judge may not 
fail of its intended effect. 

So much with respect to the forthcomingness of evidence. The 
second condition, required to give the decision the benefit of all existing 
evidence is, that the whole should be taken, and that not any part of it 
which can be taken without preponderant inconvenience should be 
excluded and lost. 

Of the several articles of evidence, some will always be of more im- 
portance, some of less ; and some may be of very little importance ; but 
whether of little or of much, it is always desirable that all should be 
taken, and every the smallest portion counted for what it is worth. ‘The 
discovery of truth is promoted by taking advantage of every thing which 
tends to throw light upon the subject of dispute. 

These propositions, it may appear to be useless, indeed impertinent, 
formally tovstate. They are too evident, it may be said, to be disputed, 
and too important to be overlooked. Important as they are, and undis- 
puted by all the rest of the world, they are not only disputed, but 
trampled upon by lawyers, especially English lawyers. ‘They have un- 
happily established a set of rules in direct opposition to them. These 
rules they applaud in all forms of expression, and celebrate as guards and 
fences of all that is dear to mankind. 

In all causes, they have determined, that persons so and so situated, 
things so and so situated, though apt to be pregnant with information 
beyond all other persons and things, shall not be admitted as sources of 
evidence. Thus, in English law, we have incompetency of witnesses, 
that is, exclusion of them, 1st, From want of understanding; 2d/y, From 
defect of religious principle; 3d/y, From infamy of character; 4thdy, 
From interest. These are undisguised modes of exclusion; besides 
which, there is an extensive assortment of disguised modes. Under this 
title comes the rule, that only the best evidence be given which the nature 
of the case admits of; according to which, it often happens that the 
only evidence which cau be had is excluded. Under this title also falls 
the rule, making certain kinds of evidence conclusive, by which pro- 
ceeding, all other evidence is excluded. To the same list belongs the 
rule, that hearsay evidence is not admissible, The rules, so extensive in 
their application, by which writings are wholly rejected, only because 
they want certain formularies, are rules of exclusion; and so are the 
limitations with respect to time, and to number of witnesses. Into the 
very extensive subject, however, of the absurdity aad mischievousness of 
the rules of evidence in English law, we cannot pretend so much as to 
enter. A remarkable exemplification of them was afforded on the trial 
of Warren Hastings, to which, for this purpose, the reader may be 
referred. (See Mill's [History of British India, Book VI. Chap. ii.) 

The only conceivable reasons for the exclusion of evidence are three: 

1. Irrelevancy. 

2. Inconvenience in obtaining and producing. 


33 


3. Danger of deception. 

With regard to irrelevancy the decision is clear. What has no ten- 
dency either to prove or disprove the point in question, it would be loss 
of time to receive. 

With regard to inconvenience, it is no doubt liable to happen, that 
when all the good which can be expected from the obtaining of a lot of 
evidence is compared with the evil of the delay, cost, and vexation, 
inseparable from the obtaining of it, the evil may be more than an over- 
match for the good. In all such cases, it is expedient that the lot of 
evidence should be foregone. 

As a guard against the danger of deception, it is equally certain that 
no evidence ought ever to be excluded. An account of all the reasons 
by which the absurdity is demonstrated of exclusion on this ground, and 
of the wide and deplorable mischief which, in the vulgar systems, is 
produced by it, would be far too extensive for the contracted limits of 
the present discourse. Reasons, however, decisive of the question, pre- 
sent themselves so obviously, that hardly any man, with an ordinary 
understanding, not fettered by prejudice, can look at the subject without 
perceiving them. 

If evidence is to be received from no source from which eyidence, 
liable to produce deception, is capable of coming, evidence must not be 
received at all. Evidence must be received from sources whence false 
evidence, as well as true, is liable to flow. To refuse ail information 
from such sources, is not the way by which a knowledge of the truth 
can be obtained. ‘This is the way to make sure of not having that know- 
ledge. ‘lhe means of obtaining it are, to receive evidence from every 
possible source, and to separate the bad from the good, under all those 
securities, and by the guidance of all those marks, of which understand- 
ing and attention know how to avail themselves. 

It is not enough to say, we will receive information from those sources 
only which are least likely to yield deceptious evidence, refuse to receive 
it from those which are most likely. You are obliged to receive it from 
sources differing in almost all possible degrees of likelihood. Where 
are you to draw the line of separation? Is not the same discernment 
which guards you against the danger of false information from the 
sources which you deem the least likely to yield it, sufficient to guard you 
against it from those sources which you deem the most likely to do so? 
In fact it will be still more sufficient ; because in this case you will be 
much more apt to be upon your guard. The very best information is, im 
truth, liable to be derived from the very worst of sources,—from a 
man who, you know, would not tell you one word of truth, if he could 
help it. 

‘The securities that a man will give true information, independently of 
those artificial securities which the legislature can apply equally to all, 
are, 1st, Intelligence, 2dly, Probity, 3dly, Freedom from interest. Sup- 
pose that one, or two, or all of these securities are wanting ; it only 


54 


follows, that what he states should be heard with a proportional distrust. 
It may still be of the utmost importance to the discovery of the truth that 
he should be heard. Hear him with the proper allowances, and it must 
always be less favourable to that great end, that, he should not be heard at 
all. His testimony may appear, when heard, to be utterly unworthy of cre- 
dence. But that could not be known till it was heard and examined. It 
might so have been, that it was not only worthy of credence, but com- 
pleted the proof of a fact of the greatest possible importance. That a 
man should not be heard as a witness, on account of his religious creed, 
is an absurdity which we cannot descend to notice. 

2. The second of the three things which we found necessary, as above, 
for making the best use judicially of whatever evidence, to the fact in 
question, exists, was, that it should be taken under those circumstances, 
which are most conducive to trust-worthiness. Those circumstances are 
constituted by the artificial securities, which arrangements can be made 
to apply. The following enumeration of them has been made by Mr. 
Bentham (Introduction to the Rationale of Evidence, p. 54), and ap- 
pears to be complete. 

1. Punishment. 

2. Shame. 

S. Interrogation, including counter-interrogation. 

4, Counter evidence,—admission of. 

5. Writing,—use made of it for giving permanence, Xc. to evidence. 

6. Publicity,—to most purposes and on most occasions. 

7. Privacy,—to some purposes, and on some occasions, 

For developing the import of these several securities, we can afford to 
say nothing. The principal operation of the judicial functionary in this 
part of the business is, to preside over the interrogation ; to see that it is 
properly and completely performed. The question, then, what is the 
sort of agency best adapted for the performance of this part of the task 
of taking evidence is not difficult to answer. ‘There is nothing in it 
which one man, with the proper intellectual and moral qualifications, is 
not as capable of performing, as any number of men. 

3. All the existing evidence being collected and received, it only 
remains that the proper value should be attached to the several portions, 
and a corresponding decision pronounced. 

It is sufficiently evident that, for the performance of this duty, no very 
precise instructions can be laid down. The value which belongs to an 
article of evidence often depends on minute and almost indescribable 
circumstances ; and the result must be left to the sagacity and conscience 
of the judge. 

At the same time, however, service to this end, and of the greatest 
importance, may be, and, of course, ought to be, rendered by the legis- 
lature. ‘The different marks of trust-worthiness may, to a certain extent 
of particularity, be very correctly described. This being done, the dif- 
ference between the value of any two lots of evidence, to which those 


35 


marks attach, may be very exactly ascertained. One has a certain 
number of the marks of trust-worthiness, as laid down by the legislature; 
another has all these and so many more; the result is clear. Itis evident, 
that as far, in this respect, as experience and foresight can go, nothing 
should be left undone by the legislature. 

Another important service can be rendered by the legislature; and 
that is, to provide an accurate language for the judge; a language in 
which he can express precisely the degree of value which he allots to 
each article of evidence, and to the whole. Various expedients may be 
adopted for this purpose. A very obvious one is, to fix upon some par- 
ticular, well known, article of evidence, the value of which all men 
appreciate equally ; the clear testimony, for example, of a man of the 
ordinary degree of intelligence and probity, as a standard. Is the value 
to be expressed, which the judge attaches to any other article of evi- 
dence? If inferior to the standard, it falls below it by so many degrees, 
one, two, three, four: If superior, it rises above it by so many. 

Having provided an accurate language, the legislature should take 
security that it be used ; and admit of no vague and general expressions 
in the account of the value which the judge attaches to each article of 
the evidence on which he grounds his decision. 

At the same time that the legislature insists upon the use of precise 
language in stating the value of evidence, it should insist upon reasons ; 
upon receiving from the judge a precise statement of the grounds upon 
which he attaches such a value, and no other, to each and every article 
of evidence; that is, upon receiving a reference, as exact as language 
can give, to each of the circumstances which contributed to suggest to 
him that particular estimate which he says he has formed. 

Of the importance of all these expedients we presume that no illus- 
tration is required. 

We come now to the third and last stage of the business of judi- 
cature ; when all that remains is to carry into effect the sentence of the 
judge. 

When they, upon whom the sentence operates, are willing to obey, all 
that is necessary is, to afford them notice of what it requires them to per- 
form. In well ordered countries, all but a very insignificant number will 
be found to be cases of this description. When opposition is to be 
overcome, a physical force must be provided, sufficient for the purpose. 
As there seems nothing mysterious in determining how this should be 
formed, and under what rules it should act, to secure the ends for which 
it is provided, with the smallest possible amount of collateral evil, we 
shall here take leaye of the subject. 


VII. 


The Judicial Establishment; or Inquiry what ts the best form of the 
Agency required for giving effect to the Laws.—Securities for the 
intellectual Endowments of the Judge.—Securities for the moral 
Qualities of the Judge. 


We have now seen the whole of the operations to be performed. The 
parties are received to state before the judge the investitive or divestitive 
facts on which they rely. If they state, for this purpose, a fact which is 
not possessed of those qualities, they are immediately told that it is not 
possessed of them, and not calculated to support their claim, They 
come, by twa, or three steps, at the longest, to a fact upon which the 
question ultimately turns; and which is either contested, or not con- 
tested. In a great many cases it would not be contested. When the 
subject was stript of disguise, the party who had no right, would 
generally see that he had no hope, and would acquiesce. ‘Lhe suit 
would thus be terminated without the adduction of evidence. When it 
was not, the cases would be frequent in which it might be terminated by 
the evidence which the parties brought along with them. In these 
cases, also, the first hearing would suffice. A vast majority of the 
whole number of suits would be included in these two sets of cases. 
For the decision of a vast majority, therefore, of the whole number of 
suits, a few minutes would suffice. When all the evidence could not be 
forthcoming at the first hearing, and only then, would a second hearing 
be required. In this mode of proceeding, justice would be, that with- 
out which it is not justice, expeditious and cheap. 

In all this there is nothing which one man, with the appropriate intel- 
lectual and moral qualities, is not as competent to perform as any 
number of men. As one man is cheaper than any greater number, that 
is one reason why no more than one judge should be allowed to one 
tribunal. 

The next object of inquiry is, to ascertain what securities can be pro- 
vided that those who are entrusted with the business of judicature shall 
possess the requisite intellectual and moral endowments. 

The intellectual endowments depend upon those who have the power 
of choosing and of dismissing the judges: and who do or do not appoint 
men whose knowledge and capacity are ascertained. The moral be- 
haviour of the judges depends upon the interests which act upon them 
in the situation in which they are placed. 

Into the question, who should have the appointment of the judges, we 
do not intend to enter, The answer would be different under different 
forms of government; and this is not the place to compare the different 
forms of government, either for this or any other of the ends of its in- 


37 


stitution. One thing only we shall state, because it carries its evidence 
along with it. Those who appoint the judges ought to have no interest 
contrary to the best administration of justice. 

As the uprightness of the judge is assailed by interests inseparable 
from his situation ; viz. the profit which he may derive from misdecision, 
it is necessary to counterbalance them by opposite interests, assuming 
the character of securities. Several of the securities, which we have 
already seen applying to the situation of wiiness, apply also to the situa- 
tion of judge: Some are peculiar to each. The following is the list of 
those which apply to the situation of judge. 

1, Punishment. 

2. Shame. 

3. Publicity. 

4. Writing, for the sake of accuracy and permanence. 

5. Singleness of the functionary, 

6. Appeal. 

For the Punishment of the several. kinds of judicial offences, pro- 
vision ought to be made in the penal code. 

In the case of the judge there is particular occasion to point accu- 
rately, and to strengthen to the utmost, the operation of Shame; for in 
the situation of judge it is possible to be guilty of offences very numerous 
and very serious, without permitting so much of evidence to attach to 
any definite act, as would suffice to form a ground for punishment. 

The great instrument for the application of shame is Publicity. The 
importance of publicity, therefore, is paramount. It is not only the 
great instrument for creating and applying the moral sanction, the appro- 
bation and disapprobation of mankind; but it is of essential service 
towards the application of punishment, by making known the occasions 
on which it is deserved. It is not only a great security in itself, but it is 
the principle of life and strength to all other securities. 

All other publicity is feeble and of little worth compared with that of 
the Press. Not only, therefore, ought this to be allowed to operate with 
its utmost force upon the judge, but effectual provision ought to be 
made to cause it to operate upon him with its utmost force. Not only 
ought the judgment hall to be rendered as convenient as possible for the 
reception of the public; not only ought the greatest freedom to be 
enjoyed in publishing the proceedings of the judge; and in publishing 
all manuer of observations upon them, favourable or unfavourable ; but 
measures ought to be taken to make a public, and to produce publica- 
tion, where there is any chance that a voluntary public, and voluntary 
publication, would be wanting. For this purpose, unless other very im- 
portant considerations intervene, the judgment seat should always be in 
that place, within the district to which it belongs, where the most 
numerous and intelligeut public, and the best means of publication, are 
to be had. = : 

In England, where there is no definition of libel, and where the judges, 


58 


therefore, are allowed to punish, under the name of libel, whatever 
writing they do not like, the publishing of unfavourable observations on 
the conduct of a judge—nay, in some instances, and these the highest in 
importance, the simple report of his proceedings—rs treated as one of 
the most heinous of all possible offences. No wonder! Allow judges, 
or allow any men, to frame laws, and they will frame them, if they can, 
to answer their own purposes. Who would not, if he could, make a law 
to protect himself from censure? More especially if he were a man dis- 
posed to act in such a way as to deserve censure? | ; 

Would you allow falsehood to be published against the judge? The 
word falsehood is here ambiguous. It means both erroneous opinions, 
and false statements with regard to fact. Erroneous opinions we would 
undoubtedly permit, because we know no standard for ascertaining them, 
other than that which is afforded by public discussion; and because this 
is an adequate remedy for all the evil which erroneous opinions have any 
tendency to produce. Affirmation of facts injurious to the judge, if 
false, and made without reasonable grounds for having been believed to 
be true, we would prevent. 

Allow facts, injurious to the judge, to be published, even when true ; 
allow comments, unfavourable to the judge, to be made upon his actions, 
you discredit the administration of justice. Discredit the administration 
of justice, to which the people are resorting every day for the greatest of 
all possible benefits, protection from injury! As well talk of discrediting 
the business of a bread-baker, a meat-seller, if the fraudulent dealer is 
exposed to the censures of the public! Discredit the administration of 
justice, indeed, by taking measures of security against the vices of judges, 
indispensable for its perfection! 

The importance of recording, in permanent characters, what takes 
place before the judge, we must content ourselves with assuming. We 
may do so, it is presumed, with propriety, on account of the facility with 
which the reasons present themselves. We must also leave it to our 
readers to draw the line of distinction between the occasions on which it 
is requisite, and the occasions on which it may be dispensed with; the 
occasions, for example, where every thing is simple and clear, and all 
parties are satisfied. 

It is a great security, both for diligent and for upright conduct in the 
judge, that he occupy singly the judgment seat, When a man knows 
that the whole credit and reward of what is done well; the whole 
punishment and disgrace of what is done ill, will belong to himself, the 
motive to good conduct is exceedingly increased. When a man hopes 
that he can shufHe off the blame of negligence, the blame of unfairness, 
or fix a part of it on another, the uncertainty of the punishment 
Operates, as we have already seen, to the diminution, and almost to the 
extinction, of its preventive force. Certain common, and even proverbial 
expressions, mark the general experience of that indifference, with which 
a duty, that belongs in common to many, is apt to be performed, What 


39 


is every body’s business is nobody’s, ‘This is as true in the family as in 
the state ; as true in judicature as in ordinary life. Much remains to be 
said upon this topic, which is one of great importance ; but we must 
pass to the next. 

_ Of the use of appeal, as a security against the misconduct of the 
Judge, there is the less occasion to adduce any proof, because it seems to 
be fully recognized by the practice of nations. 

} One thing, however, which is not recognized hy that practice, is, that, 
if it is necessary in any one sort of causes, so it is in every other, without 
exception. Not a single reason can be given why it should exist in one 
set of cases, which is not equally strong to prove that it should exist in 
any other. 

It is instructive to observe the cases in which it has been supposed 
that it ought to exist, and the cases in which it has been supposed that it 
might be omitted. The cases in which it has been thought necessary, 
are those which concern property of considerable value. Those in 
which it has been dispensed with are those which concern property of in- 
considerable value. ‘The first set of cases are those which are of im- 
portance to the aristocratical class ; the second are those which are of no 
Importance to that class, It is the aristocratical class who have made 
the laws; they have accordingly declared that the suits which were im- 
portant to them should-have the benefit of appeal; the suits not important 
to them should not have the benefit of appeal. 

We recognize only one standard of importance; namely, influence 
upon human happiness and misery. ‘The small sum of money for 
which the suit of the poor man is instituted is commonly of much greater 
importance to him, than the larger sum for which the suit of the rich man 
is instituted is to the rich. Again, for one rich man there are thousands 
and thousands of poor. In the calculation, then, of perfect bene- 
volence, the suits for the small sums are not, as in the calculation of 
perfect aristocracy, those of the least, or rather no importance; they are 
of ten thousand times greater importance than the suits for the largest 
sums. 

If an appeal ought to be had, how many stages should there be of 
appeal? This question, we imagine, is easily answered. If you go for 
a second judgment, you should, if possible, go to the very best source : 
and if you go at once to the best source, why go any farther? 

What is required to be done, in the case of an appeal, is the first thing 
which deserves to be ascertained. An appeal takes place in consequence 
of a complaint against the previous judge. Where no complaint, there 
is no appeal, nor place for appeal. 

A complaint against the judge must relate to his conduct, either at the 
first, the second, or the third stage, of the judicial opevations. 

If to his conduct at the first stage, it must be a complaint of his having 
permitted a party to rest upon a fact which had not the investitive or 
divestitive quality ascribed to it; and this implies either a mistake with 


40 


respect to the law, or that he allowed the decision to turn upon a fact 
which did not embrace the merits of the question. It is evident, that for 
the decision of this question, all that is necessary is an exact transcription 
of the pleadings, and transmission of them to the court of appeal. 

If the complaint relates to his conduct at the second stage, it must 
turn upon one of two points; either that he did not take all the evidence, 
or that he did not properly determine its value. 

If he did not take the evidence properly, by a failure either in 
assembling the sources of it, or in extracting it from them when assembled, 
the proper remedy is to send back the cause to him, with an order to him 
to supply the omission; or, if he be suspected of having failed wilfully, 
to send it to the judge of one of the neighbouring districts, to retake the 
evidence and decide. : 

If the complaint relates to a wrong estimate of the evidence, the state- 
ment of it, transmitted to the court of appeal, with the reasons assigned 
by the judge for the value affixed to every portion of it, will enable the 
appellate court to decide. 

With regard to the third stage, the only complaint there can be is, that 
the judge has not taken measures to execute his own sentence. If any in- 
quiry is in this case to be made, the proper course is, that the appellate 
court refer it to one of the neighbouring judges. When a simple act is 
to be done, the proper order is to be dispatched, and the proper penal- 
ties for nou-performance exacted, 

It thus appears, that for every thing which is required to be done by 
the appellate judicature, nothing whatsoever is required, as a foundation, 
but certain papers. “The presence is not required, either of parties or of 
witnesses. 

As it is of no great consequence, in a country in which the means of 
communication are tolerably provided, whether papers have to be trans- 
mitted 50 or 500 miles, the distance, even though considerable, of the 
seat of the appellate jurisdiction is a matter of very little importance. 
The object, ihen, is to get the best seat; that is, the best public. The 
best public, generally speaking, is in the capital. ‘The capital, then, is 
the proper seat of all appellate jurisdiction. And that there should be 
one judge, and one judge only, in each court of appeal, is proved by 
exactly the same reasons, as those which apply to the courts of primary 
jurisdiction. 

The question how many courts there should be, as well of primary as 
of appellate jurisdiction, is to be determined by one thing, and one 
thing only; namely, the need there is for them. The number of the 
courts of primary jurisdiction must be determined, in some 1stances, by 
the number of sujts; in some, by local extent. ‘To render justice suf- 
ficiently accessible, the distance from the seat of judicature must not be 
great, though the number of accruing suits, either from the paucity or 
from the good conduct of the people, should be ever so small. 

As the jucigment seat should never be empty, for the need of staying 


Al 


injustice is not confined to times and seasons, and as one judge may be 
sometimes ill, sometimes called to a distance even by the duties of his 
office, provision ought to be made for supplying his place. For this 
purpose the proper expedient is a deputy. ‘That the deputy should well 
perform his duty, the best security is, that he should be chosen and 
employed by the judge, the judge being responsible for the acts of the 
deputy, as his own. Whatever it be, which the judge cannot do, or can- 
not conveniently do, in that he may employ his deputy. If there is a 
great influx of causes, the deputy may be employed in some of the 
least complex and difficult. If there is any business, not of first-rate im- 
portance, requiring the presence of the judge at a distance, the delegation 
of the deputy or deputies is the proper resource. 

Besides the judge and his deputy, there are two adjuncts to every tri- 
bunal, which are of the utmost importance ; indispensable, indeed, to 
the due administration of justice. These are, a pursuer-general, and a 
defender-general. ‘The business of both pursuer-general, and defender- 
general is, to reclaim the execution of all laws in the execution of which 
the nation has a peculiar interest, though individuals may not. ‘The pe- 
culiar business of the pursuer-general is, to act on behalf of the adminis- 
trative authority, in its character of plaintiff, and on behalf of every plain- 
tiff who is without the means of engaging another advocate; to obviate 
any prejudice he sees likely to arise to justice from the conduct of plain- 
tiffs, whether in civil matters or penal; and to perform, in the case of all 
offences, where no private prosecutor appears, the office of prosecutor. 
The peculiar duty of the defender-general is, to act on behalf of the ad- 
ministrative authority in its capacity of defendant, and on behalf of every 
defendant who has not the means of engaging another advocate, and to 
obviate any prejudice he sees likely to result to justice from want of skill 
or other causes on the part of a defendant who pleads his own cause, or 
on the part of the advocate who pleads it for him. 

The courts of appeal, though all seated in the metropolis, ought to be 
as numerous as the speedy hearing of all the appeals which come to 
them requires. The fudges of appeal ought all to be chosen from the 
judges of primary jurisdiction, not only on account of the education and 
the experience received, but as a step of promotion, and a proper motive 
to acquire the requisite education, and to merit approbation in the infe- 
rior employment. There is the same propriety, and for the same reason, 
in choosing the judges of primary jurisdiction from the deputies. 


(EF. F.) 


ni 


"=~; 
eae atl Ge nt 
7 ae we 


> Bl 
ire Pee = a = - 


i 


av 
“~ 
iase’ Py Ue 
lige 265 


an e* 7 
parte! ae is 


14) ty ‘3 7 an bes ThA 
etic st i 


THE ARTICLE 
LIBERTY OF THE PRESS, 


REPRINTED FROM 
THE SUPPLEMENT 


TO THE 


ENCYCLOPEDIA BRITANNICA. 


LLTTMA any 


- 
F435 FE GAT AG ‘ae 


LIBERTY OF THE PRESS. 


iF 


Nature and Objects of the Inquiry. 


THE task of pointing out which of the acts, capable of being com- 
~~ mitted by the press, it would be expedient to prohibit under peual- 
ties, we trust will be found to be greatly diminished, by what we have 
already established in the articles GovERNMENT and JURISPRUDENCE. 

There is scarcely a right, for the violation of which, scarcely an 
operation of government, for the disturbance of which the press may 
not be employed as an instrument. ‘The offences capable of being com- 
mitted by the press are indeed nearly co-extensive with the whole field 
of delinquency. 

It is not, however, necessary to give a separate definition of every 
such violation or disturbance, when committed by the press; for that 
would be to write the penal code a second time; first describing each 
offence as it appears in ordinary cases; and then describing it anew for 
the case in which the press is the particular instrument. 

If, for the prevention of the violation of rights, it were necessary to give a 
separate definition, on account of every instrument which might be em- 
ployed as a means of producing the several violations, the penal code would 
be endless. In general, the instrument or means is an immaterial circum- 
stance. The violation itself, and the degree of alarm which may attend 
it, are the principle objects of consideration. If a man is put in fear of 
his life, and robbed of his purse, it is of no consequence whether he is 
threatened with a pistol or with a sword. In the definition of a theft, 
of a fraud, or a murder, it is not necessary to include an account of all 
the sorts of means by which these injuries may be perpetrated. It is 
sufficient if the injury itself is accurately described. The object is to 
prevent the injury, not merely when produced by one sort of means or 
another sort of means, but by any means. 

From these illustrations, it sufficiently appears, that, if an accurate 
penal code were composed, defining the violations of nghts, and the dis- 


4 


turbances of the operations of government, to which penalties were to 
be annexed, every offence, capable of being committed by the press, 
would be defined without mentioning the press. It is no less evident, 
that if we include in the term /ibel, as, to the great encouragement of 
confusion, is generally done, all the offences capable of being Se 
by the press, we include in the definition of libel all the definitions o 
the penal code. a8 

As far as Persons and Property are concerned, the general definition 
of the acts by which rights are liable to be violated, has always been held 
sufficient; and has been regarded as including not less the cases in 
which the instrumentality of the press has been employed, than those in 
which any other means have been employed to the same end. Nobody 
ever thought of a particular law for restraining the press on account of 
the cases in which it may have been rendered subservient to the perpe- 
tration-of a murder or a theft. It is enough that a law is made to punish 
him who has been guilty of the murder or theft, whether he has employed 
the press or any thing else as the means for accomplishing his end. 

There can be no doubt, however, that the press 1s an instrument 
peculiarly adapted for the commission of injuries against Reputation, and 
for effecting disturbance to the operations of Government, while it has 
no peculiar adaptation for the commission of other offences. Here, too, 
there is the greatest disposition to restrain the press within improper 
limits. It is demanded of us, therefore, upon this-part of the subject, 
to enter into greater detail. 

We are then to inquire, in the first place, what are the acts of the 
press with respect to private reputation? and next, what are the acts 
with respect to government, which it is desirable that punishment should 
be employed to restrain? 


es 


LE 


Offences of the Press with respect to Private Rights. 


Agreeably to the principles which have been already considered in the 
article JURISPRUDENCE, no act can be regarded as an offence with re- 
spect to an individual, which is not a violation of some of his rights. * 

In considering the rights which ought to be established with respect to 
reputation, one proposition may be assumed; That every man should be 
considered as having a right to the character which he deserves ; that is, 
to be spoken of according to his actions. 


Such Offences should be defined. 


In what manner the definition of this right, which would form a part 


* In the description which follows of that violation of rights which is most liable to 
be committed by the press, and of the mode in which it ought to be treated, the deve- 
lopements presented in the article JurtsPRUDENCE are understood to be in the mind of 
the reader; if they are not, the yery brief exposition here given will not be understood. 


5 


of the civil code, should be expressed, is not now the question; it is 
evident there is no peculiar difficulty in the matter. As words, not 
thoughts, are the object of legal cognizance, the right can only have 
fespect to security against certain words; words, imputing to the indi- 
vidual, actions which he has not performed, or a disposition to certain 
actions, without evidence that such a disposition exists. 

Suppose that one man has instituted a suit against another, for the 
offence of having violated, through the press, his right to some part of 
the reputation which he deserves. In his ground of complaint he must 
affirm that the man has imputed to him either the performance of actions 
which he did not commit, or a disposition to certain actions, where no 
evidence of such disposition can be given. 

The words are produced; and the first question is, whether they do 
or do not impute the actions which, in the complaint, or bill of accu- 
sation, they are alleged to impute? 

It is to be observed, that they who oppose the attempt to define the 
offences, which, for shortness, we call the offences of the press, make 
use of such occasions, as this, to raise their objections. How, they ask, 
can all the forms of expression be defined, by which the imputation of 
such and such actions may be, either more openly, or more covertly, 
conveyed? 

It is. very evident that the question, on such an occasion, whether the 
words do or do not impute such or such actions, is a question of fact. 
The law says, that such and such actions shall not be imputed, defining 
the actions. Whether such and such a man has imputed such actions, 
and whether by one set of words, or another set of words, are questions 
of fact. 

The law, when it said that such and such acts should not be imputed 
to a man, could not determine whether A, who is accused by B, of 
having imputed to him one of those acts, did so, or not. That 1s to be 
determined by evidence, bearing upon the point. One, and in general 
the main article of that evidence, are the words which have been used. 
What is the import of these words; or, which comes to the same thing, 
what is the degree of proof involved in them, is to be determined, as all 
questions respecting the weight of evidence are, in each instance, to be 
determined, by the tribunal before which the accusation is brought. The 
interpretation of words rests upon the same footing it this, as in all other 
cases, that, for example, of a Will. The law determines, that what- 
soever disposition a man has made with respect to his property, shall take 
effect after his death. But whether A has left his manor of Dale to B, 
is a matter of fact to be determined by evidence applying to that parti- 
cular point; principally by that arising from the words of the will. 

It may still be argued, by persons who do not easily renounce an 
opinion to which they have once given their support, that the actions, the 
imputation of which, the legislature means to prohibit, cannot be defined. 

But this is a position which cannot long be maintained. 

It is hurtful to a man, if he is believed to have committed some 


6 


actions, or to have a disposition to commit them; it is not hurtful in the 
case of others. Evidently it is by imputation of the first sort alone, that 
any right with respect to reputation can be infringed. 

‘The acts, which a man receives injury from being believed to have 
committed, or to be disposed to commit, are either those to which the 
law has annexed penalties, or those to which the penalties of public 
disrepute and dislike are annexed. 

With respect to those acts to which the Jaw has annexed penalties, as 
theft, murder, perjury, and so on, it will not be pretended that there is 
any difficulty ; the law has already defined them, or ought to define them, 
and they may be marked with perfect precision by a few words. 

Those acts which it is hurtful to a man, solely on account of the dis- 
repute and dislike which they produce, ta have it believed that he has 
committed them, may also be with sufficient accuracy determined. 


Compensation should be made to the individual for injuries sustained 
by Offences of the Press. 


The ends to be attained by punishment are, Reparation to the indi- 
vidual to whom injury has been done, and Prevention of similar acts in 
future. 

In the idea of all punishment, effectual reparation to the injured indi+ 
vidual is a necessary and essential ingredient. Suppose, then, it were 
declared by the legislature, that every imputation to a man of acts which 
bring the evil of dislike and disrepute upon him who bas committed them, 
that is, every false imputation, shall be punished at least by reparation 
to be made to the party injured; the term evil is to this purpose per- 
fectly precise. It would remain with the complainant to show what kind 
and degree of injury he had received; which 1s a matter of fact, to be 
estimated, in each instance, from the evidence adduced, by the tribunal 
before which the question is brought. If the injury sustained is a pecu- 
niary injury, the question coincides exactly with the question of damages, 
decided regularly, in English courts, as a question of fact, by the jury. 

Injuries of the kind which we are now considering can affeet a man 
only in two ways; either, by lessening the pecuniary:value which he 
might otherwise have enjoyed ; or, by lessening the marks of respect and 
affection which he would otherwise have received. What the loss is, in 
this latter instance,*is also evidently a question of fact. It has nothing, 
therefore, to do with the legal definition of the offence, the business of 
the legislature. It is a question, which, like all other questions of fact, 
must of necessity be determined upon evidence by the tribunal before 
which it is brought. It is no doubt a question of delicacy, and con- 
siderable difficulty, because the evidence must often consist of very fine 
and minute circumstances, which can seldom be precisely ascertained. 
But this is not the only class of judicial questions, the determination of 
which depends upon such evidence as it is very difficult accurately to 
collect and to weigh. What is of greatest importance, on this occasion 
tu remark is, that all the difficulty lies in the matter of fact. There is no 


7 


doubt or obscurity in the law, which says, that whatsoever hurt a man has 
sustamed through actions or dispositions falsely imputed to him, he shall 
receive compensation for. Difficulties, however, arising either from the 
complexity of the matter of fact, or the obscurity of the evidence, no 
legislative enactments can prevent. These are confided to the skill and 
integrity of the judge. 

‘The compensation which. ought to be made to a man for the 
diminution of those marks of respect and affection which he would 
otherwise have received, is a question for the legislature. Let us 
suppose that a soldier has been accused of cowardice, in such a man- 
ner as to create a general belief of the truth of the accusation; that a 
man of honour has been accused of mendacity, or of some of those irre- 
gular propensities to which the horror of the public is attached; it is evi- 
dent that money is not, in such cases, an appropriate compensation. 

When a man, through the offence of another, has been deprived of a 
certain amount of money, or of money’s worth, we say that he has received 
compensation, when he is placed in the same situation in which he would 
have been, if the offence had never taken place. 

According to this idea of compensation, a man, against whom an 
unfayourable opinion has been created, by the act of another man, has 
received compensation, when he is placed in the same situation with 
regard to the opinion of those with whom he is connected, as if that act 
had not taken place. This, therefore, is the object which it ought to be 
the endeavour of the legislature to effect. 

One expedient is perfectly appropriate. It is, that the man who has 
falsely propagated an unfavourable opinion with respect to another, 
should be made to do whatever is in his power to remove the impression 
he has made. ‘To this end, he should publish the sentence of the judge, 
declaring that the action, or disposition which he had imputed to the indi- 
vidual injured, he had imputed to him falsely. He should at least be 
made to publish it in every way in which he had published the impu- 
tation. Frequently a more extensive publication might be required. 

In most cases, it will be allowed, that thus much would suffice. It 
may, however, be affirmed, that often the impression would be too pro- 
foundly struck, to be effaced by a mere knowledge of the sentence of the 
judge. In such cases, something more in the way of compensation 
would be required. On this, it is of importance to be observed, that if 
the impression produced by an imputation, which, after solemn inquiry, 
the judge has declared to be false, should not, by that declaration, be 
completely effaced, it implies necessarily one of two things; either that 
the public have evidence of the truth of the accusation, which was not 
adduced to the judge, and then the remaining impression is not owing 
to the imputation which the judge has condemned, but to the evidence ; 
or, secondly, that the public mind is in a state of gross ignorance and 
imbecility, capable of forming opinions, even on the clearest subjects, 
not only not according to evidence, but in opposition to it. If the 
public mind, however, is in such a deplorable condition, it is the fault 


8 


of the legislature; and for the rectitication of this evil, the best course 
undoubtedly is, to take effectual measures for the instruction of the 
people, which instruction would soon place them beyond the danger of 
such delusions. In the mean time, if something more than the publi- 
cation of the sentence of the judge were necessary to restore a man to 
that degree of consideration, of which the false imputation had deprived 
him, governments have numerous ways of raising the consequence of 
individuals; and no legislature would be at a loss for a gradation of 
expedients suited to the scale of demand. 


Means which should be used for preventing the violation of Rights 
by the Press. 


We have now illustrated that part of this question which regards com- 
pensation to the injured individual. It remains to inquire what is best 
to be done in this case, for the attainment of the other object of punish- 
ment, namely, the prevention of similar offences in time to come. 

To devise a punishment sufficient to prevent an offence, is to provide 
a motive sufficient to counteract the motive which leads to the offence. 
We have hence to consider what are the motives by which men are 
incited to make false imputations on the characters of others. 

These motives may be of three different sorts. A man may derive 
pecuniary profit, he may derive comparative distinction, or he may 
satisfy his desire of vengeance, by blackening the character of his 
neighbour. 

In the case in which a man has by calumny wrongfully intercepted the 
pecuniary receipts of his neighbour, the obligation of making satisfaction 
to the party injured would, it is obvious, alone suffice, provided the 
machinery of the laws were sufficiently perfect, to render the execution 
of them certain. Seldom would any man calumniate his neighbour, for 
the sake of placing £20 in his own pocket, if he were sure that, next day, 
or next week, he would have to restore it, with all the profit which might 
have been made by the use of it, and with the disgrace besides of having 
committed an action which other men abhor. 

Sometimes, however, a man may derive pecuniary profit from calum- 
niating persons whom he has not by that means deprived of any pecu- 
niary advantage; by the sale, for example, of a slanderous publication ; 
when the satisfaction due to the individual may not be of a nature to 
counteract the motive which leads to the offence. The expedient in this 
case, also, is sufficiently obvious, and sufficiently simple. It is necessary 
to ascertain the whole of the gain which has been made by the offender, 
and to take it away from him. ‘This, together with the satisfaction which 
he ought to make to the injured individual, would, if it were certain, 
create a surplus of motive to abstain from the injurious act. 

In both of these cases, if the execution of the law is uncertain, an 
additional punishment may be necessary, sufficient to compensate for the 
chance of escape. The allowance to be made on this score must depend 
upon the imperfection of the laws; while one important fact is to be kept 


9 


mi remembrance, that as a severity of punishment, beyond a certain 
point, is increased, certainty of execution is diminished. ‘The true 
expedient, therefore, is to render the machinery of the laws so perfect, 
that the penalties which they denounce may always be sure of execution ; 
and then hardly any thing beyond compensation to the individual, and the 
abstraction of any additional gain which might have been made by the 
propagation of slander, would be necessary: to repress all offences 
against the reputation of others, to which the motive was constituted by 
pecuniary gain. 

The two remaining cases are still more simple. If a man propagates 
a falsehood, for the sake of injuring the character of a man by whom his 
own consideration is eclipsed, it is only when he expects to obtain by 
that nieans a permanent advantage. If he knows that immediately the 
law will take its hold upon him; that he will be compelled to re-elevate 
the character of his neighbour, and to proclaim his own disgrace, he will 
see that, to attempt depressing the character of another mau by calumny, 
is the very worst of all expedients, for giving a comparative elevation to 
his own. ‘The same is the result in the case where vengeance constitutes 
the motive to injure the reputation of another. ‘To render this propo- 
sition manifest, the most obvious illustration will suffice. No man, to 
gratify his malignity to another person, would kill his ox or his ass, pro- 
vided he were sure that immediately he would be obliged to make him 
full satisfaction; awd instead of injuring the man whom he hated, to 
injure only himself. No, the rudeness and inefficacy of the law, holding 
éut a chance of escaping the duty of making reparation, is the sole origi 
and cause of all offences of this description ; and if the law were placed 
in a state but-approaching perfection, hardly any thing beside the obli- 
gation of making satisfaction would be necessary to repress the whole of 
this order of crimes. 


Whether any Imputation by which Truth is not violated, should be 
considered an Offence by the Press. 


We have now made considerable progress in this important inquiry. 
We have ascertained, we think, with sufficient evidence, all that 1s 
necessary to be done for preventing injuries to the reputation of indi- 
viduals; provided the rights of reputation are, by the civil code, not 
made to extend beyond the boundaries of truth. Whether or not they 
ought to extend farther, and individuals ought to be protected from the 
disclosure of acts which they may have committed, is, we confess, a 
question highly worthy of solution; upon which, therefore, before we 
proceed to any of the subsequent topics, we shall offer the following 
reflections. 

There can be no doubt that the feelings of the individual may beas pain- 
ful, where actions of a disreputable nature are, truly, as where they are 
falsely, imputed to him. It is equally certain, that no painful feelings 
ought to be wilfully excited in any man, where no good, sufficient. to 
everbalance hat evil, is its natural consequence. 


10 


We-have already shown, that reputation is injured by the imputation 
of acts of two different descriptions; first, those to which the law an- 
nexes penalties; secondly, those to which disrepute and the dislike of 
others are annexed. 

With respect to those acts to which the law annexes penalties, there 
is no room for uncertainty or dispute. Unless the law is a bad law, 
which ought to be repealed (this, we confess, constitutes an exception, 
and one, which, in very imperfect codes, extends a great way), the law 
ought not to be disappointed of its execution. The man who gives 
mformation against a murderer, or a thief, by the press, or without the 
press, renders.a public service, and deserves not punishment but reward. 

It appears, therefore, that the question, whether a man ought to be 
protected from the imputation of actions which he has really comiitted, 
refers solely to those acts which, without being punishable by the law, 
are attended with disrepute; acts, in-other words, which the members of 
the society disapprove and dislike. 

The prospect of the immediate and public exposure of all acts of this 
description, would be a most effectual expedient to prevent their being 
committed. Men would obtain the habit of abstaming from them, and 
would feel it as little painful to abstain, as at present it is to any well 
educated person to keep from theft, or those acts which constitute the 
it mamners of the vulgar. The fable of Momus has always been un- 
derstood to carry an important moral. He foundhgrievous fault that a 
window had not been placed in the breast of every man, by which, not 
bis actions alone, but his thoughts, might have been known. ‘lhe mag- 
aanimity of that Roman has been highly applauded, who not only placed 
his residence in such a situation that his fellow-citizens might see as much 
as possible of bis actions, but declared a wish that he could open to all 
eyes his breast as well as his house. 

If the hatred and contempt of the people, therefore, were always rightly 
directed, and nghtly proportioned ; if they never operated against any 
actions but those which were hurtful, either to the individual Inmself, or 
to others, and never, but in the degree in which they were hurtful, the 
case would be clear; the advantage which would be derived from the 
true exposure of any man’s actions of any sort, would exceed beyond 
calculation the attendant evil. ‘The great difficulty of insuring the 
pructice of morality, in those numerous and highly important cases, to 
which the legal sanction, or the security of pains and penalties does not 
extend, consists in the wast of a motive always present, and powerful 
enough to counteract the instant motive which urges to the instant offence. 
That motive almost every man would derive from the knowledge that he 
had the eyes upon him of all those, the good opinion of whom it was his 
interest to preserve ; that no immoral act of kis would escape their ob- 
servation, and a proportionate share of theirhatred and contempt. It isin 
this view that the aid of region has been sometimes regarded as of import- 
ance to morality; suggesting the idea of a high and constant obseryer. 
All motives, however, are feeble, in proportion as the pains and pleasures 


1] 


upon which they depend are distant, vague, or uncertain. Divines agree 
with all other men ia complaining of the trifling effect of religious 
motives upon the lives of the greater number of men. From the nature 
of the prospect on which these motives depend, they could not be less 
feeble than they have been thus described. ‘The case is not the same 
with the motives arising from the sentiments which we know we. shall 
inspire in the breasts of our fellaw-creatures. It is a matter of daily and 
incontrovertible experience, that these are among the most powerful 
which operate upon the human mind, The soldier rushes upon death, 
and endures all the hardships and toils of his cruel profession, that be 
may enjoy the admiration, and escape the contempt of his fellow men. 
On what else is founded the greate: part of all human pursuits? Haw 
few, even of those who toil at the meanest occupations, but exert them- 
selves to have something for show, something to make an impression 
upon the eyes of those who surround them? ‘The very subject of the 
present inquiry derives from this source the whole of its importance, ‘The 
value of reputation is, indeed, but another name for the value which we 
attach to the favourable and unfavourable sentiments of our fellow men, 

It is, however, true, that their unfavourable sentintents do not always 
fall where they ought, and this, we confess, is a consideration of the 
highest importance, It very often happens that men’s antipathies are 
excited te actions from which no ¢vil ensues, either to him whe performs 
them, or to any body else. If any mau derives a pleasure from such 
actions, it is to limit his sphere of innocent enjoyment, to debar bim 
from them. And if the press exposes him to the antipathies, the hatred, 
and contempt of his fellow-creatures, on account of those actions, i pro- 
duces an evil, uncompensated by the smallest portion of good. “Fo an 
Indian Brahmen, if he were known to have eaten, even when staryiug, 
a morsel of food which had been prepared by a Christian, the conse- 
quences would be dreadful. Where the Roman Catholic religion 
is in vigour, a man who should indulge himself in animal food on forbidden 
days would be regarded with horror. The use of wine, bowever mode- 
rate, would render a Mahomedan execrable to the whole of his tribe. 

This misdirection of the favourable and unfavourable sentiments of 
mankind, in other words, this perversion and corruption of their meral 
sentiments, has, in by far the greater number of instances, been the work 
of priests, contriving the means of increasing their influence, In some 
very important instances, such, for example, as the prejudices of birth, 
at one time in Eyrope so powerful as: to make men of low birth objects 
of the greatest contempt, men of elevated birth abjects of the highest 
veneration, the perversion of the moral sentiments is evidently the work 
of the aristocratical class, securing to themselves a more easy dominion 
over the rest of their fellow-creatures. 

It is, therefore, evident, that where antipathies, religious or aristo- 
cratical, should prevail, the press would be hurtfully employed in giving 
notoriety to the facts which would expose a man to the operation 
of either. 


12 


We have now ascertained the cases in which it would not be good 
that men should be protected from the declaration of truth by the press, 
and also the cases in which it would be good that they should be se 
protected. 

What, upon this view of the subject, would be desirable, is sufficiently 
clear. It would be desifable that, in the one set of cases, the decla- 
ration should be allowed, in the other it should not be allowed. Are 
the two sets of cases, however, capable of bemg accurately distinguished ? 

If the comparison is made with any attention, it will not be difficult to 
determine that the evil te be incurred by the loss of truth in the set of 
cases in which the dec!aration of it would be useful, is much greater 
than that which would arise from permitting the declaration in the cases 
in which it would be hurtful, 

In the first place, the set of cases in which the declaration would be 
useful are much more numerous, and much more important, than those 
in which, in any tolerably civilized state of society, it would be hurtful. 
Those in which it would be useful embrace the whole field of morality, 
all those acts, the performance of which, on account of their singular 
importance, has been elevated to the rank of virtues. Every, body 
believes and proclaims, that the universal practice of the moral virtues 
would ensure the highest measure of human happiness; no one doubts 
that the misery which, to so deplorable a degree, overspreads the globe, 
while men injure men, and instead of helping and benefiting, supplant, 
defraud, mislead, pillage, and oppress, one another, would thus be 
nearly exterminated, and something better than the dreams of the golden 
age would be realized upon earth. ‘Toward the attainment of this most 
desirable state of things, nothing in the world is capable of contribating 
so much as the full exercise of truth upon all immoral actions,—all 
actions, the practice of which is calculated to lessen the amount of human 
happiness. According to this view, the justice of which it is impossible 
to dispute, the evil incurred by forbidding the declaration of trath upon 
all immoral actions is incalculable. ‘That which would be incurred by 
the antipathies of misguided minds against actions innocent in themselves, 
nobody, we should imagine, would so much as think of placing iu 
comparison. 

In our own country, for example, the classes of actions which, though 
they injure nobody, expose a man to the unfavourable sentiments of 
others, are not numerous. ‘The number of persons who would be ex posed 
to inconvenience on account of the declaration of truth, in regard to theni, 
would be small in comparison with those who would benefit by its decla- 
ration, in the case of all really hurtful acts. 

It is, indeed, important to be observed, that a comparative smallness 
of number is necessarily implied in the supposition of injury from any 
unfounded antipathy. ‘Those who share in the antipathy, of course, 
abstain from the action. And unless the antipathy were so general as to 
include almost the whole of the society, it would Jose its injurious effect. 
Besides, all the injury which can be done to the individuals agaist whom 


13 


truth would in this manner operate injuriously, would be, to make them 
abstain from the acts which were thas condemned. 

Another thing to be considered is, that the whole of the evil arising 
from the exercise of truth is dependent upon. an accidental circumstance, 
capable of being removed; upon a mental disease, requiring to be cured, 
which, the legislature ought to be constantly endeavouring to cure, and 
toward the cure of which truth is likely to operate as the most effectual 
of all expedients. If any considerable inconvenience were experienced 
from exposure to unfounded antipathies, in consequence of the pab+ 
lication of truth, the groundlessness of these antipathies could not fail in 
this case to be so often canvassed, and made to appear, that at last it 
would become familiar to the multitude, and the antipathies would 
expire. 

{t clearly, therefore, appears, that, if the cases in ‘which the de- 
clasation of truth would expase to unfounded prejudices could not be 
clearly defined, and separated from the cases in whieh the declaration 
would be salutary, the rule of permitting truth ought to be universal. ‘ But 
though we perceive, that, to a considerable extent, there are cases, in 
respect to which it would be vain to hope for agreement in drawing the 
line of distinction between what is hurtful and what is not, we are per- 
suaded that principles might be laid down in which all would agree, and 
which would, serve to mark out certain cases for exception with sufficient 
exactuess. If any such cases could be separated, veither of actions 
which, though injurious to nobady, excited antipathies, or of facts, as 
those of birth, for which, though a man was in no respect worse, he 
might be regarded as worse ; the exercise of truth, with regard to them, 
might, on the express ground that they were actions innoxious, or facts 
which onglit to be of no importance in the estimate of human worth, be 
forbidden, when injurious, under the penalty of at least making repa- 
ration for ail the injury of which it had been the cause. 


LS er cee aetna EAR! 
‘th 
Offences of the Press with respect to Government. 

We have now explained, we trust, with sufficient clearness for the 
present occasion, the pritciples upon which laws should be constructed 
for protecting the rights of individuals against violations committed by 
the press. ‘The first part of this mguity therefore, we must consider as 


completed. In the second part we have to explain the principles upon 


which they should be constructed for protecting the operations of 
government, 


Exhortatiuns to obstruct the operations of Government in detail, should ; 


Exhortations to resist all the powers of Government at once should 
not, be considered offences. 


Unless a door is left open to resistance of the government, in 
the largest sense of the word, the doctrine of passive obedience is 


14 


adopted; and the consequence is, the universal prevalence of mis- 
government, ensuring the misery avd degradation of the people. On 
the other hand, unless the operations of government, instituted for 
the protection of nights, are secured from obstruction, the security 
of rights, and all the advantages dependent upon the existence of 
government, are at an end. Between these two securities, both ne- 
cessary to obtain the benefits of good government, there appears to 
be such a contrariety, that the one can only be obtained by the 
sacrifice of the other. 

As this difficulty, however, arises chiefly from the largeness of the 
terms, a close inspection of the cases which they involve, and which 
they have a tendency to confuse, will enable us to discover the course 
which it belongs to practical wisdom to pursue. 

It is necessary, first of all, to ascertain what sort of obstructions are 
inconsistent, aud what are not inconsistent, with those operations of 
government, which are necessary for the protection of rights. 

‘The application of physical force, to resist the government in apply- 
ing to the execution of the laws the physical power placed at its disposal 
by the law, is such an obstruction of the operations of government, as 
would, if frequent, render it inadequate to the ends which it 1s provided 
to secure. ‘Lhis application of force, therefore, must be treated as an 
offence; and any thing proceeding from the press, tending directly to 
produce it, as a similar offence. 

This proposition requires to be illustrated. The application of phy- 
sical force which is here described, and treated as an evil, is clearly 
distinguishable from that resistance of government which is the last 
security of the many against the misconduct of the few. ‘This is an appli- 
cation of physical force to obstruct the operations of government in 
detail; the proceedings, fer example, of a court of justice; the pro- 
ceedings of the legislative organ, or the proceedings of any of the 
administrative functionaries, in the execution of the duties with which 
they are charged, ‘This is not that species of resistance which is neces- 
sary, in the last resort, to secure the people against the abuse of the 
powers of government. ‘his last is not a resistance to the operations ef 
government in detail. It is a resistance to all the powers of govern- 
ment at once, either to withdraw them from the hands in which they 
have hitherto been deposited, or greatly to modify the terms upon which 
they are held. 

Even this last species of resistance it may be necessary to punish, at 
least in a certain degree, whenever it 1s not successful; that society may 
not be disturbed by commotions which the majority of the people dis- 
approve. ‘I’his, however, is a question which belongs to the penal code 
in general, and does not concern the inquiry into the offences capable of 
being committed by the press: because we think it may be satisfactorily 
shown, that no operation of the press, however directly exhorting to this 
species of resistance, ought to be treated as an offence. 


15 


The reason 1s, that no such exhortation can have any immediate, or 
formidable effect ; can, indeed, have any effect at all, except through 
such mediums as ought to be at all times perfectly free. Suppose that a 
work 1s published, exhorting the people in general to take arms against 
the government, for the purpose of altering it against the consent of its 
rulers. ‘The people cannot take arms against the government without 
the certainty of being immediately crushed, unless there has been already 
created a general consent. If this consent exists in such perfection as to 
want nothing to begin action but an exhortation, nothing can prevent the 
exhortation ; and forbidding it is useless. If the consent does not exist 
in nearly the last degree of perfection, a mere exhortation, read in prt, 
can have no effect which is worth regarding. In all circumstances, 
therefore, it is useless, and consequently absurd, to treat this species of 
exhortation as an offence. If, on the other hand, it were clearly recog- 
nized, that every man had a licence to exhort the people to the general 
resistance of the government, all such exhortations would become ridi- 
culous, unless on those rare and extreme occasions, on which no pro- 
hibitions, and no penalties, can or ought to prevent them. The doctrine 
of this paragraph, which will appear somewhat startling and paradoxical 
to minds accustomed only to a certain train of ideas, will receive illus- 
tration, and we trust will be amply confirmed, as we proceed. 

Having mentioned this as a grand exception, we now return to 
the cases in which not only physical force applied to obstruct the ope- 
rations of government, but the publishing of exhortations to tha 
obstruction, ought to be treated as an offence. ‘These relate solely, a8 
above remarked, to the operations of government in detail. Ob- 
structions, it is evident, may be offered to the operations in detail of a 
government which possesses and deserves the fullest confidence of the 
community at large; and the press may be employed in directly and 
efficiently exciting to these obstructions. A hand-bill, for example, 
distributed at a critical moment, and operating upon an inflamed state 
of mind, in a narrow district, may excite a mob to disturb the pro- 
ceedings of a court of justice, to obstruct public officers in the 
execution of their duties, or even to disturb, on this or that occasion, the 
deliberations of the legislature itself. 

These are clearly hurtful acts; they may be very accurately defined ; 
and penalties, of moderate severity, would be sufficient to deter from the 
performance of them. Satisfaction by the party offending to the party 
injured, would often, in offences of this description, be out of the 
question; because there would be no definite party to whom an injury 
would be occasioned. It would only be necessary to ascertain the sorts 
of motives by which such offences would be liable to be produced, and 
to apply skilfully, as in other cases, motives of an opposite tendency, 
sufficient to counteract them. This would not be more difficult in this 
than in other cases, and it is not, therefore, necessary to explain at any 
length the mode of performing it. A 

One principle is to be carefully and most religiously observed, that of 


16 


not imposing an atom of punishment for the purposes of cengearee. 
‘his is a principle, the justness and importance of which are so com- 
pletely recognized, that we might have expected to be relieved ere now 
trom the necessity of recommending attention to it. The fact, however, 
is, that so long as there are abuses in governments, so long will the men, 
who have the means of profiting by those abuses, exert themselves to 
multiply the list of offences against government, and to apply to them 
punishments of the greatest severity. a! 

Punishments for contempt of court; punishments to vindicate the 
honour of the court, of the government, of the magistracy; punish- 
ments for the support of dignity; punishments severe in proportion as 
the dignity of the party offended is supposed to be high, and so on, are 
punishments almost always applied for purposes of vengeance, or the 
protection of the instruments of abuse. ‘They are punishments, therefore, 
which will be rigidly excluded from a code which wisely and steadily 
pursues the general good. 


Of Exhortatious to obstruct the Operations of Government, in detail, 
there are two Sorts: 1, The Direct, 2. Lhe Implied. or Constructive. 


What the sort of acts are, to which the exhortations of the press ought 
not to be applied, has been so far ascertained. The next point is, to de- 
termine with accuracy what sort of exhortation it is that ought to be 
forbidden. 

To all those who profit by the abuses of government, that is more 
especially, to all those who, in a defective government, wield any of its 
powers, it is of great importance to leave as undetined as possible the 
sort of exhortation that ought to be forbidden. The point of greatest 
importance to them 1s, to keep the people at large from complaining, or 
from knowing or thinking that they have any ground of complaint. If 
this object is fully attained, they may then, without anxiety, and without 
trouble, riot in the pleasures of misrule: there is no limit to the degree 
in which the few may pursue their own agvautage at the expence of the 
many. 

There can be nothing, therefore, in which they have a greater interest, 
than preventing the press from being employed in any such way, as_ will 
lead the people to think that they have any thing, on the part of their 
rulers, of which to complain. All artifices possible will be sure to be 
employed to effect that prevention. And if it is enacted, that exhor- 
tations to acts which obstruct the operations of government in detail 
should be punished, without defining accurately what sort of exhor- 
tations, they will easily find expedients which, to a great exient, will 
accomplish their purpose. 

Under the sort of constructions which it will be their interest to apply, 
every thing which can be done by the press, to make the people know or 
believe that there is any thing in the system of their government, or the 
conduct of their rulers, of which they have to complain, may be treated 
as an exhortation to obstruct the operations of government. Of these 


17 


constructions, our experience affords innumerable examples. Does 
not the imputing of defects to the government, or miscouduct to those 
who wield the powers of government, tend to bring both “ into hatred 
and contempt?” And if the people hate and contemn the institutions 
and rulers of their country, will they not oppose their operations? ‘The 
Imputing of these faults, therefore, is it not, in essence and effect, an 
exhortation to oppose the operations of government? And are we to be 
governed, in our legislature, by the mere forms in which a set of words 
may appear, and not by our knowledge of their nature and con- 
sequences ? 

This is not only exceedingly plausible, but almost all the propositions 
which it involves are perfectly true. It is thus, therefore, the more easy 
to establish such a mode of interpreting an indefinite law of the press, 
as will prevent, or where the people cannot yet bear a total prevention, 
will go far towards preventing, whatever can lead the people to believe 
that any thing is amiss in the manner in which they are ruled. 

There are two species of exhortations, one the explicit and direct, the 
other implied and constructive. In the one, a particular act is pointed 
out, and the party, or parties, addressed, are called upon to perform it. 
In the other, certain grounds are only laid, from which the opinion of 
the addresser, that the act ought to be performed, may, with more or less 
certainty, be inferred. 

With respect to the first, there is no occasion for doubt. A direct and 
explicit exhortation to commit one of those acts, described above, as 
obstructing the operations of government in detail, should be treated as 
an offence. ‘The precise question is, whether any exhortation, which is 
only implied and constructive, should be considered an offence? In the 
answer to this question, almost every thing which relates to the use of 
the press in matters of government, will be found to be involved. 


Exhortations which are Implied and Constructive, ought not to be 
punished. 


We have already divided the subject of resistance to government into 
two parts; first, that general resistance, the object of which 13 same 
great change in the government at large; and, secondly, resistance to 
this or that of its operations in detail. 

We have already adduced an argument, which appears to us to be 
conclusive, to show, that no exhortation, whether explicit or implied, 
direct or indirect, the object or tendency of which is to produce the first 
species of resistance, ought to be subject to legal restraint. 

It is necessary here to enter a little more fully into the grounds 
of that opinion. 

We think it will appear, with sufficient evidence, that in the way of 
indirect exhortation to resistance, that is, in laying the grounds of dis- 
satisfaction with the government, there is no medium between allowing 
every thing, and allowing nothing; that the end, in short, which is 
sought to be gained, by allowing any thing to be published in censure of 


13 


the government, cannot be obtained, without leaving it perfectly free to 
publish every thing. 

The end which is sought to be obtained, by allowing any thing to be 
said in censure of the government, is, to ensure the goodness of the 
government; the most important of all the objects, to the attainment of 
which, the wisdom of man can be applied. If the goodness of 
government could be ensured by any preferable means, it is evident that 
all censure of the government ought to be prohibited. All discontent 
with the government is only good, in so far as it is a means of removing 
real cause of discontent. If there is no cause, or if there is better means 
of removing the cause, the discontent is, of course, an evil, and that 
which produces it an evil. 

So true it is, however, that the discontent of the people is the only 
means of removing the defects of vicious governments, that the freedom 
of the press, the main instrument of creating discontent, is, tm all 
civilized countries, among all but the advocates of misgovernment, 
regarded as an indispensable security, and the greatest safeguard of the 
interests of mankind. 

For what is meant by a vicious government? or wherein do the 
defects of government consist? Most assuredly they all consist in 
sacrificing the interests of the many to the interests of the few. The 
small number, in whose hands the powers of government are, in part 
directly, in part indirectly, placed, cannot fail, like other men, to have a 
greater regard for what is advantageous to themselves, than what is 
advantageous to other men. ‘They pursue, therefore, their own advan- 
tage, in preference to that of the rest of the community. That 1s 
enough. Where there is nothing to check that propensity, all the evi!s 
of misgovernment, that is, in one word, the worst evils by which human 
nature is afflicted, are the inevitable consequence. (See the article 
GovERNMENT.) 

There can be no adequate check without the freedom of the press. 
The evidence of this is irresistible. In all countries, the people either 
have a power legally and peaceably of removing their governors, or they 
have not that power. If they have not that power, they can only obtain 
very considerable ameliorations of their governments by resistance, by 
applying physical force to their rulers, or, at least, by threats so likely 
to be followed by performance, as may frighten their rulers imto com- 
pliance. But resistance, to have this effect, must be general. To be 
general, it must spring from a general conformity of opinion, and a 
general knowledge of that conformity. How is this effect to be pro- 
duced, but by some means, fully enjoyed by the people, of commu- 
nicating their sentiments to one another? Unless where the people can 
all meet in general assembly, there is no other means, known to the world, 
of attaiing this object, to be compared with the freedom of the press. 

_ Itis, uo doubt, true, that in countries where the liberty of the press 
1s unknown, evil governments are frequently overthrown. ‘This is almost 
always accomplished by the military force, revenging some grievance of 


19 


their own, or falling in with some heat and animosity of the people. 
But does it ever enable them to make a new government, in which any 
greater security is provided for their interests than there was before? In 
such cases, the people get rid of one set of rulers, whom they hate, only 
to obtain another set, with equal powers of doing them injury. 

‘There are, however, we believe, some people who say, that though 
the liberty of the press is a necessary instrument to attain good govern- 
ment, yet, if it is fairly attained, and if legal and peaceable means are 
in the hands of the people of removing their governors for mis- 
conduct;—if the people of England, for example, really chose the 
members of the House of Commons, and renewed their choice so fre- 
quently, as to have the power of removal after a short experience of 
misconduct, the freedom of the press would be unnecessary. 

So far is this from being true, that it is doubtful whether a power in 
the people of choosing their own rulers, without the liberty of the press, 
would be an advantage. 


Freedom of Censure on the Conduct of their Rulers, is necessary for the 
good of the People. 


It is perfectly clear, that all chance of advantage to the people, from 
having the choice of their rulers, depends upon their making a good 
choice. If they make a bad choice—if they elect people either inca- 
pable, or disinclined, to use well the power entrusted to them, they 
incur the same evils to which they are doomed when they are deprived 
of the due control over those by whom their affairs are administered. 

We may then ask, if there are any possible means by which the 
people can make a good choice, besides the liberty of the press? The 
very foundation of a good choice is knowledge. ‘lhe fuller and more 
perfect the knowledge, the better the chance, where all sinister interest 
is absent, of a good choice. How can the people receive the most 
perfect knowledge relative to the characters of those who present them- 
selves to their choice, but by information conveyed freely, and without 
reserve, from one to another? 

There is another use of the freedom of the press, no less deserving the 
most profound attention, that of making known the conduct of the indi- 
viduals who have been chosen. ‘This latter service is of so much 
importance, that upon it the whole value of the former depends. _ 

This is capable of being rigidly demonstrated. No benefit is obtained 
by making choice of a man who is well qualified to serve the people, and 
also well inclined to serve them, if you place him in a situation in which 
he will have preponderant motives to serve himself at their expence. 

If any set of men are chosen to wield the powers of government, 
while the people have not the means of knowing in what manner they 
discharge their duties, they will have the means of serving themselves at 
the expence of the people; and all the miseries of evil government are 
the certain consequence. i.e 

Suppose the people to choose the members of the Legislative 
Assembly, with power of rechoosing, or dismissing them, at short intervals ; 


20 


To what desirable end could these powers be exercised, without the 
liberty of the press? Suppose that any one of those whom they have 
chosen has misconducted himself, or promoted, as far as depended upon 
him, the ends of misgovernment; how are the people to know that the 
powers with which they had entrusted him had been treacherously 
employed? é 

f they do not know, they will rechoose him, and that as cordially as 
the man who has served them with the greatest fidelity. This they are 
under a deplorable necessity of doing, even to be just; for, as they know 
no difference between him and the best, it would be on their part ini- 
quity to make any. The consequences would be fatal. If one man saw 
that he might promote misrule for his own advantage, so would another ; 
so, of course, would they all. In these circumstances, we see laid the 
foundation on which, in every country, bad government is reared. On 
this foundation it is impossible that it should not be reared. When the 
causes are the same, who can expect that the effects will be different? 
It is unnecessary to dwell upon these fundamental truths, because they 
have already been developed in the article GoVERNMENT. 

Without the knowledge, then, of what is done by their representatives, 
in the use of the powers entrusted to them, the people cannot profit by 
the power of choosing them, and the advantages of good government are 
unattamable. It will not surely cost many words to satisfy all classes of 
readers that, without the free and unrestrained use of the press, the 
requisite knowledge cannot be obtained. 

That an accurate report of what is done by each of the representatives, 
a transcript of his speeches, and a statement of his propositions and 
votes, is necessary to be laid before the people, to enable them to judge 
of his conduct, nobody, we presume, will deny. This requires the use 
of the cheapest means of communication, and, we add, the free use.of 
those means. Unless every man has the liberty of publishing the pro- 
ceedings of the Legislative Assembly, the people can have no security 
that they are fairly published. If it is in the power of their rulers to per- 
mit one person, and forbid another, the people may be sure that a false 
report,—a report calculated to make them believe that they are well 
governed, when they are ill governed, will be often presented to them. 

One thing more is necessary, and so necessary, that, if it is wanting, 
the other might as well be wanting also. ‘The publication of the pro- 
ceedings tells what is done. This, however, is useless, unless a cor- 
rect judgment is passed upon what is done. 

We have brought this inquiry, then, to an important point. In the 
article GOVERNMENT, we have seen that, unless the people hold in 
their own hands an effectual power of control on the acts of their 
government, the government will be inevitably vicious: We have now 
seen, that they cannot exercise this control to any beneficial purpose 
without the means of forming a correct judgment upon the conduct of 
their representatives: We have likewise seen, that one of the means 
necessary to enable them to judge correctly of the conduct of their 
representatives, is the liberty to every body of publishing reports of 


21 


what they do. It remains to inquire, by what other acts the press can 
be made to contribute to the same desirable end. 

What is wanted is, that all the people; or as many of them as possible, 
should estimate correctly the consequences of the acts proposed or done 
by their representatives, and also that they should know what acts might 
have been proposed, if the best were not proposed, from which better 
consequences would have followed. This end would be accomplished 
most effectually, if those who are sufficiently enlightened would point 
out to those who are in danger of mistakes, the true conclusions; and 
showing the weight of evidence to be in their favour, should obtain for 
them the universal assent. 

How is this to be accomplished? In what manner are those wise 
men to be chosen? And who are to be the choosers? Directly 
the object cannot be attained. ‘There are no distinct and indubitable 
marks by which wisdom, and less by which integrity, is to be known. 
And who is to be trusted with‘the privilege of pointing them out? 
They whose judgment requires to be directed are not well qnalified to 
determine who shall direct them. And if the rulers are to choose, they 
will employ none but those who will act in conformity to their views, and 
enable them to benefit themselves by the pillage and oppression of the 
people. 

As there is no possible organ of choice, no choice whatever ought to 
be made- If no choice is to be made, every man that pleases ought to 
be allowed. All this is indubitable. ‘The consequences of denying any 
part of it are so obvious, that hardly any man, we suppose, will risk the 
Imputations to which such a denial would justly expose him. 

They who say that no choice ought to be made, say, in effect, that no 
limit whatsoever ought to be imposed upon the liberty of the press. 
The one of these propositions is involved in the other. T’o impose any 
restraint upon the liberty of the press, is undoubtedly to make a choice. 
If the restraint is imposed by the government, it is the government that 
chooses the directors of the public mind. If any government chooses 
the directors of the public mind, that government is despotic. 

Suppose that, by the restraint imposed upon the liberty of the press, 
all censure of the government is forbidden, here is undoubtedly a choice, 
The government, in this case, virtually says, ‘The people who might 
attempt the task of directing the public mind are of two sorts; one that 
of those who would censure; another that of those who wonld not 
censure; I choose the latter. ; 

Suppose that not every censure, but only such and such kinds of cen- 
sure, are forbidden ; here, again, is still a choice, while confessedly there 
is no party to whom the power of choosing for the rest can with safety 
be given. ot) 

lf not every censure, but only some censures, are to be forbidden, 
what are those to which the prohibition should extend? The answer to 
this question will elucidate nearly all that yet remains in any degree 
obscure, of the doctrine of the liberty of the press. 


ag 


It will not be said that any censure which is just sliould be forbidden ; 
because that would undoubtedly be to detract from the means of 
enabling the people to form correct judgments ; and we have, we trust, 
rendered it indisputable that no source of benefit to society is at all to be 
compared with that of correct judgments, on their government and 
its functionaries, formed by the people, and determining their actions. 

But what censures are just and what are unjust; in other words, what 
are the conclusions which ought to be formed respecting the properties 
and the acts of the government, is exactly the point to be determined. 
If you say that no man is to pass an unjust censure upon the 
government, who is to judge? It is surely unnecessary to repeat 
the proof of the proposition, that there is nobody who can safely be 
permitted to judge. The path of practical wisdom is as clear as day: 
All censures must be permitted, equally ; just, and unjust. 

Where various conclusions are formed among a number of men, 
upon a subject on which it would be unsafe, aud therefore improper, to 
give any minor portion of them a power of determining for the rest, only 
one expedient remains. Fortunately, that is an expedient, the operation 
of which is powerful, and its effects beneficial in the highest degree. 
All the conclusions which have formed themselves in the minds of 
different individuals, should be openly adduced; and the power of 
comparison and choice should be granted to all. Where there is no 
motive to attach a man to error, it is natural to him to embrace the truth; 
especially if pains are taken to adapt the explanation to his capacity. 
Every man, possessed of reason, is accustomed to weigh evidence, and 
to be guided and determined by its preponderance. When various con- 
clusions are, with their evidence, presented with equal care and with 
equal skill, there is a moral certainty, though some few may be mis- 
guided, that the greater number will judge aright, and that the greatest, 
force of evidence, wherever it is, will produce the greatest impression. 

As this is a proposition upon which every thing depends, it is happy 
that the evidence of it should be so very clear and striking. There 
is, indeed, hardly any law of human nature more generally recognized, 
wherever there is not a motive to deny its existence. ‘ To the position 
of Tully, that if Virtue could be seen, she must be loved, may be 
added,” says Dr. Johnson, “ that if Truth could be heard, she must be 
obeyed.” (Rambler, No. 87.)—‘ Je vous plains, mes Péres,” says 
Mons. Pascal to the Jesuits, “ d’avoir recours a de tels remédes. Vous 
croyez avoir la force et |’impunité: mais je crois avoir la verité, et 
Pinnocence. C’est une etrange et longue guerre que celle ou la violence 
essaie d’opprimer la verité, ‘Tous les efforts de la violence ne peuvent 
affoiblir la verité, et ne servent qu’d la relever davantage: toutes les 
lumiéres de la verité ne peuvent rien pour arréter Ja violence, et ne fout 
que lirriter encore plus. Quand Ja force combat la force, la plus 
puissante detruit la moindre: quand l’on expose les discours aux 
discours, ceux qui sont veritables et convainquants confondent et dis- 
sipent ceux qui n’ont que la vanité et le mensonge.” (Lett. Province. 


23 


12.)—*“ Reason,” says Burke, “ clearly and manfully delivered, has in 
itself a mighty force; but reason, in the mouth of legal authority, is, I 
may fauly say, irresistible.” (Lett. on Regicide Peace.) 

It is of importance to show how many of the greatest inen, of all ages 
and countries, have borue testimony to the prevalence of true over false 
conclusions, when both are fairly offered to the human mind. “ Truth,” 
says Mr. Locke, “ certainly would do well enough, if she were once 
left to shift for herself. She seldom has received, and [ fear never will 
receive, much assistance from the power of great men, to whom she is 
but rarely known, and more rarely welcome. She is not taught by laws, 
nor has she any need of force to procure her entrance into the minds of 
men.” (Letter on YVoleration.) The following is the emphatical 
language of Montesquieu: “ La raison a un empire naturel; elle a 
meme un einpire tyrannique: on lui resiste, mais cette resistance est son 
triomphe, encore un peu de temps, et l’on sera forcé de revenir a 
elle.” (hsp. de Lotz, |. 28, ch. 38.)— It is noted out of Cicero, by 
Machiavel, that the people, though they are not so prone to find 
out truth of themselves, as to follow custom, or run into error; yet 
if they be shown truth, they not only acknowledge and embrace it 
very suddenly, but are the most constant and faithful guardians and con- 
servators of it.” ( Harrington.) —“ The labour of a confutation,” says 
Chillingworth, “ I have not an any place found such labour or difficulty, 
but that it was undertakeable by a man of very mean abilities; and 
the reason is, because it is J’ruth I plead for; which is so strong 
an argument for itself, that it needs only light to discover it.” (Religion 
of Protestants.)—“ About things on which the public thinks long,” says 
Dr. Johnson, “ it commonly attains to think right.” (Life of Ad- 
dison.)— The adversary,” says Dr. Campbell, “is both subtile and 
powerful. With such an adversary, I should on very unequal terms 
enter the lists, had I not the advantage of being on the side of 
truth. And an eminent advantage this doubtless is. It requires but 
moderate abilities to speak in defence of a good cause. A good cause 
demands but a distinct exposition, and a fair hearing; and we may say, 
with great propriety, it will speak for itself. (Campbell on Miracles, 
Introd.) 

We have then arrived at the following important conclusions,— 
that there is no safety to the people in allowmg any body to 
choose opinions for them; that there are no marks by which it can 
be decided beforehand, what opinions are true and what are false; 
that there must, therefore, be equal freedom of declaring all opinions, 
both true and false; and that, when all opinions, true and false, are 
equally declared, the assent of the greater number, when their interests 
are not opposed to them, may always be expected to be given to 
the true. ‘{hese principles, the foundation of which appears to be 
impregnable, suffice for the speedy determination of every practical 
question. : 

All censure thrown upon the government, all censure thrown either 


a4 


upon the institutions of the government, or upon the conduct of any of 
the functionaries of government, supreme or subordinate, has a tendency 
to produce resistance to the government. 

Of the censures thrown upon government, some may have a tendency 
to produce resistance to the operations of government in detail; others 
that general resistance which has in view some great alteration in 
the government. ; 

Of the first sort would be any such accusation of the conduct 
and disposition of a judge, as might excite the people, whose sympathies 
were roused in favour of the individual against whom his sentence was to 
operate, to rescue him from the officers of justice. We have already 
shown that such a rescue ought to be punished, and any direct ex- 
hortation to it ought to be punished. It will now be evident, we trust, 
that no censure on the judge, though capable of being treated as an 
indirect exhortation, ought to be punished. 

The reason is conclusive. The people ought to know, if possible, 
the real qualities of the actions of those who are entrusted with any share 
in the management of their affairs. This they have no chance of 
knowing, without the unlimited power of censure upon those actions, 
both in gross and detail. ‘To see the full force of these propositons, 
it is only necessary to apply the principles which have been already 
established. 

If the people have not the means of knowing the actions of all public 
functionaries, they have no security for the good conduct even of their 
representatives. Suppose it is the duty of their representatives to watch 
the conduct of the judges, and secure the perfection of judicature, 
the people cannot know whether their representatives perform this duty, 
unless they know what the conduct of the judges is. Ignorance of this 
would of itself suffice to vitiate the government. A door would be left 
open, through which the rulers might benefit themselves at the expence 
of the people. All the profit to be made by an abuse of the power 
of justice, would thus become the profit of the representatives, by whom 
it would be allowed, and encouraged, as far as the knowledge, which 
they could not withhold from the people, would permit. 

That the people ought, therefore, to know the conduct of their 
judges, and when we say judges we mean every other functionary, 
and the more perfectly the better, may be laid down as indubitable. 
They are deprived of all trust-worthy means of knowing, if any limit 
whatsoever is placed to the power of censure. 

All censure consists in the delivery of an unfavourable opinion, with 
or without the grounds of it. This is the essence of censure. But if the 
conduct of the judge deserves that an unfavourable opinion should be 
entertained of it, the more perfectly that is known to the people, 
the better. 

The conduct of the judge, on this occasion, says a defender, does 
not deserve an unfavourable opinion: A public expression of such 
an opinion ought, therefore, to be prohibited. But there are occasions 


25 


on which the conduct of judges deserves an unfavourable opinion. 
When it is deserved, there is no security for good government, unless 
it is allowed to be made known. How can you allow an unfavourable 
Opinion to be delivered in the one case, and not delivered in the other? 
To have the benefit of it in the one case, you must submit to the 
evil of it in the other. 


In matters of Government, undeserved Praise as mischievous as 
undeserved Blame. 


As the real point of importance is, to establish correct opinions in the 
minds of the people, it is as mischievous to inculcate a favourable 
opinion, when an unfavourable is deserved, as an unfavourable when a 
favourable is deserved; and, in the eye of reason, it is incontrovertible, 
that, if the one deserves to be prevented by punishment, so does the 
other. 

But, if an unfavourable opinion is pronounced of any public 
functionary; of a judge, for example, would you have it left uncon- 
tradicted? Would you not grant the liberty of calling in question 
the truth of the allegations, and of supporting a different opinion? If 
not, the character of no public functionary would be safe, and any man, 
however deserving, might be made to appear the proper object of 
the most unfavourable sentiments. Why should not the two cases 
be treated equally? Why should not the favourable, a3 well as the 
unfavourable opinion be open to contradiction ? 

It is perfectly certain, that it is not in the power of Jaw to mark out, 
by antecedent definition, any sort of men, of whom it can say, all 
opinions favourable to such men shall be punished. It can never 
be-affirmed of any men beforchand that they will certainly perform 
such and such injurious actions. [f they do perform them, all de- 
clarations conformable with the matter of fact are good. But the 
question is, whether they have performed them? One man, affirms 
that they have. Is that to be taken for granted? And is no man 
to be allowed to affirm the contrary, and to sift the grounds upon which 
the allegations of the other man are supported? It is by weighing welk 
the evidence on both sides, that a well-founded opinion is capable 
of being formed. And it is certain, that the best security for having 
the evidence on both sides fully adduced, and the strength and weakness 
of it perfectly disclosed, is by permitting all those who are attached 
to different opinions to do what they can for the support of them. 

If it is evident that it ought not to be permitted to speak evil 
of public functionaries without limit, while any limit is put to the power 
of speaking well of them ; it is equally evident that, for the purpose of 
forming a correct opinion of their conduct, it ought not to be pernntted 
to speak well of them, and oppose any limit whatsoever to the power of 
speaking ill of them. 

It ought not to be permitted to speak evil of them without an equal 
liberty of speaking well; because, in that case, the evidence against 


26 


them might be made to appear much stronger than it was.. it ought 
not to be permitted to speak well of them without an equal liberty 
of speaking ill; because, in that case, the evidence in favour of them 
might be made to appear much greater than it really was. In either 
case, the people would be misguided, and defrauded of that moral 
knowledge of the conduct of their rulers, the paramount importance 
of which has so fully appeared. fs 

It may be said (as by the short-sighted, if we did not anticipate them, 
it would be said), that if, by limiting the power of censure, the people 
are made to judge more favourably of their rulers than they deserve, the 
evil is small; but if they are permitted to form a very unfavourable 
opinion, the consequences are alarming. 

We believe it may be rigidly demonstrated, that no evils are greater 
than those which result from a more favourable opinion of their rulers, 
on the part of the people, than their rulers deserve ; because just as far 
as that undue favour extends, bad government is secured. By an 
opinion of their rulers more favourable than they deserve, is implied 
an ignorance on the part of the people of certain acts of their 
rulers by which the people suffer. All acts by which the rulers 
have any motive to make the people suffer, are acts by which the 
rulers profit. When the ignorance of the people extends to material 
points, all the evils of bad government are secured. ‘These are the 
greatest of all possible evils. To this it will not be said that the 
ignorance of the people ought to extend. On all material points, it 
is admitted, then, that the freedom of censure ought to be complete. 
But if it is to be allowed on great points, on those where it is calculated 
to excite the greatest disapprobation; what can be thought of their 
consistency, who would restrain it on those where it is only calculated to 
excite a small? If it is proper to protect thé people from great injuries 
at the hands of their rulers, by exciting a strong, it is good to protect 
them against small injuries, by exciting a weak disapprobation. 

To public functionaries may be imputed either acts which they have 
not performed, or a want of certain qualifications, moral or intellectual, 
which they possess, 

With respect to acts, and even dispositons, which do not, either 
directly or indirectly, concern their public fuuction, the same protection 
may be safely extended to them as to private men. 

Acts in their public capacity which they have not performed, may 
be imputed to them either by mere forgery, and without any appearance 
of ground, or they may be imputed with some appearance of ground. 
From permitting the former, no good can be derived. ‘They ought, 
therefore, to be prevented, in the same way as false imputations, 
injurious to individuals in their private capacity. That there should be 
no restraint in imputing actions to any public functionary which he 
may appear to have done, flows immediately from the principles already 
established, and requires not that any thing should here be added to its 
proof. Any appearance sufficient to lay the foundation of the slightest 


27 


suspicion, renders it useful to call the attention of the public to the 
suspected part, which can only be done by making the suspicion known. 
A man may, indeed, publish, as a matter of fact, what is supported by 
appearances which would only justify the slightest suspicion. In that 
case, he is sure of incurring the disgrace of temerity, if not of malignity ; 
and this is all the penalty which needs or cau safely be inflicted 
upon him. ‘ 

_ In imputing inaptitude to a public functionary, on the score either of 
intellectual or moral qualities, scarcely any limitation would be safe. 
Every man ought to have liberty to declare upon this subject any opinion 
which he pleases, and support it by any evidence which he may think 
adapted to the end. If, in supporting his opinion of the inaptitude of 
any public functionary, he imputes to him actions which there is 
not even an appearance of his having performed, that limited prohibition, 
the propriety of which we have just recognized, will strictly apply. 
With this exception, freedom should be unimpaired. 

We have now, therefore, explained, we hope sufficiently, in what 
manner the principles which we have established require, that the use of 
the press should be regulated in speaking of the action of publi¢ 
functionaries, and of their fitness for the duties which they are appointed 
to discharge, whether those functionaries are the immediate repre- 
sentatives of the people, or others whom it is the business of those 
representatives to control. 


Freedom of Censure on the Institutions of Government is necessary 
for the good of the People. 


We have next to inquire in what manner those principles require that 
the use of the press should be regulated in speaking of the enstztutzons of 
government. ‘The illustrations already adduced will supersede the use of 
many words upon this part of the subject. 

Institutions of government are good in proportion as they save the 
people from evil, whether it be evil created by the government, or 
evil not prevented by the government. Institutions of government are 
bad in proportion as they are the cause of evil to the people, either 
by what they create, or what they fail in preventing. 

According to this statement, which it is impossible to controvert, 
institutions of government may, in strict propriety of speech, be said 
to be the cause of all the evil which they do not save the people 
from, and from which the people would be saved by any other institutions, 

It is therefore of the highest importance that the people should know 
what are the jnstitutions which save from the greatest quantity of evil, and 
how much their own institutions want of being those best institutions. 

Institutions of government are bad, either because those in whose 
hands the powers of government are placed do not know that they 
are bad, and though willing, cannot improve them; or they are bad, 
because those who have in their hands the powers of government do not 
wish that they should be improved. 


28 


Where the rulers are willing, but do not know how to improve the institu- 
tions of government; every thing which leads to a knowledge of their defects 
is desirable to both rulers and people. That which most certainly leads to 
such knowledge is, that every man who thinks he understands any thing of 
the subject, should produce his opinions, with the evidence on which they 
are supported, and that every man who disapproves of these opmions 
should state his objections. All the knowledge which all the individuals 
in the society possess upon the subject is thus brought, as it were, to a 
common stock or treasury ; while every thing which has the appearance 
of being knowledge, but is only a counterfeit of knowledge, 1s assaye 
and rejected. Every subject has the best chance of becoming thoroughly 
understood, when, by the delivery of all opinions, it is presented in all 
points of view; when all the evidence upon both sides is brought forward, 
and all those who are most interested in showing the weakness of what is 
weak in it, and the strength of what is strong, are, by the freedom of the 
press, permitted, and by the warmth of discussion excited, to devote to 
it the keenest application of their faculties. False opinions will then be 
delivered. ‘True; but when are we most secure against the influence of 
false opinions? Most assuredly when the grounds of these opinions are 
the most thoroughly searched. When are the grounds of opinions most 
thoroughly searched? When discussion upon the subject is the most 
general and the most intense; when the greatest number of qualified 
persons engage in the discussion, and are excited by all the warmth 
of competition, and all the interest of important consequences, to study 
the subject with the deepest attention. ‘To give a body of rulers, or any 
other body of men, a power of choosing, for the rest, opinious upon 
government, without discussion, we have already seen, upon good evi- 
dence, is the way to secure the prevalence of the most destructive errors. 

When institutions are bad, and the rulers would gladly change them if 
they knew they were bad, discussion, it will not be disputed, would be 
yood for both parties, both rulers andruled. There is, however, another 
case, and that by far the most common, where the rulers are attached to 
the bad institutions, and are disposed to do all in their power to prevent 
any alteration. This is the case with all institutions which leave it in the 
power of the men who are entrusted with the powers of government, to 
make use of them for their own advantage, to the detriment of the people ; 
in other words, which enable them to do injury to the people, or prevent 
the people from good. This is the case with by far the greater number 
of those institutions by which the people suffer. They are institutions 
contrived for benefiting the few at the cost of the many. 

With respect, therefore, to the greater number of defective institutions, 
it is the interest of the rulers that true opinions should not prevail. But 
with respect to these institutions, it is of still greater importance to the 
people that discussion should be free. Such institutions as the rulers 
would improve, if they knew that they were defective, will be improved 
as the rulers themselves become sensible of their defects. Such defective 


29 


mstitutions as the rulers would not wish to see improved, will never be 
improved, unless the knowledge of these defects is diffused among the 
people, and excites among them a disapprobation which the rulers do not 
think it prudent to disregard. 

That the prevalence of true opinions among the people, relative to 
those defects in their political institu:ions, by which the rulers profit at 
their expence, is of the utmost importance to the people, is therefore a 
proposition, which no improbity will dare openly to controvert. That 
freedom of discussion is the only security which the people can have for 
the prevalence of true opinions has already been proved. It is therefore 
proved, that freedom of discussion, in its utmost perfection, they ought 
to enjoy. 

What is included in the term freedom of discussion, is evident from 
what has already been said, 

Freedom of discussion means the power of presenting all opinions 
equally, relative to the subject of discussion; and of recommending them 
by any medium of persuasion which the author may think proper to 
employ. If any obstruction is given to the delivering of one sort of 
opinions, not given to the delivering of another; if any advantage is at- 
tached to the delivering of one sort of opinions, not attached to the 
delivery of another; so far equality of treatment is destroyed, and so far 
the freedom of discussion is infringed; so far truth is not left to the sup- 
port of her own evidence ; and so far, if the advantages are attached to 
the side of error, truth is deprived of her chance of prevailing. 

To attach advantage to the delivering of one set of opinions, dis- 
advantage to the delivering of another, is to make a choice. But we 
have already seen, that it is not safe for the people to let any body choose 
opinions for them. If it be said, that the people themselves might be 
the authors of this preference, what is this but to say, that the people can 
choose better before discussion than after; before they have obtained 
mformation than after it? No, if the people choose before discussion, 
before information, they cannot choose for themselves. They must fol- 
low blindly the impulse of certain individuals, who, therefore, choose for 
them. ‘This is, therefore, a pretence, for the purpose of disguising the 
truth, and cheating the people of that choice, upon which all their 
security for good government depends. 

If these deductions are as clear and incontrovertible as to us. they 
appear to be, the inquiry respecting the principles which ought to 
regulate the use of the press is drawn pretty nearly to its close. We 
have shown, that as far as regards the violation of the rights of in- 
dividuals, in respect to both persons and things, no definition on account 
of the press is required. We have shown in what manner the rights of 
individuals, in regard to reputation, should be defined by the civil code, 
and the violation of them prevented by the penal. We next proceeded 
to what may be considered as the main branch of the inquiry, namely, 
the use of the press in speaking of the institutions and functionaries of 
government. We have found, that in this respect the freedom of the 


30 


press is uf such importance, that there is no security for good government 
without it. We have also found, that the use of it, in respect to these 
subjects, admits but of two useful restrictions ;—that of a direct exhorta- 
tion to obstruct any of the operations of government in detail, and that 
of imputivg to a functionary of government a criminal act, which there 
was no ground, nor even any appearance of ground, to impute to him. 
These restrictions, of course, it would be very easy to define in the 
criminal code, and to find appropriate motives to sanction. In all other 
respects, we have seen that the press ought to be free ; that if there is any 
limit to the power of delivering unfaveurable opinions, respecting either 
the functionaries, or the institutions of government, and of recommending 
those opinions by any media, with the single exception of false facts, 
under the circumstances mentioned above, the benefits which may be 
derived from the freedom of the press are so greatly infringed, that hardly 
any security for good government can remain. 


lS 


IV. 


Limitations to Freedom of Discussion, which involve tts destruction. 


In the administration of English law, or rather of what is called law, 
upon this subject, without being any thing better than the arbitrary will 
of the judges, it is said, that though discussion should be free, it should 
be “ decent ;” and that all “ indecency” in discussion should be 
punished as a libel. It is not our object in this discourse to give an 
exposition of the manifold deformities of the English law of libel. If we 
have been successful in developing the true principles which ought to 
regulate the freedom of the press, every reader may, by an application of 
those principles, determine what he ought to think of the several particu- 
lars which there may attract his attention. We shall confine ourselves to 
a short notice of those dicta, or doctrines, which seem most likely to be 
pleaded in opposition to the priuciples which we have endeavoured to 
establish. 

The question is, whether indecent discussion should be prohibited ? 
To answer this question, we must, of course, inquire what is meant by 
indecent. 

In English libel law, where this term holds so distinguished a place, is 
it not defined ? 

English legislators have not hitherto been good at defining 3 and 
English lawyers have always vehemently condemned, and grossly abused 
jt. The word “ indecent,’ therefore, has always been a term under 
which it was not difficult, on each occasion, for the judge to include 
whatever he did not like. ‘* Decent,” and “ what the judge likes,” have 
been pretty nearly synonymous. 

Indecency of discussion cannot mean the delivery either of true or of 
false opinions, because discussion implies both. In all discussion there 


$1 


is supposed at least two parties, one who affirms, and one who. denies, 
One of them must be in the wrong. 

The delivery, though not of all true opinions, yet of some, may be said 
to be indecent. All opinions are either favourable or unfavourable. 
True opinions that are favourable to government and its functionaries 
will not be said to be indecent; nor will all opinions that ate true and 
unfavourable be marked out for prohibition under that name. Opitrons 
unfavourable may either be greatly unfavourable or slightly unfavourable. 
Jf any unfavourable opinions are exempted from the charge of indecency, 
it must be those which are slightly so. But observe what would be the 
consequence of prohibiting, as indecent, those which are greatly un- 
favourable. A true opmion, greatly unfavourable to a funetiomary, or 
institution. of government, is an opmion that the functionary, or ifstitu- 
tion, is greatly hurtful to the people. You would permit the slight evi 
to be spoken of, and hence removed; you would not permit the great 
evil to be spoken of. 

If no true opinion can be regarded as indecent, meaning by indecent, 
requiring punishment, we must inquire if any false opinion on matteérs of 
government ought to be treated as such. If all false opinions are m- 
decent, all discussion is indecent. All false opinions, therefore, are not 
indecent. ‘The English libel law does not treat any favourable opinions, 
how much soever false, as indecent. If all opinions that are false and 
unfavourable are said to be indecent, who is to judge if they are false? It 
has been already proved, that the people can confide the power of deter- 
mining what opinions are true, what are false, to none but themselves. 
Nothing can resist the following argument. Either the people do know, or 
they do not know, that an opinion is false: if they do not know, they can 
permit nobody to judge for them, and must leave discussion its free course : 
if they do know, all infliction of evil for the delivery of an opinion which 
then can do no harm, would be purely mischievous and utterly absurd. 

If all opinions, true and false, must be allowed to be delivered, so must 
all the media of proof. We need not examine minutely the truth of this 
inference, because it will probably be allowed. It will be said, howeyer, 
that though all opinions. may be delivered, and the grounds of them 
stated, it must be done in calm and gentle language. Wehement expres- 
sions, all words and phrases calculated to inflame, may justly be regarded 
as indecent, because they have a tendency rather to pervert than rec- 
tify the judgment. 

To examine this proposition, it must be taken out of that state of 
yagueness in which so many things are left by the English law, and made, 
if possible, to speak a language, the meaning of which may be ascer- 
tained. 

We have just decided, and as it appeared, on very substantial grounds, 
that the statement of no opinion, favourable or unfavourable, true or 
false, with its media of proof, ought to be forbidden. No language, 
necessary, for that purpose, can be indecent, meaning here, as before, 


32 


nothing by that term, as nothing can be meant, but simply punishable, 
or proper for punishment. he. 

But the only difference between delivering an opinion one way and 
another way is, that in the one case it is simply delivered, in the other it 
is delivered with indications of passion. The meaning of the phrase in 
question then must be, that an opinion must not be delivered with indica- 
tions of passion. 

What! not even a favourable one? 

“Oh, yes! a favourable one. Merited praise ought to be delivered 
with warmth.” ; 

Here, then, is inequality, and therefore mischief, at once. An opinion, 
meaning here a true opinion, if it is favourable, you allow—if unfavoura- 
ble, you do not allow—to be delivered in a certain way. Why? Because 
in that way, you say, it is calculated to make an undue impression. 
Opinions favourable, then, you wish to make an undue impression, and 
by that confess the wickedness of your intention. You desire that the 
people should think better of the institutions and functionaries of their 
government than they deserve; in other words, you wish the government 
to be bad. 

If opinions, to what degree soever unfavourable, may be freely aud 
fully delivered, there are two conclusive reasons why the terms in which 
they are delivered should not be liable to punishment. In the first place, 
the difference between one node of delivery and another is of little con- 
sequence. In the second place, you cannot forbid the delivery in one set 
of terms, without giving a power of preventing it in almost all. 

First, the difference is of little éonsequence. If I say barely that such 
a functionary of government, or such an institution of government, is the 
cause of great injury and suffering to the people, all that 1 can do more 
by any language is, to give intimation, that the conduct of such func- 
tionary, or the existence of such institution, excites in me great contempt, 
or great anger, or great hatred, and ought to excite them in others. But 
if [ put this in the way of a direct proposition, I may do so, because 
then it will be a naked statement with regard to a matter of fact, and 
cannot be forbidden, without overthrowing the whole of the doctrine 
which we have already established. 

If, then, | give indication of certain sentiments of mine, and of my 
opinion of what ought to be the sentiments of others explicit/y, L ought, 
you say, to be held innocent; if ¢mpdicitly, guilty. Implicitly, or 
explicitly, that is the difference, and the whole of the difference. If 
I say, that such a judge, on such an occasion, took a bribe, and 
pronounced ‘an unjust decision, which ruined a meritorious man and his 
family, this is a simple declaration of opinion, and ought not, according 
to the doctrine already established, to meet with the smallest obstruction. 
If [ also state the matter of fact with regard to myself, that this action 
has excited in me great compassion for the injured family, and great 
anger and hatred against ihe author of their wrongs, this must be fully 


338 


allowed. I must further be allowed to express freely my opinion, that 
this action ought to excite similar sentiments in other members of the 
community, and that the judge ought to receive an appropriate punish+ 
ment. Much of all this, however, [ may say in another manner. I may 
say 1t much more shortly by implication.—Here, I may cry, is an act for 
the indignation of mankind! Here is a villain, who, invested with the 
most sacted of trusts, has prostituted it to the vilest of purposes! Why 
is he not an object of public execration? Why are not the vials of wrath 
already poured forth upon bis odious head ?—All this means nothing, 
but that he has committed the act; that I hate him for it, and com 
miserate the sufferers; that I think he ought to be punished ; and that 
other people ought to feel as 1 do. It cannot be pretended, that 
between these two modes of expression, the difference, in point of real 
and ultimate effect, can be considerable. For a momentary warmth, 
the passionate language may have considerable power. The permanent 
opmnion formed of the character of the man, as well as the punishment, 
which, under a tolerable administration of law, he can sustain, must 
depend wholly upon the real state of the facts; any peculiarity in the 
language in which the facts may have been originally announced soon 
loses its effect. If that language has expressed no more indignation 
than what was really due, it has done nothing more than what the know- 
ledge of the facts themselves would have done. If it has ex- 
pressed more indignation than what was due, the knowledge of 
the facts operates immediately to extinguish it, and, what is morey 
to excite an unfavourable opinion of him who had thus displayed his 
intemperance. No evil then is produced; or none but what is very 
slight and momentary. If theré should be a short-lived excess of un- 
favourable feeling, we have next to consider what is the proper remedy. 
Punishment should never be applied, where the end can be attained by 
more desirable means. To destroy any excess of unfavourable feeling, 
all that is necessary is, to show the precise state of the facts, and the 
real amount of the evil which they import. All excess of feeling arises 
from imputing to the facts a greater efficacy in the way of evil than 
belongs to them. Correct this opinion, and the remedy is complete. 
Secondly, you cannot forbid the use of passionate language, without 
giving a power of obstructing the use of censorial language altogether. 
The reason exists in the very nature of language. You cannot speak of 
moral acts in language which does not imply approbation and disappro- 
bation. All such language may be termed passionate language. How 
can you point out a line where passionate language begins, dispassionate 
ends? The effect of words upon the mind depends upon the associations 
which we have with them. But no two men have the same associations 
with the same words. A word which may excite strains of emotion in 
one breast, will excite none in another. A word may appear to one man 
a passionate word, which does not appear so to another. Suppose the 
legislature were to say, that all censure, conveyed in passionate language, 
shall be punished, hardly could the vices of either the functionaries or the 


34 


institutions of government be spoken of in any language which the 
judges might not condemn as passionate language, and which they would 
not have an interest, in league with other functionaries, to prohibit by 
their condemnation. The evil, therefore, which must of necessity be 
incurred by a power to punish language to which the name of passtonate 
could be applied, would be immense. The evil which is incurred by 
leaving it exempt from punishment is too insignificant to allow that 
almost any thing should be risked for preventing it. 

Religion, in some of its shapes, has, in most countries, been placed on 
the footing of an institution of the state. Ought the freedom of the 
press to be as complete, in regard to this, as we have seen that it ought 
to be, in regard to all other institutions of the state? If any one says that 
it ought not, it is incumbent upon him to show wherein the principles, 
which are applicable to the other institutions, fail in their application 
to this. 

We have seen, that, in regard to all other institutions, it is unsafe for 
the people to permit any but themselves to choose opinions for them. 
Nothing can be more certain, than that it is unsafe for them to permit 
any but themselves to choose for them in religion. 

If they part with the power of choosing their own religious opinions, 
they part with every power. It is well known with what ease religious 
opinions can be made to embrace every thing upon which the unlimited 
power of rulers, and the utmost degradation of the people, depend. The 
doctrine of passive obedience and non-resistance was a religious doctrine. 
Permit any man, or any set of men, to say what shall, and what shall not, 
be religious opinions, you make them despotic immediately. 

This is so obvious, that it requires neither illustration nor proof. 

But if the people here, too, must choose opinions for themselves, dis- 
cussion must have its course; the same propositions which we have 
proved to be true in regard to other institutions, are true in regard to this ; 
and no opinion ought to be impeded more than another, by any thing but 


(E. B.) 


the adduction of evidence on the opposite side. 


THE ARTICLE 


LAW OF NATIONS, 


REPRINTED FROM 
THE SUPPLEMENT 


TO THE 


ENCYCLOPADIA BRITANNICA. 


= 5" 7 


7 


ves 
UR Y fF A 
er 


= 


LAW O/* NATIONS. 


ideas involved in the term Law.—These ideas how modified in the term 
Law of Nations—The only sanction applicable to the Law of 
Nations is the popular sanction—What dependence may be placed 
upon the popular sanction. 


UN the tneaning of the word Law, three principal ideas are involved ; 
that of a Command, that of a Sanction, and that of the Authority 
from which the command proceeds. 

Every law imports, that something is to be done; or to be left undone. 

But a Command is impotent, unless there is the power of enforcing it. 
The power of enforcing a command is the power of inflicting penalties, 
if the command is not obeyed. And the applicability of the penalties 
constitutes the Sanction. 

There is more difficulty in conveying an exact conception of the 
Authority which is necessary to give existence to a law. It is evident, 
that it is not every command, enforced by penalties, to which we should 
extend such a title. A law is not confined to a single act; it embraces 
a class of acts; it is not coufined to the acts of one man; it embraces 
those of acommunity of men. And the authority from which it emanates 
must be an authority which that community are in the habit of obeying. 
An authority to which only a temporary obedience is paid, does not 
come up to the notion of that authority which is requisite to give 
existence to laws; for thus, the commands of a hostile army, committing 
plunder, would be laws. - 

The conditions, which we have thus described, may all be visibly 
traced, in the laws which governments lay down for the communities to 
which they Lelong. ‘There we observe the command ; there the punish- 
ment prescribed for its violation; and there the commanding authority 
to which obedience is habitually paid. 

Of these conditions how many can be said to belong to any thing 
included under the term Law of Nations ? 


4 


By that term is understood, something which either does, or which, it 
is supposed, ought to bind the conduct of one nation towards another. 

But it is not understood, that one nation has a right to command ano- 
ther. When one nation can be commanded by another, it is dependent 
upon that other; and the laws of dependence are different from those 
which we are at present considering. An independent nation would 
resent, instead of obeying, a command delivered to it by another. 
Neither can it properly be said, that nations, taken aggregately, prescribe 
those laws to one another severally; for when did they ever combine in 
any such prescription? When did they ever combine to vindicate the 
violations of them? It is therefore clear, that the term Command 
cannot be applied, at least in the ordinary sense, to the laws of nations, 

In the next place, it would not seem, that any thing, deserving the 
name of Sanction, belongs to them. ‘Sanction, we have already seen, is 
punishment. Suppose nations to threaten one another with punishment, 
for the violation of any thing understood to be a law of nations. ‘To 
punish imphes superiority of strength. For the strong, therefore, the 
law of nations, may perhaps have a sanction, as against the weak, But 
what can it have as against the strong? ITs it the strong, however, or is 
it the weak, by whom it is most lable to be violated: ‘The answer is 
obvious and undeniable.—As against those from whom almost solely any 
violation of the laws of nations need be apprehended, there appears, 
tnerefore, to be no sanction at all. 

If it be said, that several nations may combine to give it a sanction in 
favour of the weak, we might, for a practical answer, appeal to expe- 
rience. Has it been done: Have nations, in reality, combined, so con- 
stautly and steadily, in favour of the law of nations, as to create, by the 
certainty of punishment, an overpowering motive, to unjust powers, to 
abstain from its violation? For, as the laws against murder would have 
no efficacy, if the punishment prescribed were not applied once in fifty, 
or a hundred, times, so the penalty against the violations of the law of 
nations can have no efficacy, if it is applied unsteadily and rarely. 

On the mode in which it has been applied, we may appeal to a great 
authority. Montesquieu says—‘ Le droit public est plus connu en 
Europe qu’en Asie: cependant on peut dire que les passions des princes 
—la patience des peuples—la flatterie des ecrivains, en ont corrompu 
tous les principes. Ce droit, tel quwil est aujourd’hui, est une science qui 
apprend aux princes jusqu’a quel point ils peuvent violer la justice, sans 
choquer leurs intéréts.”—( Lett. Persanes, XCIV.) 

To go a little deeper, we may consider, whether the interest of nations, 
that which, in the long run, governs them all, can ever produce com- 
binations, from which an effectual sauction, of the nature in question, can 
be expected to proceed. ‘That they would derive some advantage from 
the general observation of those maxims which have been called laws of 
nations, frivolous as are the points upon which the greater part of them 
turn, cannot be denied. These advantages, however, are seen at a dis- 
tance, and with the mind’s eye; they are speculative, rather than sensible. 


5 


The inconveniences, on the other hand, which must be felt, from any 
movement to lend effect to the law of nations, are immediate and formi- 
dable; the whole train of the evils of war arc almost sure to arise from 
them. The latter class of impressions must, in general, be far more 
powerful than the former; and thus the interposition, in favour of the 
law of nations, will generally be shunned. A nation is often but too 
easily stimulated to make war in resentment of injuries done to itself. 
But it looks with too much coolness upon the injuries done to other na- 
tions, to incur the chance of any great inconvenience for the redress of them. 

Besides, the object is to be gained by the means of combination. 
But the combinations of nations are very difficult things. Nations 
hardly ever combine without quarrelling. 

Again, all nations ought to combine for an object common to all, 
But for all nations to combine in any one enterprise is impossible. 
Suppose a prince to have violated the Jaw of nations, it would be absurd 
to suppose that all the countries on earth should conspire to punish him. 
But if not all, what is to be the selection? Who shall come forward ; 
who stand excused? By those who are condemned to the sacrifice, in 
what proportion are the contributions tote made? Who is to afford the 
greatest, and who may come with the least ¢ 

It is unnecessary to pursue any farther the analysis of this extraordinary 
hypothesis. itis evident from what has been said, that it is full of im- 
practicabilities. 

Are we, then, obliged to consider the maxims or rules, which pass 
under the name of Laws of Nations, as utterly without force and in- 
Huence; aud the discourse which is made about them, as mere affectation 
and impertinence ? 

Not wholly so. It is of use, that the ordinary intercourse of nations 
should be conducted according to certain forms, generally known and 
approved ; because they will be observed on all occasions, when there is 
no particular motive to violate them, and will often prevent disputes which 
might arise on frivolous occasions. ‘hey resemble, in this respect, the 
ceremonial of a court, or the established forms of polished society. 

‘Lhe objects, however, which are understood to be embraced by the 
Jaw of nations, are of two sorts. The first are those minor objects, 
which partake more of form than of substance. The other are objects 
which deeply affect humanity. ‘i hat there are certain interests of nations, 
which it were good to have considered as their rights, aud of which it is 
infinitely to be desired that the violation could be prevented, 1s most true. 
But if national law has no penalty annexed to it; if the weaker party, 
who is wronged, has no means of redress; where, it may be said, is the 
advantage of such a law? Or where the propriety of calling that a Jaw, 
which is only a declaration respecting rights; violated by the more 
powerful party with impunity, as often, and to as great an extent, -as he 
pleases? ; : 

There is still, however, a power, which, though it be not the physica! 
force, either of one state, or of a combination of states, applied to vin- 


6 


dicate a violation of the law of nations, is not without a great sway 
in human affairs ; and which, as it is very nearly the whole of the power 
which can be applied to secure the observation of that law, deserves to 
be carefully considered, that, by duly appreciating its efficacy in this im- 
portant affair, we may neither trust to it where it will disappoint our ex- 
pectation, nor ueglect the use of it where it may be turned to advantage. 

That the human mind is powerfully acted upon by the approbation or 
disapprobation, by the praise or blame, the contempt and hatred, or the 
love and admiration, of the rest of mankind, is a matter of fact, which, 
however it may be accounted for, is beyond the limits of disputation. 
Over the whole field of morality, with the exception of that narrow part 
which is protected by penal laws, it is the only power which binds to good 
conduct, and renders man agreeable and useful to man. It is evident, 
also, that where there is not great inequality, it is a power, the binding 
force of which must be necessarily great. Because every individual, 
considered in himself, is weak and helpless as compared with the rest of 
the community. Unless, therefore, he can prevail upon them to abstain 
from injuring him, he must be exposed to unlimited suffering. And if, 
on the other hand, he can prevail upon them to combine in doing, or in 
desiring to do him good, he is put in the way of receiving perpetually the 
greatest advantages. His motive, therefore, to obtain the favourable, 
and to avoid the unfavourable regards of the members of the society in 
which he lives, is of the highest order. But he can obtain their favourable, 
aud avoid their unfavourable sentiments, only by abstaining with scrupu- 
lous anxiety from domg any injury to them, and observing all such modes 
of conduct as are calculated to be useful and agreeable to them. 

The value which men set upon these favourable regards of the persons 
among whom they live, is stnkingly manifested by some Of the most 
ordinary forms of their discourse and behaviour. What is more esteemed 
than character? What injury reckoned more deep and unpardonable 
than that of the man who exerts himself to take away unworthily any part 
of the reputation of his neighbours? But what is character, if not the 
title to the favourable sentiments of other men? And what is the loss of 
character, but the opinion of other men, that we do not deserve those 
favourable sentiments, with which they have been accustomed to re- 
gard us? 

Honour and shame, those emotions, the intensity of which is proved 
by so many phenomena of human life, are but the feelings which attend 
upon those different situations. When a man finds himself in possession 
of the love, the esteem, and admiration of those by whom he is sur- 
rounded, he is filled with that delight which the belief of the secure pos- 
session of a great source of benefit, cannot fail to inspire: he is fearless, 
elated, and confident; the principal characteristics of that state of mind 
which we denominate pride. When he is conscious; on the other hand, 
of having forfeited in any degree the favourable sentiments of those among 
whom he lives, he suffers that depression which the loss of a highly valued 
possession is calculated to create; he ceases, in some degree, to look 


7 


forward to bis fellow men for good, and feels more or less the apprehen- 
sion of evil at their hands; he fears to prove how far their disapprobation 
of him reaches, or to excite them to define it too accurately for them- 
selves ; he hangs down his head, and dares not so much as look them in 
the face. 

When men are favourably situated for having those impressions deeply 
struck ; or, more correctly speaking, when those combinations of ideas 
have consistently and habitually been presented to their minds, the asso- 
ciation becomes at last so indissoluble and strong, as to operate, 
even where the connection among the things themselves may not 
exist, 

When persons, who have been educated in a virtuous society, have, 
from their infancy, associated the idea of certain actions with the favoura- 
ble sentiments, and with all the advantages which flow from the favourable 
sentiments of mankind ; and, on the other hand, have associated the idea 
of certain other actions with the unfavourable sentiments, and all the 
disadvantages which flow from the unfavourable sentiments of mankind ; 
so painful a feeling comes in time to be raised in them at the very thought 
of any such action, that they recoil from the perpetration of it, even in 
cases in which they may be perfectly secure against any unfavourable 
sentiments, which it might be calculated to inspire. 

It will, we apprehend, upon the most accurate investigation, be found, 
that this is the only power to which we can look for any considerable 
sanction to the laws of nations ;—for almost the only species of punish- 
ment to which the violation of them can ever become amenable: it is the 
only security, therefore, which mankind can ever enjoy for the benefit 
which laws, well contrived for this purpose, might be calculated to yield. 

It is in the next place incumbent upon us to inquire, what dependence 
can be placed upon this security, in the set of cases now under considera- 
tion; and in what circumstances it is calculated to act with the greatest, 
in what with the least efficacy, toward this important end. 

A power, which is wholly derived, from the good which may follow 
the favourable, the evil which may follow the unfavourable sentiments of 
mankind, will act most efficaciously upon him who is the most, least 
efficaciously upon him who is the least exposed to receive good and evil 
from the immediate inclination of his fellow men. ; 

It seems to be evident, that he who is most weak, as compared with 
the rest of the community, is the most exposed to receive good or evil in 
consequence of their favourable or unfavourable sentiments ; and that he, 
on the other hand, who is the most powerful, as compared with them, is 
the least exposed to receive good or evil in consequence of those sen- 
timents. : 

When men are nearly upon equality, no one has any chance of in- 
ducing other people to abstain from burting him, but by his abstaining 
from doing hurt in any way to them. He has no means of inducing 
them to do him any acts of service, but by their expectation of receiving 
similar acts of service from him. He is, therefore, intensely interested in 
its being generally believed of him, that he is a man who is careful to 


8 


abstain fiom injuring, and ever ready to exert himself to do services 
to others. aes : 

The case is exceedingly different, where one man is lifted high above 
others. In that case he has powerful means of protection against their 
hurtful acts, powerful means of obtaining their services, altogether 
independent of his conduct, altogether independent of his disposition 
either to abstain from injuring them, or to render them service. 

So far, therefore, as good conduct arises from a man's dependence 
upon the seutiments of others ; and from this is derived the moral power, 
to which alone the term moral sanction or obligation can properly 
belong: the security for good conduct is apt to be lessened, in exact 
proportion as any one is raised above the level of those composing the 
mass of the community. If any man possesses absolute power over the 
rest of the community, he is set tree from all dependence upon their sen- 
timents. In this, or nearly in this situation is every despot, having a well 
esfablished authority. So far as a man is educated as a despot, he can 
therefore have but few of those associations, on which a conduct, benefi- 
cent to others, depends. He is not accustomed to look—for the services 
which he needs, or the evils which he apprehends, from others—to the 
opinion which they may entertain of the goodness or badness of his con- 
duct; he cannot, therefore, have that salutary train of transitions from the 
idea of an evil act to that of the condemnatory sentiments of mankind, and 
from the condemnatory sentiments of mankind to the forfeiture of all 
those delights aud advantages which spring to him from the operation 
of their favourable regards ;—associations which in men favourably 
situated become at Jast habitual, and govern the conduct, as it were, 
mechanically, without any distinct recurrence to the consequences, upon 
the thought of which, nevertheless, this salutary and ennobling seutiment 
ultimately depends, and from which it has been originally derived. 

If such is the situation of the despot with regard to these important 
associations, it is In a proportional degree the situation of all those who 
partake of that species of elevation. In av Aristocratical country, for 
example, a country in which there is great inequality of wealth, those who 
possess the large fortunes, are raised to a great degree above any chance 
of receiving evil, or of standing deprived of any good, because the great 
mass, the lower orders, of their countrymen, think unfavourably of them. 
They are, no doubt, to a considerable degree dependent upon what the 
people of their own class may think of them; and it is accordingly found, 
that those qualities and acts, which are useful to that class, are formed 
into a particular, an Aristocratical code of morality, which is very effec- 
tually sanctioned by the favourable and unfavourable sentiments of the 
Aristocratical body, at the same time that it is exceedingly different from 
that more enlarged and all-comprehensive code, on which the happiness 
of the greatest number depends, and to which alone the epithet moral in 
propriety belongs. 

Such being the state of the facts connected with this important case, it 
remains to see what are the inferences, bearing upon it, which we are 
entitled to draw from them. We have already ascertained, that the only 


9 


power which can operate to sanction the laws of nations; in other words, 
to reward or punish any nation, according as it obeys, or as it disobeys them, 
is the approbation and disapprobation of mankind. It follows, that the 
restraining force is, in this case, determined by the associations which they 
who goyern it may have formed with the approbation and disapprobation 
of mankind. If they have formed strong associations, of a pleasurable 
kind, with the approbation, strong associations, of the painful kind, with 
the disapprobation of mankind, the restraining force will be great; if they 
have not formed such associations, it will be,feeble and insignificant. It 
has, however, appeared, immediately above, that the rulers of a country, 
af which the government is either monarchical,-or aristocratical, can have 
these associations in but a very low degree; as those alone, who are 
placed on a level with the great body of other men, are placed in circum- 
stances calculated to produce them. It is only then in countries, the 
rulers of which are drawn from the mass of the people, in other words, 
in-democratical countries, that the sanction of the laws of nations can be 
expected to operate with any considerable effect. 


II. 


What is required to give to the Law of Nations its greatest perfection. 
—Necessity for a Cove of International Law.— Rights of Nations. 


Having thus ascertained, what is the power which restrains from 
violating the laws of nations, and what the description of rulers upon 
whom its restraining force is the greatest, we are next to inquire, by 
what expedients the force of it may be raised to the greatest pitch, and 
the greatest amount of benefit may be derived from it. 

It is sufficiently recognized, that whatever is intended to produce any 
effect as a punishment, produces it in a greater degree, in proportion as 
it operates with greater precision and certainty. ‘The inquiry, then, 
regards the means of giving precision and certainty to those sentiments 
of the world, on which the binding power of the laws of nations 80 
greatly depends, 

Two things are necessary to give precision and certainty to the opera- 
tion of laws within a community. The one is, a strict determination of 
what the law is, the second, a tribunal so constituted as to yield prompt 
and accurate execution to the law. It is evident, that these two are 
indispensible requisites. Without them no penalties can operate with 
either precision or certainty. And the case is evidently the same, 
whether we speak of the laws which regulate the actions of individual 
and individual within the state, or those which regulate the actions of one 
state towards another. 

It is obvious to remark, in the first place, that with regard to the laws 
of nations, not one of these two indispensible requisites has ever yet had 
any existence. It has neither been determined what the laws in question 


10 


are, nor has any common tribunal for cognizance of the violations of them 
ever been constituted. With respect to the last, not so much as the idea 
of it seems to have been entertained. And with respect to the first, 
though much has been written, it has been almost wholly in the way of 
vague and general discourse. Hardly a single accurate definition has yet 
been applied to any part of the subject. nin 

Here, then, we come to what is obviously the grand inquiry; namely, 
first, What can be done towards defining the laws of nations? and, 
secondly, What can be done towards providing a tribunal for yielding 
prompt and accurate decisions in conformity with them? in other words, 
for applying with the greatest possible efficacy the opinion of the world 
for restraiuing the violation of them ? 

In the Article JurisPRUDENCE, to which it is necessary for us here 
to revert, we have sufficiently made it appear, that the foundation of all 
law is the constitution of rights. Of two parties, unless it is previously 
determined what each shall enjoy, it can never be determined whether one 
has improperly disturbed the enjoyment of the other. ‘lo determine, 
however, what a party is to enjoy, is to determine his nights. 

Now, then, with regard to nations, the question is, what ought to be 
constituted rights? or im other words, what would it be desirable, for the 
good of mankind upon the whole, that the several nations should respect 
as the rights of each other? 

This, it is pretty obvious, is one of the most extensive of all inquiries, 
far exceeding the limits of an article in the present work. We can 
attempt little more than to show the way in which the inquiry may be 
carried on. 

In the Article JurisPRUDENCE, we have endeavoured to clear up the 
meaning which in Jegislation can, without leading to confusion, be alone 
attached to the term Rights; and we have there hkewise seen, that there 
are but two classes of objects, in which individuals can have rights ; 
namely, ‘Things, and Persons. 

The case, we believe, will be found the same with respect to nations. 
They also can have rights, in nothing but Persons, and Things. Of 
course, it follows, that they can receive injury in nothing but in Persons, 
or Things. 

The inquiry, however, with respect to the rights of nations, is not 
so simple, as that with respect to the rights of individuals; because 
between individuals, subject to the same system of laws, the legislature 
recognizes no state of hostility ; but between nations there is the State of 
War, and the State of Peace, and the rights which are understood to 
belong to nations are different in these two different states. In the state 
of war, nations recognize in one another very few rights respecting either 
persons or things; they kill the one, and take and destroy the other, with 
little other limit than the want of ability. In the state of peace, they 
respect as rights belonging to one another, nearly the same things which 


are constituted rights of individuals, by the ordinary systems of na- 
tional law. 


11 


Ii. 


What should be recagnized as Rights in time of Peace.—The Property 
of Individuals.—The Persons of Individuals,—The Property or Do- 
minion of the State.—Dominion in Land.—Dominion in Water. 


We shall begin with the consideration of those things which it would 
be desirable that nations should respect as the rights of one another, in 
the time of peace. 

_ And, first, of rights with respect to things. As the subject of the 
rights of nations, things may be divided into two sorts; things belonging 
to some individual member of the nation, and things belonging to the 
nation in its collective, or corporate, capacity. 

Those rights in things which the nation guarantees to its individual 
members, within the nation, it would be desirable, with hardly any 
exception, that nations should respect in regard to one another; that 
those things, for example, which the government of the country to which 
a man belongs, would regard, and would compel all its subjects to regard, 
as his property, the governments of all other countries should respect, and 
compel all their subjectsto respect as his property. 

There are two states of circumstances in which questions may arise 
between nations, respecting the property of their respective subjects. 
The first, where the property in question, when the cause of dispute 
arises, is within the country of the individual to whom it belongs: The 
second, where the property has, by its owner, been previously removed 
into the country, with which, or some of the inhabitants of which, the 
dispute has arisen. 

1. The first set of circumstances exists between two conterminous 
countries; the bordering inhabitants of which are neighbours to one 
another, and may, as any other neighbours, infringe the properties of one 
another. The proper mode of settling these disputes seems to be 
sufficiently obvious. The rights of the party complaining should be 
adjudged, according to the laws of the country to which he belongs. 
But the party sued or prosecuted, should be amenable only to the 
tribunals of the country to which he belongs ; that is to say, the question 
should be tried before the tribunals of the country of the defendant ; 
but the definition of the right in question should be taken from the law 
of the country to which the plaintitf belongs. It might in some cases 
be convenient for countries in this situation, to agree in constituting 
a common judicature, appropriated to these disputes, to consist, for 
example, of two judges, one of each, gountry, with power to chuse 
a third, when they could not agree. 

The injury complained of may be capable of redress by a remedy of 
the nature of a civil suit merely ; or it may be of that more atrocious sort, 
theft or robbery, for which the remedy of punishment is required. 

It would appear that punishment ought to be apportioned according 
to the laws of the country to which the party who has incurred it belongs. 


19, 
Whatever would be the punishment decreed for the offence, if committed 
against a man of his own country, such a punishment he ought to sustain, 
for the offence against the man of the other country. ‘The question of 
punishment is here understood, as extraneous to that of compensation. 
This ought always to be made to the party injured, where it 1s capable 
of being made, and in a case of property it is always capable ; if not by 
the author of the injury, from want of property, or other cause, at least by 
the government of the country to which he belongs. _ ! 

2. Where a man has removed his property from his own into another 
country, there seems to be no peculiar reason why it should be regulated 
by any other laws than those of the country iuto which he has removed it; 
why the rights which it confers should be otherwise determined; or the 
violation of them otherwise punished. 

We have now considered, though in a very general manner (and our 
limits preclude us from attempting any thing more), the mode in which 
nations should agree about the rights of one another (in other words, the 
laws they should establish), in as far as the property of individuals, 
belonging to them, is concerned. After the property of individuals, 
their persons are to be considered as requiring the protection of laws. 

There is more difficulty in determining what is desirable, as inter- 
national law, upon this part of the subject, than in that which regards the 
property of individuals. It is desirable that the persons of the in- 
habitants of every country should receive protection, according to the 
laws of their own country. But it is also desirable that each man should 
sustain punishment according to the laws of bis country; and these two 
objects are to a certain extent inconsistent with one another. 

The inconvenience, however, seems to be greater, in permitting the 
inhabitants of one country to be punished, according to the laws of 
another; than in leaving the inhabitants of one country to the same 
measure of protection against injury to their persons from the inhabitants 
of other countries, as is afforded to the inhabitants of those countries by 
their own laws. Many cases, indeed, may be conceived, in which this is 
a measure of protection which all reasonable men would allow to be 
inadequate. In such cases, however, the only remedy seems to be the 
formation of a compact, by which a mode of proceeding, agreeable to 
the sentiments of both parties, may be positively prescribed. ‘This latter 
expedient is of course extraneous to that equitable construction which 
ought to be uniformly applied by the tribunals of one country to the 
injuries perpetrated, by those whom they may have to judge, upon 
the inhabitants of another country. If an mbhabitant of Persia, for 
example, should force cow-broth down the throat of an inhabitant and 
native of Hindostan, the tribunals of Persia should not punish this out- 
rage, as they would punish one Persian for making another swallow the 
same liquid. ‘To the Persian it would be a trifling injury, and more than 
a trifling punishment would not be required. ‘To the Hindu, it would 
be one of the greatest of all conceivable injuries. It ought to be, there- 
fore, put upon the same footing, with an injury of an equal degree, done 


18 


toa Persian; the nature,of the injury, not the external act, should be 
the object of consideration: and whatever the punishment which would 
be awarded against a Persian for one of the greatest injuries of which he 
could be guilty to a Persian, the same ought to be inflicted upon him, for 
this, one of the greatest which he could occasion to a Hindu. 

Besides the cases in which a government, as representative of the 
country, may be injured through the individuals who live under its pro- 
tection, there ave cases in which it may be injured more directly. Cer- 
tam things belong as property to the government, without belonging 
to any individual; and there are persons who are members of the 
government, or agents of the government, and who may receive injuries 
1) that capacity, distinct from those which affect them, as private 
individuals. hese are the cases to which it now remains that we direct 
our attention. 

Those things which belong to government as goods and chattels; its 
moveables, for example; or the lands which it holds, as any individual 
holds them, in the way of an estate; there seems to be no reason for 
considering as subject to any other rules, than those applicable to the 
goods and chattels which belong to individuals. 

Of other things, those to which any government can claim a right, as 
representative of a nation, must be, either, first, Portions of Land, or, 
secondly, Portions of Water. 

1. The questions which relate to the rights which any nation may 
claim in any portion of land, are questions regarding boundaries ; and 
these involve the whole of the questions respecting the acquisition of 
dominion. 

To have any standard for determinmg questions with regard to 
dominion, the different modes of acquiring dominion, must be re- 
cognized ; those which are proper to be allowed and respected by other 
nations must be distinguished from those which are improper, must be 
accurately defined and the definitions made known. 

For this purpose it is easy to perceive, that the same process is 
necessary, as that for the definition of rights, described, at some length, 
in the Article in this work, entitled JuRIsPRUDENCE, to which we must 
again refer. 

It is necessary, according to that example, that the events which are 
to be considered as giving commencement to a right of dominion, and 
those which are to be considered as putting an end to it, should be fully 
enumerated, and accurately defined. i Swe 

This is the first part of the process. The other part is, to distinguish 
the differeut degrees of dominion. There is a dominion which is perfect, 
which includes every power over the subject in question, and leaves 
nothing farther to be acquired, a dominium plenum : there is also a 
dominion, which is but the commencement, as it were, of dominion, and 
includes the smallest possible fragment of a full dominion. ‘These are 
the two extremes; and between them are various distinguishable degrees. 
All these should be fully depicted, and accurately defined. 


14 


When any of those events occurs which are to be considered as giving 
commencement to rights, it often happens that they are accompanied by 
circumstances which limit the right they would otherwise convey, and 
render the dominion less than full. These circumstances ought, also, to 
be completely enumerated ; and the power of each to be accurately 
defined. 

If this were done; an international code would be composed, in which 
the rights of dominion would be accurately defined; and to determine 
any question about boundaries, or about the degree of dominion, nothing 
farther would then be necessary than an adequate inquiry respecting the 
state of the facts. 

The questions would exactly resemble those, which we have already 
described, in the Article JurisPRUDENCE, in analyzing what is called 
pleading in judicature. In a question about boundaries there is, let us 
suppose, a district, over which one country affirms that it has a night of 
dominion, a dominion more or less complete; and another country 
denies that it has that right. The first question is, Whether any of those 
events has occurred, which would give the affirming country a right of 
dominion? The second question is, Whether, if such an event had 
occurred, it was accompanied with any of those circumstances which 
limit dominion, and render it less than full, and if so, under what degree 
of limiting power they are classed? ‘The third question isy Whether, if an 
event, thus giving commencemient to a right of dominion had occurred, 
any other event, putting an end to that right, had subsequently occurred ? 

We need not here enlarge upon these several topics; because they 
will be sufficiently understood by those readers who bear in. mind the 
expositions already given in the article referred to; and to those, who do 
not, we suggest the propriety of recurring to that article, as a preparation 
for the perusal of this. 

It is evidently disproportionate to the limits which we must here 
prescribe to ourselves, to enumerate the events which it would be 
agreeable to the interests of mankind in general, that nations should 
regard as giving, and alone giving, commencement and termination 
to rights of dominion ; because, in order to afford an enumeration which 
would be in any degree instructive, the reasons must be given why one 
set of events, and not another, should have the privilege in question 
conferred upon them. 

It may be proper, however, in the mean time, to observe, that the 
events in question will not be found to be numerous, nor very difficult to 
discover. In fact, they are, and among civilized nations, almost always 
have been, pretty nearly agreed upon; and they are the questions of 
modification, and questions of fact, upon which, chiefly, differences have 
arisen. For example, there is no dispute, that Occupancy, where there is no 
prior right, is an event which should be considered as giving commencement 
to aright of dominion. Neither is there any doubt, that the Consent of 
those who have a right, may transfer that right to others: or in other 
words, that such consent is an event which gives commencement to 


15 


aright in those others. Conquest, also, made in a lawful war, is recog- 
nized as an event of the same description; and, it will be found upon 
inquiry that these do, in fact, contain the whole. For on every Occasion 
on which dominion is acquired, the territory so acquired must, before 
hand, either have belonged to some body, or have belonged to no body. 
If it belonged to nobody, occupancy is the only event which can be sup- 
posed to give commencement to the right. If it belonged to some body, 
it must be taken from him, either willingly, or by force. If it is taken 
from him willingly, we have his consent. If it is taken by force, it is by 
conquest in war, that the new right is created. 

It is evidently, however, farther necessary, that the different species of 
consent should be distinguished ; and those to which it would be proper 
to attach this investitive power, separated accurately from those from 
which it should be withheld. It is here accordingly, that the doctrine of 
contracts, would need to be introduced; that the different species of them 
applicable to this subject, in which all treaties would be included, should 
be enumerated ; that the effects proper to be given to each of them should 
be detined ; and the mode of interpreting them, or fixing the sense which 
they ought to bear, accurately laid down. 

It would also be expedient, after the principal contracts, applicable to 
international concerns, are ascertained, to exhibit in the international 
code, formule, with blanks to be filled up, which should be employed 
by nations ‘on all occasions of such contracts, and being framed with the 
greatest possible accuracy, would go as far as it would be possible by 
words to go, in excluding ambiguity, and the grounds of dispute. 

With respect to conquest, the last event, calculated to give commence- 
ment to rights of dominion, mentioned in the above general enumeration, 
it is allowed, that as there are some conquests which ought not to be con- 
sidered as conferring rights of dominion, there are others which ought to 
be considered as doing so. It is evidently necessary, therefore, that the 
line of separation should be drawn. 

Whether a conquest, however, should or should not be considered as 
conferring a right of dominion, depends very much upon the nature of 
the war, through which it is made. If the war be what is regarded as 
just, and the mode of warfare conformable to the recognized rules, the 
conquest is apt to be regarded as conferring a legitimate title; if the 
war, and mode of war, be of a contrary description, the validity of the 
title conferred by the conquest may be liable to dispute. 

It is evident, therefore, that in order to define the species of conquest 
on which the investitive power in question should be conferred, the cir- 
cumstances which render a war justifiable, and the mode in which it is 
justifiable to carry it on, must first be ascertained. This forms the second 
part of our inquiry: and the question regarding the investitive power of 
conquest must be deferred, till that inquiry is performed. 

2, Having thus far considered the mode in which should be determined 
the rights ‘which nations acquire over portions of territory, or Land, it 


16 


remains that we consider the mode in which their rights should be deter- 
mined with regard to Waters. ; 

Waters, as concerns the present purpose, are, either rivers or the sea. 

As the sea involves the questions of greatest extent and importance, we 
shall attend to that part of the subject first. 

Even in the language of ordinary discourse, the sea is denominated the 
common domain of nations. 

The first principle with regard to the sea is this, that all nations have 
an equal right to the use of it. The utility of recognizing this principle, is 
so apparent, that it has never been the subject of any dispute. And all the 
rights assigned to nations severally, in the enjoyment of this common do- 
main, ought to rise out of this principle; and to be limited by it. What- 
ever use any nation makes of it, should be such as not to prevent a 
similar and equal use from being made by other nations. And every use 
which cannot be shown to have that effect, should be recognized as a 
right by the law of nations. 

The principal use which nations make of the sea, is that of a passage 
for their ships. Agreeably to the principle which we have recognized, 
the ships of one nation should pass in such a manner as not to obstruct 
the passage of those of another. The rules according to which the pos- 
sible cases of interference should be regulated, are very simple; and are, 
in fact, laid down and acted upon, with considerable accuracy. They 
resemble, in all respects, those according to which the vessels of the 
same country are made to avoid and to regulate their interferences in the 
rivers of the country, or upon its coasts. There would be no diflicuity, 
therefore, in making accurate definitions of the requisite rights, for in- 
sertion in the international code. 

The rights being established, the violations of them should be punished, 
on the same principles, as those which we have laid down in regard to 
the preceding cases. Either property has been injured, or persons. In 
either case, compensation is an indisputable part of the remedial process, 
wherever it is practicable. In loss of property it is fully practicable. 
It is also practicable in many of the injuries done to the person. 
As in the case of offences committed on land, the rights of the 
individual who has suffered should be estimated according to the 
laws of the country to which he belongs; but the punishment of the 
offender should be measured according to the laws of the country to 
which he belongs. In the case of piracy, which is robbery, or murder, 
committed by persons whom no country recognizes, and upon whom, 
therefore, justice can be demanded from no foreign government, it has 
hitherto been the practice that the nation suffering has taken the punish- 
ment into its own hands. Accordingly, the punishment of piracy has 
always been extremely severe. It would be, no doubt, better, if a mode 
were adopted, by which it would not be necessary for a nation to be judge 
in its own cause. A rule does not seem impossible to be framed, ac- 


17 


cording to which the pumshment of piracy niight be provided for, by re- 
ferring those accused of it, either to some general tribunal, constituted 
for that purpose, or to the tribunals of some nation other than that against 
which the offence has been perpetrated. A general law, on this subjéct, 
to be observed by all nations, would be highly desirable. 

Rules, therefore, seem not difficult to be laid down, for regulating the 
proceedings of nations on the high seas. A distinction, however, is 
drawn between what is called the Aigh, and what is called the narrow 
seas. By the narrow seas is commonly meant, some portion of sea, to 
a greater or less extent, immediately surrounding a particular country ; 
and in which that country claims peculiar privileges. The question 1s, 
whether any such privileges should be allowed, and if allowed, to what 
extent? 

The regulating principle in this, as in other cases, is the general 
advantage, the principle of utility. Fhere are cases, in which certain 
privileges, in the waters surrounding a particular country, are of so much 
importance to that country; and the exercise of those advantages occa- 
sions so very little inconvenience to other nations, that what is lost, by 
all of them taken together, bears no comparison with what is gained by 
that, particular nation. In these cases, the exercise of such privileges 
should be allowed; they should, however, be defined, in as many instances 
as possible, and promulgated by insertion in an international code. 

Of the privileges in question, are all those which are essential, or toa 
considerable degree subservient, to the national security. In some cases, 
the exclusive right of fishing might perhaps come under the same rule. 
But this is in general provided for, by the necessity of drawing the nets, 
or curing the fish upon the land, a privilege which, of course, it is in the 
power of any nation to give or to withhold. 

In obedience to this equitable principle, it appears, that such foppish 
privileges, as have sometimes been insisted upon, affording no advan- 
tage to one nation, which is not wholly at the cost of others—lowering 
the flag, for example, and such like impositions—should not be recog- 
nized by the code of nations. 

It appears, also, that those tolls which have been, sometimes, and are 
levied, at the narrow inlets of some seas, deserve to fall under the same 
condemnation. ‘The passage through these inlets is a common good to 
all the nations of the earth which may have a motive to use them; a good 
of the highest importance to the nations whieh are situated within, and 
to which it is the only means of maritime communication; and, while it 
imparts no evil to the coyterminous nation, the toll which that nation 
levies is an. advantage obtained wholly at the cost of others ; and imposing 
upon them a burthen, in the way of obstruction and trouble, which is 
compensated for by advantage to nobody, ; 

The waters, we have said, in respect to which rights should be as- 
signed to nations, are rivers and the sea, Having stated what appears 
necessary on the present occasion with respect to the sea, it remains that 
we offer the few observations required, on the subject of rivers. 


18 


Rivers are either the boundary between two countries, or they are 
wholly within a particular country. 

Those which are wholly within a particular country, 1t seems most 
agreeable to the principle of utility to regard as wholly belonging to that 
country In the case of navigable rivers which pass through several 
countries, it would indeed be desirable for those countries which are si- 
tuated higher up than that at the mouth of each, as weil as for all those 
who might thus have intercourse with them, that the navigation of such 
rivers should be free; but it would be difficult so to regulate this right, 
as not to affect the security of the country through which a free navi- 
gation should thus be allowed; and a slight diminution in its security 
would he so great a loss to that country as would require, to compensate 
for it, a very great advantage to those by whom the navigation was enjoyed. 
Unless where this advantage were very great, it would not, therefore, be 
agreeable to the principle which should dictate the laws of nations, that 
the freedom of the navigation should be regulated on any other principles 
than those of mutual agreement. 

In regard to those rivers which flow between two countries, the prin- 
ciple of regulation is sufficiently plain. The benefits derivable from the 
river should be shared equally between them. Its principal benefits arise 
from the fishing and from the navigation. ‘The right of fishing in most 
cases may be fitly distributed, by each party fishing from its own bank 
to the middle of the stream. ‘The right of navigating of each must be so 
exercised as not to obstruct the right of the other. In this case the same 
sort of rules are required, to prevent the ships of the two nations from ob- 
structing one another, in a common river, as are found available to pre- 
vent the ships of different individuals from obstructing one another, in a 
river belonging to one country. There is no difficulty, therefore, here, 
which it is worth stopping to show how to remove. 


LY: 


What should be recognized as Rights in time of War.—What should be 
regarded as necessary to render the Commencement of a War just.— 
alah haula be regarded as just and unjust in the Modes of carrying 
on a War. 


We have now adduced, what our limits admit to be said, upon the first 
great branch of the inquiry relative to the law of nations; namely, the 
rights which they should recognize in one another in the state of peace. 
We proceed to the second branch, relating wholly to the state of war. 

The questions which present themselves for solution relating to the 
state of war, are either those which respect its commencement, or those 
which respect the mode of carrying it on. 

_ With respect to the commencement of a war, the principal question 
is, What are the conditions which should be regarded as necessary to 
render it just ? b 


19 


A\s men, in a situation where laws, and the protection derived from 
them, do not exist, are left to their own protection, and have no means 
of deterring other men from injuring them, but making them dread injury 
in return, so nations, which, with respect to one another, have, as we 
have seen before, but little protection from the legal sanction, are left to 
supply its place Ly this dread of injury in return, which, in the case both 
of individuals and of nations, may be called the retributive sanction, and 
of which, in the case of nations, war is the principal organ. 

From this view of the essence and end of war, we lay down immediately 
one pretty extensive proposition with regard to the conditions necessary 
to render it just. 

As the legal sanction, or punishment for the offences of individuals 
eught to operate only where some right has been violated, and the viola- 
tion has been such as to require it, so the retributive sanction of nations, 
which is war, ought to operate only where some right of the nation, or 
something which ought to be treated as a right, has been violated, and 
where the violation has been such as to require that desperate remedy. 

But as not all violations which may possibly be committed of the 
rights of a nation will justify it in inflicting war, the next object is, to 
draw the line of separation, and distinguish between those violations of 
the rights of nations which justify, and those which do not justify, the 
extremity of war. 

As the evils which war produces are exceedingly great, it is, first of 
all, evident, that no violation of rights which is not very great, will, upon 
the principle which we have so often recognized, suffice to justify it. 
Of two evils, the least, is the choice of all sound legislation. 

Of the violation of the rights of individuals, iu the same country, the 
cases meet for punishment are capable of being pointed out, with a 
degree of accuracy, not wanting much of perfection. Of the violation 
of the rights of nations, commniitted by one nation against another, the 
cases which would justify the remedial operation of war are much more 
difficult to define. ‘The difficulty, indeed, is vot universal; for there are 
cases which may be very satisfactorily defined ; and as far as definition 
can go, it is of the utmost importance that it should be carried. Uncer- 
tainty, then, pervades only one part of the field; which the more we 
are able to lessen, the greater is the advantage in favour of humanity. 
If a proper code of international law were formed, there would 
be certain defined violations of the rights of nations which would be 
pointed out, not only as deserving the indignation and hatred of all the 
world, but as justifying the injured nation before all the world, in inflict- 
ing upon its injurer the calamities of war. There would also be certain 
other injuries pointed out, of a more doubtful character, which might, 
or might not, according to circumstances not easy to define, be such as 
to justify recourse to war. The injuries of this secondary character, also, 
which might, or might not, according to circumstances, justify a war, are 
capable of being pointed out with a certain degree of accuracy. Toa 
certain degree, likewise, the circumstances which would convert them 


20 


into justifying causes, are capable of being foreseen. So far definition 
is capable of extending, and so far, of course, it ought to be carried. 

In illustration of this latter class of injuries, we may select the most 
remarkable, perhaps, and important of all the instances; preparations 
for a threatened attack. A sense of security is one of the most valuable 
treasures of a nation; and to be deprived of that sense of security, 1s one 
of the greatest of injuries. But what state of preparation shall, or shalk 
not be considered as justifying the threatened nation in striking the first 
blow, in order not to give its enemy the advantage of completing his 
preparations, and making bis attack just at the moment when it would be 
most destructive, it is perhaps impossible to determine, for all cases, 
beforehand; though, no doubt, a certain progress may be made towards 
that determination, and the bounds of uncertainty may be greatly re- 
duced. 

We are aware how general, and therefore how unsatisfactory, these 
observations are, on the important subject of defining those violations of 
the rights of nations which ought to be regarded as justificatory causes of 
war; but at the same time it is to be observed, that not much sore could 
have been done without framing the code, by actually enumerating and 
defining the violations for which that remedy should be reserved 

Another consideration is now to be weighed. It is evideut that what- 
ever injuries are done by one nation to another, compensation may almost 
always be made for them. It is equally evident, that whatever injury 
may have been sustained, if compensation is made for it, the justificatory 
cause of war is removed. 

The doctrine of compensation, therefore, is an important part of 
international jurisprudence. Before recourse is had to war, for any 
vialation of rights, compensation ought first to be demanded; and no 
war, except in cases fit for exception, should be regarded as just, which 
this demand had not preceded ; a demand which should be made through 
a constituted organ, and in a predetermined mode, as we shall more fully 
describe in a subsequent page, when we come to treat of an international 
tribunal. 

As there can be no reason why the demand of compensation should not 
always precede the use of arms, except in cases of such a necessity as 
will not allow time for demanding compensation—a necessity for the 
immediate use of arms, in order to prevent au evil immediately impending 
—those cases of urgent necessity should, as far as possible, be sought 
out, and defined. 

Other circumstances may be enumerated, as belonging to this first stage 
of the remedy, aguinst a nation, which places itself in an attitude, affect- 
ing the sense of security of any of its neighbours. If a nation is making 
preparations, or executiug any other measures, calculated to excite alarm, 
it may be called upon to desist from them; or it may be called upon to 
give security, that it will not make a hostile use of them. Of these se- 
curities, hostages are one of the most familias instances. Various other 
instances will easily present themselves to the consideration of our rea- 


91 


ders. Upon this part of the subject, therefore, it is unnecessary for us 
to enlarge. 

It thus appears, that we may lay down, with a considerable degree of 
precision, the conditions upon which the commencement of a war ought 
to be regarded as just. It remains, under this head of inquiry, that we 
show how it may, as far as possible, be determined, what ought to be 
regarded as just and unjust in the modes of carrying it on. 

‘This is an inquiry of more complexity, a good deal, than the first. In 
looking out for a guiding principle, it is evidently necessary to keep in 
view the end to which every just war is of necessity restricted. ‘That is, 
compensation for an injury received, and security that a fresh injury 
shall not be committed. Combining this with the grand principle of 
humanity and utility, in other words, of morality; namely, that all evil, 
wilfully occasioned, and not calculated to produce a more than equivalent 
good, is wicked, and to be opposed, we obtain one compreliensive and 
highly important rule; which is this: That in the modes of carrying on 
war, every thing should be condemned by the law of nations, which, 
without being more conducive, or more in any considerable degree, to 
the attainment of the just end of the war, is much more mischievous to 
the nation against whom it is done. 

As the end is to be gained, in most cases, only by inflicting a loss of 
men and property, upon the opposing nation, it would be desirable that 
the distinction should be drawn between the modes of inflicting this loss, 
which are the most, and those which are the least calculated, to inflict 
pain and suffering, without bemg more conducive to the end, 

One distinction is sufficiently remarkable; namely, the distinction 
between the men who are in arms or actually opposed to the desigis of 
the belligerent, and the men who are not so; also between the property 
which belongs to the government of the opposing nation, aud that which 
belongs to private individuals composing the uation. 

With respect to the first class of objects, the men in arms, and the 
property of the government, there is not much difficulty. ‘l'o produce 
the loss of them, as rapidly as possible, till the end or purpose of the 
war is obtained, appears to be a privilege which cannot be separated 
from the right of warring at all. 

With respect to the loss of the men, indeed, there is an important re- 
striction. It means the loss of them for the purposes of the war, and no 
more. If it be practicable to put them in a situation in which they can 
no longer be of any service to the war, all farther injury to them should 
be held unjustifiable. Under this rule falls the obligation, so generally 
recogmzed, of making our enemies, as often as possible, prisoners, 
instead of killing them, and of treating them with humanity, while 
retained in that condition. 

That part of the subject, therefore, which relates to men in arms, and 
to such property as belongs immediately to the government, it 1s not Im- 
possible to include in rules of tolerable precision. ‘The difficulty is, with 
respect to those individuals who, composing the body of the nation, form 


22 


ne part of the men in arms, and with respect to the property of such 
individuals. 

Though it would not be correct to say, that these do not contribute, 
or rather that they may not be made to contribute, to the means with 
which the government carries on the war; yet it would be absurd not to 
recognize a very broad distinction between them, and the men and things 
which are immediately applied, or applicable to the war. A difference, 
therefore, equally broad, ought, m reason, to be made in the mode of 
treating them. ‘The mode of treating the one ought to be very different 
from that of treating the other. As the rule of destruction must be the 
rule with regard to the first, only limited by certain restrictions; so the 
rule of forbearance and preservation ought to be the rule with regard to 
the latter, only to be infringed upon special and justifying circumstances. 

Thus far we seem to have travelled with the advantage of light to our 
path. We may go a little farther, with equal certainty, and say, that as 
far as regards the persons of those who are not engaged in the immediate 
business of hostility, very few occasions can occur, in which it would be 
allowable, upon any just principle of international law, to do them any 
injury. Leaving them out of the question, we narrow it to the case of 
the property belonging to individuals ; and shall now proceed to see how 
far the protection of it can be embraced within general rules. 

We must suppose the case, which is the strongest, that of an invading 
army. ‘The advantage which is capable of being derived to such an 
enemy, by seizing and destroying the property of individuals, bears, 
unless in certain very extraordinary instances, no sort of proportion, 
to the evil inflicted upon the individuals. ‘This, we presume, cannot 
admit of a dispute. Upon the principle, therefore, so often recognized, 
as that, the dictates of which ought in this affair to be solely obeyed, 
no such destruction, unless in such instances, ought to be sanctioned 
by the law of nations. Such property, it is well known, can rarely be 
counted upon, as any considerable resource; because it is to a very 
great extent in the power of the people invaded to drive their property 
away, or to destroy it. The property of individuals, in an invaded 
country, would in general be a much more certain resource to an 
invading army, if that army were to purchase from them the articles which 
it desired. And, perhaps, this would be the most advantageous com- 
promise, of which the circumstances admit; namely, that the invading 
army should abstain from the violation of private property; but that it 
should in return have the benefit of an unrestricted market ; that nothing 
should be done on the part of the government of the invaded country to 
prevent its subjects from buying and selling with the invaders, as they 
would with any other parties. 

_It may no doubt be true, that the plunder and devastation of a pro- 
vince, or other portion of a country, must have an effect in diminishing 
the resources of the government for carrying on the war, In this point 
of view it must be allowed that the destruction of private property is of 
some importance to the invading nation with regard to the result of the 


23 


war. But the question, in settling the difficulties of international juris- 
prudence, is not whether an advantage is gained, but whether the advan- 
tage, such as it 18, be not gained, at too great a cost. 

_ Af it be certain that the losing party, in consequence of the destruction 
in question, loses more than the gaining party gains, it is certain that the 
two parties, taken together, are losers by the proceeding ; and of course 
that nations, in the aggregate, are losers upon the whole. Nay, it is cer- 
tain that each nation, taken by itself, is a loser, upon the balance of the 
cases in which it is liable to lose, and those in which it is liable to gain. 
If it loses more im the cases in which it bears, than it gains in the cases 
im which it inflicts invasion; and if it is as liable to bear, as to inflict, 
which is the usual condition of nations, it follows clearly that it is its 
isterest to concur in a rule which shall protect the property of indivi- 
duals, in cases of invasion. 

Eyen in that more civilized mode, which has been adopted by invading 

armies, of availing themselves of the property of individuals ; by exacting 
contributions through the instrumentality of the local authorities; con- 
tributions which these authorities are left to partition among the people, 
as they may deem equitable; though it is admitted that this is a much 
Jess hurtful proceeding than military rapine, still we think, it will easily 
appear, that the evil inflicted upon the contributors is greater than the 
benefits derived to the receivers. 
_ Unless the amount thus received by an invading army is very con- 
siderable, the benefit which is derived, the aid which is gained towards 
accomplishing the end of the war, must be considered as trifling. But 
if a contribution, the amount of which can be of any considerable avail 
towards attaining the object of the war, is levied sudden'y upon a par- 
ticular district, a comparatively small portion of the invaded country, it 
must operate upon the contributors with a dreadful weight of oppression. 
Upon an equitable estimate of the circumstances, it can, therefore, hardly 
fail to appear, that, whether the contribution exacted is heavy or light (it 
must always be heavy to those who sustain it), the loss to those who 
suffer must greatly outweigh the advantage to those who receive. If it 
be so, this mode of exaction should, it is evident, be forbidden by the 
Jaw of nations. ' 

If these are the principles, upon which an international code, regarding 
this branch of the subject ought to be constructed, they will enable us to 
determine the question with regard to the property of individuals in 
another set of cireumstances, to which the rules of crvilized society have 
hardly yet begun to be applied. Whatever rules apply to the property 
of individuals found upon the land, the same rules ought, by parity of 
reason, it should seem, to apply to it when found upon the sea. 

The conduct of nations, however, has hitherto not been conformable 
to the parity which appears to belong to the two sets of cases. Some 
tenderness, more or less, according to the progress in civilization, appears 
to have been shown, by all but savages, to the property of individuals 
upon the land. ‘To this hour the property of individuals upon the sea Js 


24 


made prize of without thercy, by the most civilized mations in the 
world. ; : 

The notions of piracy, in fact, have, on this subject, unhappily pre- 
vailed, and governed the minds of men. Pirates make prey of every 
thing. Sailors, originally, were all pirates. The seafaring state was 
a belligerent state, of almost every vessel against every other vesseh 
Even when nations had gradually advanced into a more civilized state, 
and when their vessels abstained from injury to one another in a period 
of peace, they appear, when the ties of peace were dissolved, and they 
were placed with respect to one another in a state of war upon the seas, 
to have felt the force of none but their old associations, and to have 
looked upon the state of war as a state of piracy. “wo nations at war 
with one another continue to act towards the property of individuals 
belonging to one another, exactly as two nations of pirates would do. 

Assuredly this is a state of things, to which the present intelligence and 
morality of the world ought speedily to put an end. The very same 
reasoning which we have applied to the case of the property of indivi- 
duals upon the land, is not less conclusive when applied to the property 
of individuals upon the sea. The loss to the party losing is more than 
an equivalent for the gain to the party that gains. 

There is another consideration of great importance. All nations 
gain by the free operations of commerce. If then we were to suppose 
that the losses aud gains of the two belligerent parties balanced one 
another, which yet they never do, there is an advantage derived from 
their commerce to every nation on the earth to which, in any degree, 
either directly or indirectly, that commerce extends ; which advantage is 
either lost or diminished, by their preying upon the property of the 
individuals belonging to one another. This, therefore, is an unques- 
tionable balance of loss, to the general community of nations, which the 
law of that community ought to endeavour to prevent. 

If, then, we should suppose that it were enacted as the law of nations, 
that the property of individuals passing on the seas should be equally 
respected, in peace and in war, we may proceed to consider whether any 
disadvantage, nearly countervailing the general good, would thence accrue 
to the belligerents. 

It may be alleged, that a nation at war with another is retarded in 
reducing its antagonist, by the riches which the commerce of that 
antagonist, if undisturbed, will place at its disposal. But it is evident 
that an advantage to one of two antagonists, when compensated to the 
other, by a power to overcome that advantage, exactly equivalent, is in 
reality no advantage at all. Such is the case with the advantage accruing 
to the nation with which another is at war, when the property of indivi- 
duals upon the sea is allowed to pass unmolested. If its riches are 
increased by freedom of commerce, so are those of its antagonist. The 
advantages are equal, where the circumstances are equal, which, in the 
oa Pe) of cases, they undoubtedly are. 

f it be still objected, that there may be cases in which they are not 


Q5 


equal, the answer is obvious, and incontrovertible. There is no general 
rule without its exceptions, but partial evil must be admitted for general 
good. Besides, if the case were very remarkable, it might be excepted 
trom the general rule. 

If this were adopted as part of the law of nations, all those questions 
respecting the maritime traffic of Neutrals, questions which have been 
the source of so much troublesome inquiry, so much animosity, and so 
much mischief, would be immediately at an end. If the traffic of the 
belligerents, so far as concerned the property of individuals, were free, 
so would be that of all.neutral nations. 

Places actually blockaded, that is surrounded with an hostile force for 
the immediate purpose of being reduced, either by arms, or by famine, 
would still form exceptions ; because the admission of ships into them, 
with supplies either of food, or munition of war, would be directly at 
variance with the very object of the blockade. 

In all other cases, the admission either of provisions or of instruments 
of war into a belligerent country, ought, undoubtedly, upon the principle 
of utility, not to be disturbed. ‘The benefit, except in rare and remarka- 
ble cases, could not be material to the country into which they might 
enter, nor hence the injury to its antagonist; on the other hand, that 
antagonist would enjoy the same privilege of the free admission of those 
commodities, and thus they would be equal in all respects. ‘The incon- 
venience, however, which would thus be saved to the neutrals—the 
annoyance of search, the loss by detention, the occasions of quarrel— 
are known to be evils of no ordinary magnitude. 

The desertion of sailors from the ships of a belligerent to those of 
a neutral has given rise to disputes in one instance only, that of Great 
Britain and the United States of America. ‘The question to be deter- 
mined, in laying down the principles of internatioual jurisprudence, is, 
whether this desertion ought to be considered as constituting a ground 
for the general right of search; im other words, whether the evil to which 
a belligerent is exposed by desertion, or rather by that portion of deser- 
tion which can be prevented by the right of search, is an equivalent for 
all the evil which is unavoidably produced by it. 

Desertion must take place either from the ships of war of the belli- 
gerent, or from its merchant ships. 

In respect to ships of war, it is so easy for a belligerent to prevent 
desertion to neutrals, at least in any such degree as to constitute a great 
evil, that it would be altogether absurd to speak of it as fit to be 
compared with the evils Arising from the right of search. The only occa- 
sions on which ships of war can be exposed to desertion to neutrals, 
must be those on which they go into a neutral port. But on those, 
comparatively rare, occasions, they can so easily take precaution against 
desertion, that the danger to which they are exposed is hardly worth 
regarding. 

When the sailors belonging to merchant ships transfer their services to 
the ships of a neutral, it is not to be called desertion. It can only take 


26 


place, in very considerable numbers, when seamen’s wages sn the neutral 
country are much higher than in the belligerent. The sailor, in this 
case, leaves his own for another country, only because he improves 
his situation by so doing. ‘This is a liberty, which, as it ought to belong 
to every body, so it ought not to be withheld from the sailor. If, indeed, 
any nation thinks proper to forbid any class of its people to leave their 
country, as England with regard to its artificers, other countries cannot 
help that; but they ought not to be called upon to lend their aid to such 
an antisocial regulation, by allowing their vessels to be searched, as 
security against its infringement. Besides, it is evident, that there 1s 
a much greater security, arising from the very nature of the case, against 
the chance of a nation’s being, to any considerable degree, deprived of 
its sailors by any such means. If the sailors go into the neutral country 
because wages are higher there, a small number only will have gone, 
when wages, from diminution of the numbers, will begin to rise in the 
country which they have left, and from increase of the numbers, will 
begin to fallin the country to which they have been tempted to repair. 
When the wages of seamen have thus sufficiently risen, in the belligerent 
country, which they are sure to do if the demand for them rises, the 
sailors will not only come back from every country in the world, but the 
sailors of other countries will hurry along with them; and the evil of 
desertion cures itself. 

Only two questions, of any great importance, appear to remain; that 
relating to the march of troops, for a hostile purpose, through a neutral 
country, and that relating to the extent to which the operations of a suc- 
cessful war ought to be pursued. 

According to the principles which we have already laid down for 
regulating the proceedings of a hostile army even in the invaded country, 
namely, that of committing no plunder, and enjoying the right of market, 
it appears that the right of passing through a neutral country on similar 
terms should be refused to no party. This rule, while it holds out equal 
advantages to all belligerents, admits, less than any other rule, grounds 
of dispute. 

The end, which we have already described as that alone the pursuit of 
which can render any war justifiable, sufficiently defines the extent to 
which the operations of a successful war ought to proceed. The end of 
every justifiable war is to obtain compensation for an injury sustained, 
and security against the repetition of it. The last point, that of security, 
alone admits any uncertainty. Nations are apt to exaggerate the 
demand for security; to require too much ; very often unconsciously, 
from the mere craviags of self-love ; sometimes fraudulently, as a cover 
for ambitious views. As the question, however, respecting what may or 
may not, in each instance, he suflicient security, is a question of fact, not 
of law, it must be determined, if determined at all, by a tribunal 
empowered to take cognizance of the facts. 


27 


ie 


O;/ the construction of an International Code, and an International 
Tribunal How the nations might concur in framing an Interna- 
tional Code.— How an International Tribunal should be constructed.— 
Form of procedure before the International Tribunal. 


We have now then laid down the principles by which, in our opinion, 
the rights of nations, in respect to one another, ought to be determined ; 
and we have shown in what manner those principles should be applied, 
in order to come to a decision, in the most remarkable cases. The 
minor points it is, of course, not in our power to illustrate in detail; but 
that will not, we should hope, be difficult, after the exemplification 
exhibited, and the satisfactory solutions at which we seem to have 
arrived, of all the more considerable questions which the subject presents. 

From what has been shown, it is not difficult to see, what would be 

the course pursued by nations, if they were really actuated by the desire 
of regulating their general intercourse, both in peace and war, on the 
principles most advantageous to them all. 
_ Two grand practical measures are obviously not only of primary 
importance toward the attainment of this end, but are of indispensable 
necessity toward the attainment of it in any tolerable degree. ‘These 
are, first, the construction of a Code; and, secondly, the establishment of 
a Tribunal. 

It is perfectly evident, that nations will be much more likely to con 
form to the principles of intercourse which are best for all, if they have 
an accurate set of rules to go by, than if they have not. In the first 
place, there is less room for mistake; in the next, there is less room for 
plausible pretexts ; and last of all, the approbation and disapprobation of 
the world is sure to act with tenfold concentration, where a precise rule 18 
broken, familiar to all the civilized world, and venerated by it all. 

How the nations of the civilized world might concur in the framing of 
such a code, it is not difficult to devise. ‘Lhey might appoint delegates 
to meet, for that purpose, in any central and convenient place; where, 
after discussion, and coming to as full an understanding as possible upon 
all the material points, they might elect some one person, the most capa- 
ble that could be found, to put these their determinations into the proper 
words and form, in short, to make a draught of a code of international law, 
as effectually as possible providing for all the questions, which could 
arise, upon their interfering interests, between two nations. After this 
draught was proposed, it should be revised by the delegates, and approved 
by them, or altered till they deemed it worthy of their approbation. It 
should then be referred to the several governments, to receive ite final 
sanction from their approbation; but, in the mean time, it should be 
published in all the principal languages, and circulated as extensively as 
possible, for the sake of two important advantages. ‘The first would be, 
that, the intelligence of the whole world being brought to operate upon 
it, and suggestions obtained from every quarter, it might be made as per- 


28 


fect as possible. The second would be, that the eyes of all thé world 
being fixed upon the decision of every nation with respect to the code, 
every nation might be deterred by shame from objecting to any im- 
portant article in it. we fj 

As the sanction of general opinion is that upon which chiefly, as we 
have already seen, such a code must rely for its efficiency, not a little 
will depend upon the mode in which it is recognized and taught. ‘The 
recoguition should in each country have all possible publicity and 
solemnity. Every circumstance which can tend to diffuse the opinion 
throughout the earth, that the people of each country attach the bighest 
importance to such a code, is to themselves a first-rate advantage ; 
because it must be of the utmost importance to them, that all the nations 
of the earth should behave towards them upon the principles of mutual 
beneficence; and nothing which they can do can have so great a tendency 
to produce this desirable effect, as its being generally known that they 
venerate the rules which are established for its attainment. 

If nations, then, were really actuated by the desirg of regulating their 
mutual intercourse upon principles mutually beneficent, they would adopt 
measures for having a code of international law constructed, solemnly 
recognized, and universally diffused and made known. 

But it is not enough that a code should exist ; every thing should be 
done to secure a conduct conformable to it. Nothing is of so much 
importance for this purpose as a tribunal; before which every case of 
infringement should be tried, the facts of it fully and completely ex- 
plored, the nature and degree of the infringement ascertained ; and from 
which a knowledge of every thing material to the case should be as 
rapidly as possible diffused through the world; before which also all 
cases of doubt should regularly come for determination : and thus wars, 
between nations which meant justly, would always be avoided, and 
a stigma would be set upon those which justice could not content. 

The analogy of the code, which is, or ought to be, framed by each 
state for regulating the intercourse of its own people within its own terri- 
tory, throws all the illustration which is necessary upon the case of 
a tribunal for the international code. It is well known, that laws, 
however carefully and accurately constructed, would be of little avail in 
any country, if there was not some organ, by means of which it might be 
determined when individuals had acted in conformity with them, and 
when they had not; by which also, when any doubt existed respecting 
the conduct which in any particular case the law required, such doubt 
might be authoritatively removed, and one determinate line of action 
prescribed. Without this, it is sufficiently evident, that a small portion 
of the benefit capable of being derived from laws would actually be 
attained. It will presently be seen how much‘of the benefit capable of 
being derived from an international code must be lost, if it is left 
destitute of a similar organ. We shall first consider, in what manner 
au international tribunal might be constructed ; and, next, in what man- 
ner it night be appointed to act. 


29 


As it is understood that questions relating to all nations should conte 
before it, what is desirable 1s, that all nations should have equal security 
for good judicature from it, and should look with equal confidence to its 
decisions. 

_An obvious expedient for this purpose is, that all nations should con- 
tribute equally to its formation; that each, for example, should send to 
ita delegate, or judge. Its situation should be chosen for its accessibility, 
and tor the means of publicity which it might afford; the last being, 
beyond comparison, the advantage of greatest importance. As all nations 
could not easily, or would not, send, it would suffice if the more civilized 
and leading nations of the world concurred in the design, with such a 
number of the less considerable as would be sure to follow their example, 
and would be desirous of deriving advantage from an instrument of protec- 
tion, which to them would be of peculiar importance. 

As it is found by specific experience, and is, indeed, a consequence of 
the ascertained Jaws of human nature, that a numerous assembly of men 
cannot form a good judicatory; and that the best chance for good judicial 
service is always obtained when only one man judges, under the vigilant 
eyes of interested and intelligent observers, baving full freedom to de- 
liver to the world their sentiments respecting his conduct; the whole of 
these advantages maybe obtained, in this case, by a very effectual expe- 
dient. If precedent, also, be wanted, a thing which in certain minds 
holds the place of reason, it is amply furnished by the Roman law; ac- 
cording to which, a great number of judges having been chosen for the 
judicial business generally of the year, a selection was made out of that 
number, according to certain rules, for each particular case. 

Every possible advantage, it appears, would be combined in the inter- 
national tribunal, if the whole body of delegates, or judges, assembled 
from every country, should, as often as any case for decision came before 
them, hold a conference, and, after mature deliberation, choose some 
one individual of their body, upon whom the whole duty of judge should, 
in that case, devolve; it being the strict duty of the rest to be present 
during the whole of his proceedings, and each of them to record sepa- 
rately his opinion upon the case, after the decision of the acting judge had 
been pronounced. 

It would be, no doubt, a good general rule, though one can easily 
foresee cases in which it would be expedient to admit exceptions, that 
the judge, who is in this manner chosen for each instance of the judicial 
service, should not be the delegate from any of the countries immediately 
involved in the dispute. The motive to this is sufficiently apparent. 

We apprehend, that few words will be deemed necessary to show how 
many securities are thus provided for the excellence of the judicial 
service. 

In the first place, it seems impossible to question, that the utmost 
fairness and impartiality are provided for, in the choice of the judge; 
because, of the two parties involved in the dispute, the one is represented 
by a delegate as much as the other, and the rest of the delegates are in- 


30 


different between them. In general, therefore, it is evident, that the 
sinister interest on the two sides being balanced, and there being a great 
preponderance of interest in favour of nothing but a just decision, that 
interest will prevail. 

The best choice being made of a judge, it is evident that he would be 
80 situated, as to act under the strongest securities for good conduct. 
Acting singly, he would bear the whole responsibility of the service re- 
quired at his hands. He would act under the eyes of the rest of the 
assembled delegates, men versed in the same species of business, chosen 
on account of their capacity for the service, who could be deceived nei- 
ther with respect to the diligence which he might exert, nor the fairness 
and honesty with which he might decide; while he would be watched by 
the delegates of the respective parties, having the power of interest sti- 
mulating them to attention; and would be sure that the merits or demerits 
of his conduct would be made fully known to the whole, or the greater 
part of the world. 

The judicatory being thus constituted, the mode of proceeding before 
it may be easily sketched. 

The cases may be divided into those brought before it by the parties 
concerned in the dispute; aud those which it would be its duty to take 
up, when they were not brought before it by any of the parties. 

A variety of cases would occur, in which two nations, having a ground 
of dispute, and being unable to agree, would unite in an application to 
the international tribunal for an adjustment of their differences. On such 
occasions, the course of the tribunal would be sufficiently clear. The 
parties would plead the grounds of their several claims: the judge would 
determine liow far, according to the law, they were competent to support 
those claims; the parties would adduce their evidence for and against the 
facts, on which the determination of the claims was found to depend ; the 
judge would receive that evidence, and finally decide. All this is so per- 
fectly conformable to the course of pleading, and receiving proof, in the 
case of suits between individuals, as analyzed and explained in the Article 
JURISPRUDENCE, that it is unnecessary to be more particular here, If 
farther exposition is required, it will be found upon a reference to the ar- 
ticle to which we allude. Decision, in this case, it is observable, fully 
accomplishes its end; because the parties come with an intention of 
obeying it. 

Another, and a numerous class of cases, would probably be consti- 
tuted, by those who would come before it, complaining of a violation of 
their rights by another nation, and calling for redress. 

This set of cases is analogous to that, in private judicature, when one 
man prosecutes another for some punishable offence. 

_ dt should be incumbent upon the party thus applying to give notice of 
its intention to the party against which it is to complain, and of the day 
on which it means that its complaint should be presented. 

If both parties are present, when the case comes forward for tial they 
both plead, according to the mode described in the Article J URISP RU- 


31 


DENCE; evidence is taken upon the decisive facts; and if injury has been 
committed, the amount of compensation is decreed. When it happens 
that the defendant is not present, and refuses to plead, or to subniit, in 
this instance, to the jurisdiction of the court, the inquiry should notwith- 
standing go on; the allegations of the party present should be heard, and 
the evidence which it adduces should be received. The non-appearance 
of the party defendant should be treated as an article of evidence to prove 
the truth of its opponent’s allegations. And the fact of not appearing 
should, itself, be treated as an offence against the law of nations. 

It happens, not unfrequently, when nations quarrel, that both parties 
are in the wrong; and on some of these occasions neither party might 
think proper to apply to an equitable tribunal. his fact, namely, that 
of their not applying to the international tribunal, should, itself, as stated 
before, be marked in the code as an international offence, and should be 
denounced as such by the international tribunal. But even when two 
offending parties do not ask for a decision from the international tribunal, 
it is not proper that other nations should be deprived of the benefit of 
such a decision. If these decisions constitute a security against injustice 
from one another to the general community of nations, that security must 
not be allowed to be impaired by the refractory conduct of thosé who 
dread an investigation of their conduct. 

Certain forms, not difficult to devise, should be laid down, according 
to which, on the occurrence of such cases, the tribunal should proceed. 
First of all, it is evident, that the parties in question should receive inti- 
mation of the intention of the court to take cognisance of their disputes, 
on a cerfain day. If the parties, one or both, appeared, the case would 
fall under one of those which have been previously as above considered. 
If neither party appeared, the court would proceed to estimate the facts 
which were within its cognisance. 

It would have before it one important article of evidence, furnished by 
the parties themselves, namely, the fact of their non-appearance. This 
ought to be considered as going far to prove injurious conduct on both 
sides. ‘The evidence which the court would have before it, to many spe- 
cific facts, would be liable to be scanty, from the neglect of the parties 
to adduce their pleas and evidence. The business of the court, in these 
circumstances, would be, to state correctly such evidence, direct or ¢ir- 
cumstantial, as it had before it; giving its full weight to the evidence con- 
tained in the fact of non-appearance; and to pronounce the decision, 
which the balance of the evidence, such as it was, might be found to 
support. me 

Even in this case, in which the practical effect of a decision of the 
international court may be supposed to be the least, where neither party 
is disposed to respect the jurisdiction, the benefit which would be 
derived would by no means be inccnsiderable. A decision solemnly 
pronounced by such a tribunal, would always have a strong effect upom 
the imaginations of men. It would fix, and concentrate the disappro- 
bation of mankind. 


82 


Such a tribunal would operate as a great school of political morality. 
By sifting the circumstances, in all the disputes of nations, by distin- 
guishing accurately between the false colours and the true, by stripping 
off all disguises, by getting at the real facts, and exhibiting them in the 
true point of view, by presenting all this to the world, and fixing the 
attention of mankjnd upon it by all the celebrity of its elevated situation, 
it would teach men at fares to distinguish. By habit of contemplating 
the approbation of such a court attached to just proceeding, its disappro- 
bation to unjust; men would learn to apply correctly their own appro- 
bation and disapprobation ; whence would flow the various Important 
effects, which these sentiments justly excited, would naturally and un- 
avoidably produce. yas ‘ 

As, for the reasons adduced at the beginning of this article, the inten- 
tion should never be entertained of supporting the decisions of the inter- 
national court by force of arms, it remains to be considered what means 
of another kind could be had recourse to, in order to raise to as high 
@ pitch as possible the motive of nations respectively to yield obedience 
to its decisions. 4 

We have already spoken of the effect which would be produced, in 
pointing the sentiments of mankind, and giving strength to the moral sanc- 
tion, by the existence of an accurate code, and the decisions themselves of 
a well-constituted tribunal. 

To increase this effect to the utmost, publicity should be carried to the 
highest practicable perfection. The code, of course, ought to be 
universally promulgated and known. Not only that, but the best means 
should be in fall operation for diffusing a knowledge of the proceedings 
of the wibunal; a knowledge of the cases investigated, the allegations 
made, the evidence adduced, the sentence pronounced, and the reasons 
upon which it is grounded. 

The book of the law of nations, and selections from the book of the 
trials before the international tribunal, should form a subject of study in 
every school, and a knowledge of them a necessary part of every man’s 
education. In this manner a moral sentiment would grow up, which 
would, in time, act as a powerful restraining force upon the injustice of 
natrons, and give a wonderful efficacy to the international jurisdiction. 
No nation would like to be the object of the contempt and hatred of all 
other nations; to be spoken of by them on all occasions with disgust and 
indignation. On the other hand, there is no nation, which does not value 
highly the favourable sentiments of other nations; which is not elevated 
and delighted with the knowledge that its justice, generosity, and magna- 
nimity, are the theme of general applause. When means are taken to 
make it certain that what affords a nation this high satisfaction will follow 
a just and beneficial course of conduct; that what it regards with so 
much aversion, will infallibly happen to it, if it fails in the propriety 
of its own behaviour, we may be sure that a strong security is gained for 
a good intercourse among nations, 

Besides this, it does not seem impossible to find various incon- 


33 


veniences, to which, by way of penalties, those nations might be sub- 
jected, which refused to conform to the prescriptions of the international 
code. 

Various privileges granted to other nations, in their intercourse with 
one another, might be withheld from that nation which thus demeaned 
itself in a way so contrary to the general interests. In so far as the 
withholding of these privileges might operate unfavourably upon indivi- 
duals. belonging to the refractory nations,—individuals who might be little, 
or not at all, uccessary to the guilt, the effect would be the subject of 
proportional regret. Many, however, in the concerns of mankind, are 
the good things which can only be attained with a certain accompaniment 
of evil. ‘The rule of wisdom, in such cases, is, to make sure that the good 
outweighs the evil, and to reduce the evil to its narrowest dimensions. 

We may take an instance first from trivial matters. The ceremonial 
of other nations might be turned against the nation, which, in this com- 
mon concern, set itself in opposition to the interests of others. ‘The 
lowest place in company, the least respectful situation on all occasions 
of ceremony, might be assigned to the members of that nation, when 
travelling or residing in other countries. Many of those marks of dis- 
respect, implying injury neither to person nor property, which are checked 
by penalties in respect to others, might be free from penalties in respect 
to them. From these instances, adduced merely to illustrate our mean- 
ing, it will be easy to see in what manner a number of considerable in- 
conveniencies might, from this source, be made to bear upon nations 
refusing to conform to the beneficial provisions of the international 
code. 

Besides the ceremonial of other nations, means to the same end might 
be derived from the law. A number of cases might be found in which 
certain benefits of the law, granted to other foreigners, might be refused 
to them. They might be denied the privilege of suing in the courts, for 
example, on account of any thing except some of the higher crimes, the 
more serious violations of person or property. 

Among other things it is sufficiently evident, that this tribunal would 
be the proper organ for the trial of piracy. When preponderant incon- 
venience might attend the removing of the trial to the usual seat of 
the tribunal, it might delegate for that purpose the proper functionaries 
to-the proper spot. 

By the application of the principles, which we have thus expounded, 
an application which implies no peculiar difficulty, and requires nothing 
more than care in the detail, we are satisfied that all might be done, 
which is capable of being done, toward securing the benefits of inter- 
national law. 


(F. F.) 


i gow a eae 
ties Beleeeeiies 
ey Pee os 1) 


‘tom wt ae 
itipilir tient in ieSe— aes 

ors ast oF promnenent Drea lak fp 

“wD he = fh edabay yore gS Ong) 
wa ries te ere ere 

op tune a-a §- occdes, : 

Pe ieee & «eet 

ti 2) 4 ipe ee fhe SDE 

Segputs re 3 


Ni 


| LIBRARY . 
DUNIOR COLLEGE DIS (ae 
er Lous. MO- 


BK 320. M645E 
ESSAYS ON pay a rag = 
i” _ AND L 


| | | Mh 


| 


St. 30 uis 00 1 415