T H E 


Has TORY 


AND 
Paoee NT STATE 


oO F 


ELECTRICITY, 


fie ok ot 


ORIGINAL EXPERIMENTS, 


By JOSEPH PRIESTLEY, LL.D. F.R.S. 


Caufa latet, vis sft notifima. 


Ovip. 


L°O.N DO N, 


Printed for J. Dopstry in Pall-Mall, J. Jounson and 
B. DavenporT in Pater-nofter Row, and T. Capetyt 
(Succeffor to Mr. Mixiar) in the Strand. MDCCLXVII. 


A x. Ts. Samed 
Y HOF 21 
; G:U7A 
4aTATe? TUudea ad 
I oO b 
ee. IOIHTO Ga ec 
is eee 


— 


@TUAMI AGIA “TAVITA 


: so a deo hae 


TO 


THE RIGHT HONOURABLE 
JAMES Earl of Morton, 


PRESIDENT OF THE Roya Sociery, 


This HISTORY, &c. 
Is, 


WITH THE GREATEST RESPECT, 
INSCRIBED, 
By His LORDSHIP’s 
Most OBEDIENT, 
Anp Most HumMBLe 


SERV AN,T, 


POsLPH PRIESTLEY 


's) 
v7 
iu rl 
= : 


tee 


Dhelaet 


a 
» ~ 


THE 


Bom BLA Cok. 


"i 


myfelf that I thall give pleafure, as well to perfons who 

have a tafte for Natural Philofophy in general, as to elec- 
tricians in particular ; and I hope the work will be of fome 
advantage to the fcience itfelf. Both thefe ends would cer~ 
tainly be anfwered ina confiderable degree, were the executi- 
on at all anfwerable to the defign. 

Tue hiftory of electricity is a field full of pleafing objects, 
according to all the genuine and univerfal principles of tafte, 
deduced from a knowledge of human nature. Scenes like 
thefe, in which we fee a gradual rife and progrefs in:things, 
always exhibit a pleafing fpectacle to the human mind. 
Nature, in all her delightful walks; abounds with fuch views, 
and they are in a more efpecial manner connected with every 
thing that relates to human life and happinefs ; things, in their 
own nature, the moft interefting to us. Hence it is, that 
the power of affociation has annexed crouds of pleafing fenfa- 

a tions 


I N writing the difory and prefent frate of electricity, I flatter 


ii THE PREFACE, 


tions to the contemplation of every object, in which this pro- 
perty is apparent. 

Tuis pleafure, likewife, bears a confiderable refemblance 
to that of the fublime, which is one of the moft exquifite of 
all thofe that affect the human imagination. For an objeé in 
which we fee a perpetual progrefs and improvement is, as it 
were, continually rifing in its magnitude; and moreover, 
when we fee an actual increafe, in a long period of time paft, 
we cannot help forming an idea of an unlimited increafe in 
futurity ; which is a profpeé really boundlefs, and fublime. 

Tue pleafures arifing from views exhibited in civi/, natural, 
and philofophical hiftory are, in certain refpects, different from 
_ one another. Each has its advantages, and each its defedcts : 
and both their advantages and defects contribute to adapt them 
to different claffes of readers. 

Civit hiftory prefents us with views of the ftrongeft allies 
and fentiments of the human mind, into which every man 
ean eafily and perfectly enter; and with fuch incidents, re- 
fpecting happinefs and mifery, as we cannot help feeling would - 
alarm and affect us in avery fenfible manner ; and therefore, 
we are at prefent alarmed and affected by them to a confider~ 
able degree. Hence the pleafure we receivefrom civil hiftory 
arifes, chiefly, from the exercife it affords our paffions. The 
imagination is only entertained with fcenes which occafio- 
nally ftart up, like interludes, or epifodes, in the great drama, 
to which we are principally attentive. We are prefented, 
indeed, with the profpect of gradual improvement during the 
rife of great empires ; but, as we read on, we are obliged to 
contemplate the difagreeable reverfe. And the hiftory of 

moft 


THE PREFACE. hii 


. moft {tates prefents nothing but a tedious uniformity, without 


any ftriking events, to diverfify and embellith the profpect. 
Befides, if a man have any fentiment of virtue and benevo- 
lence, he cannot help being fhocked with a view of the 
vices and miferies of mankind; which, though they be not 
all, arecertainly the moft. glaring and ftriking objects in the 
hiftory of human affairs. An attention, indeed, to the con- 
dué of divine providence, which is. ever bringing good out 
of evil, and gradually conducting things to a more perfeét and 
glorious ftate, tends to throw a more agreeable light on the 


‘more gloomy parts of hiftory, but it requires great ftrength 


of mind to comprehend thofe views; and, after all, the feel- 
ingsof theheart too often over power theconclufions of the head, 
_Narvrat hiftory exhibits a boundlefs variety of {cenes, 
and yet infinitely analogous to one another. A naturalift has, 
eonfequently, all the pleafure which the contemplation of 
uniformity and variety can give the mind; and this is one of 
the moft copious fources of our intelle€tual pleafures. He 
is likewife entertained with a profpe& of gradual improve- 
ment, while he. fees every object in nature rifing by due 
degrees to its maturity and perfection. And while new plants, 
new animals, and new foflils are perpetually pouring in upon 
him, the moft pleafing views of the unbounded power, wif- 
dom, and goodnefs of God are conftantly prefent to his mind. 
But he has no dire& view of human fentiments and human 
actions ; which, by means of their endlefs affociations, great- 

ly heighten and improve all the pleafures of tafte. 
Tue hiftory of philofophy enjoys, in fome meafure, the 
advantages both of civil and natural hiftory, whereby it is 
a2 relieved 


iv THE) PREFACE., 


relieved from what is moft tedious and difgufting in both, 
Philofophy exhibits the powers of nature, difcovered and di- 
rected by human art: it has, therefore, in fome meafure, the 
boundlefs variety with the amazing uniformity of the one, 
and likewife every thing that is pleafing and interefting in 
the other. And the idea of continual rife and improvement 
is confpicuous in the whole ftudy, whether we be attentive 
to the part which nature, or that which men are acting in 
the great fcene. 

Ir is here that we fee the human underftanding to its great- 
eft advantage, grafping at the nobleft objects, and increafing 
its own powers, by acquiring to itfelf the powers of nature, 
and direéting them to the accomplifhment of its own views ; 
whereby the fecurity, and happinefs of mankind are daily 
improved. Human abilities are chiefly confpicuous in adapt- 
ing means to ends, and in deducing one thing from another 
by the method of analogy ; and where fhall we find inftances 
of greater fagacity, than in philofophers diverfifying the fitu- 
ations of things, in order to give them an opportunity of 
fhowing their mutual relations, affections, and influences ; 
deducing one truth and one difcovery from another, and ap- 
_ plying them all to the ufeful purpofes of human life, 

' Ip the exertion of human abilities, which cannot but form 
a delightful {peétacle for the human imagination, give us 
pleafure, we enjoy it here in a higher degree than while we 
are contemplating the fchemes of warriours, and the ftrata- 
gems of their bloody art. Befides, the object of philofophi- 
cal purfuits throws a pleafing idea upon the fcenes they ex- 
hibit ; whereas a reflection upon the real objects and views of 
: moft 


THE PREFACE: v 


moft ftatefmen and conquerors cannot but take from the plea- 
fure, which the idea of their fagacity, forefight, and com- 
prehenfion would. otherwife give to the virtuous and benevo- 
lent mind. Laftly, ‘the inveftigation of the powers of nature, 
like the ftudy of Natural Hiftory, is perpetually fuggefting to 
us views of the divine perfections and providence, which are 
both pleafing to the imagination, and improving to the heart: 

Bur though other kinds of hiftory may, in fome refpects, 
vie with that of philofophy, nothing that comes under the 
denomination of hiftory can exhibit inftances of fo fine a rife 
and improvement in things, as we {ee in the progrefs of the 
human mind, in philofophical inveftigations... To whatever 
height we have arrived in. natural fcience, our beginnings 
were very low, and our advances have been exceeding gradual, 
And to look down:from the eminence, and to fee, and com- 
pare all thofe gradual advances in the afcent, cannot but give 
the greateft pleafure to thofe who are feated'on the eminence, 
and who feel all the advantages of their clevated fituation. 
And confidering that we ourfelves are, by no means, at the 
top of human fcience; that the mountain ftill afcends beyond 
our fight, and that. we. are, in fact, not much above the foot 


of it, a view of the manner in which the afcent has been 


made cannot but animate us in our attempts) to. advance {till 
higher, and fuggeft methods and expedients to affift us in ous 
further progrefs. 
GREAT conquerors, we read, have been both animated, 
and alfo, in a great meafure, formed by reading the exploits 
of former conquerors. Why may not the fame effect be ex= 
pen from the hiftory of philofophy to philofophers? May 


not 


“fs THE: PREFACE. 


not even more be expected in this cafe? The wars of many 
of thofe conquerors, who received this advantage from hiftory, 
had no proper conne¢tion with former wars: They were only 
analogous to them. _ Whereas the whole bufinefs of philo- 
fophy, diverfified as it is, is but one; it being one and the 
fame great fcheme, that all philofophers, of all ages and na- 
tions have been conducting, from the beginning of the worlds 
fo that the work being the fame, the labours of one are not 
only analogous to thofe of another, but in an immediate 
manner fubfervient to them; and one philofopher fucceeds 
another in the fame field; as one Roman proconful fucceeded 
another, in carrying on the fame war, and purfuing the fame 
conquefts, in the fame country. In this cafe an intimate 
knowledge of what has been done before us cannot but greatly 
facilitate our future progrefs, if it be not abfolutely neceflary 
to it. 

. Turse hiftories are evidently much more neceflary in an 
advanced ftate of fcience, than in the infancy of it. At pre= 
fent philofophical difcoveries are fo many, and the accounts 
of them are fo difperfed, that it isnot in the power of any man 
to come at the knowledge of all that has been done, as a 
foundation for his own inquiries. And this circumftance 
appears to me to have very much retarded the progrefs of 
difcoveries. 

Nor that I think philofophical difcoveries are now at a 
ftand. On'the other hand, as quick advances feem to have 
been made of late years as in any equal period of time paft 
whatever. Nay, it appears to me, that the progrefs is really 
accelerated. But the increafe of knowledge is like the in- 

creafe 


THE’ PREFACE. vii 


ereafe of a city. The building of fome of the firft ftreets 
makes a great figure, is much talked of, and known to every 
body; whereas the addition of, perhaps, twice as much 
building, after: it has been fwelled to a confiderable fize, is 
not fo much.as taken notice of, and may be really unknown 
to many of theinhabitants. If the additions which have been 
made to the buildings of the city of London, in any fingle 
year of late, had been made two or three centuries ago, it 
could not have efcaped the obfervation of hiftorians ; whereas, 
now, they are fo feattered, and the proportion they bear to the 
whole city is fo fmall, that they are hardly noticed. For the 
fame reafon, the improvements that boys make at {chool; or 
that young gentlemen make at an academy, or the univerfity, 
are more taken notice of than all the knowledge they acquire 
afterwards, though they continue their ftudies with the fame 
afliduity and fuccefs. 

‘Tue hiftory of experimental philofophy, in the manner in 
in which it ought to be written, to be of much ufe, would 
be an immenfe work ; perhaps more than any one man ought 
to undertake; but it were much to be wifhed, ‘that perfons 
who have leifure, and fufficient abilities, would undertake it 
in feparate parts. I have executed it, in the beft manner I 
have been able, for that branch which has been my own fa- 
yourite amufement; and I fhall think myfelf happy, if the 
attempt excite other perfons to do the like for theirs. 

Tecannor help thinking myfelf to have been peculiarly 
fortunate, in undertaking the hiftory of electricity, at the 
moft proper time for writing it, when the materials were 
neither too few, nor too many to make a hiftory ; and when 

they 


Vil THE. PREFACE. 


they were fo {cattered, as to make the undertaking highly de- 
firable, and the work. peculiarly ufeful to Englifhmen. 

. Ixuikewise think myfelf peculiarly happy in my fubje@ it- 
felf. _ Few branches of Natural Philofophy would, I think, 
make fo good a fubject for a hiftory. Few can boat fuch a 
number of difcoveries, difpofed in fo fine a feries, all comprifed 
in fo fhort a {pace of time, and all fo recent, the principal ac- 
tors in the fcene being ftill living. 

Wirn feveral of thefe principal actors it has been my fin~ 
gular honour and happinefs to be acquainted; and it was their 
approbation-of my plan, and their generous encouragement 
that induced me to undertake the work. With gratitude I 
acknowledge my _ obligations to Dr. Watfon, Dr. Franklin, 
and Mr. Canton, for the books, and other. materials with 
which they have fupplied me, and for the readinefs with which 
they have given me any information in their power to procure. 
In a more efpecial manner am I obliged to Mr. Canton, for 
thofe original communications of his, which will be found in 
this work, and which cannot fail to give a value to it, in the 
efteem of all the lovers of electricity. My grateful acknow- 
ledgments are alfo due to the Rev. Mr. Price F. R. S. and'to 
the Rev. Mr. Holt, our profeflorof Natural Philofophy at War. 
rington, for the attention they have given to the work, and 
for the many important fervices they have rendered me with 
refpect to it. 5 

To the gentlemen above-mentioned the publics, likewife, 
indebted for whatever they may think of value in the original 
experiments which I have related of my own. — It was from 
converfing with them that I was firft led to entertain the 

thought 


‘ 
; 
y 


=r te. 


THE) -PREFACE. ix 


thought of attempting any thing new in this way, and it was 
‘their example, and favourable attention to my experiments, 
that animated mein the purfuit of them. In fhort, without 
them, neither my experiments, nor this work would have 
Had any exiftence. 

‘Tue hiftorical part of the work, the reader, I hope, will 
ola to be full and circumftantial, and at the fame time fuc- 
cing. Every new fact, or important circumftance, I have 
noted as it arofe; but I have abridged all long details, 
land ‘have carefully avoided all digreflions and repetitions. 
For this purpofe, I have: carefully perufed every original 
author; to which I could have recourfe; and every quo- 
tation in the margin points tothe authority that I myfelf con- 
fulted, and from which the account in the text was actually 
taken. Where I could not procure the original authors, I 
was obliged to quote them at fecond hand, but the reference 
will always fhow where that has been done. That I might 
not mifreprefent any writer, I have generally given the reader 
his own words, or’ the plaineft tranflation' I could make of 
them; and this I have done, not only in direct quotations, 
but where, | “by a’change of perfon, I have made the language 
nic own, 

‘IMaApe it a rule to myfelf, and I’ think“I have conftantly 
adhered to it, to take no notice of the miftakes, mifapprehen- 
fions, and-altercations of eleftricians ; except fo far as, I ap. 
prehended, a knowledge of them might be ufeful to their fuc- 
ceffors: » All'the' difputes which have no way contributed to 
the difcovery of truth, I would gladly confign to eternal ob- 
livion. Did it depend upon me, it fhould never be known 

ry to 


x THE (PREFACE. 


to pofterity, that there had ever been any fuch thing as envy, 
jealoufy, or cavilling among the admirers of my favourite 
ftudy. Ihave, as far as my beft judgment could dire& me, 
been juft to the merits of all perfons concerned. If any have 
made unjuft claims, by arrogating to themfelves the dif- 
coveries of others, I have filently reftored them to the right 
owner, and generally without fo much as giving a hint that 
any injuftice had ever been committed. If I have, in any 
cafe, given a hint, I hope it will be thought, by the offend- 
ing parties themfelves, to be a very gentle one; and that it will 
be a memento, which will not be without its ufe. ; 

I ruinx I haye kept clear of any mean partiality towards 
my own countrymen, and even my own acquaintance. If 
Englith authors are oftner quoted than foreign, it is becaufe 
they were more eafily procured ; and I have found a difficulty 
I could not have expected, in procuring foreign publication, 
upon this fubjec. 

I rinp it impoffible to write a preface to this work, with- 
out difcovering a little of the enthufiafm which I have con. 
tracted from an attention to it, by exprefling my withes, that 
more perfons of a ftudious and retired life would admit this 
part of experimental philofophy into their ftudies,. They 
would find it agreeably to diverfify a courfe of ftudy, by mix- 
ing fomething of action with {peculation, and giving fome 
employment to the hands and arms, as well as to the head. 
Ele¢trical experiments are, of all others, the cleaneft, and 
the moft elegant, that the compafs of philofophy exhibits. 
They are performed with the leaft trouble, there is an amaz- 
ing variety in them, they furnith the moft pleafing and fur- 


i 


oe 


THE PREF ACE! xi 


prifing appearances for the entertainment of one’s friends, and 
the expence of inftruments may well be fupplied, by a pro- 
i : deduction from the purchafe of books, which are 
generally ese and laid afide, without yielding half the enter- 
tainment.— 
THe Hives we are able to get fre books is, compa- 


_fatively, foon exhaufted; but philofophical inftruments are 


an endlefs fund of knowledge. By philofophical inftruments, 


however, I do not here mean the globes, the orrery, and 


others, which are only the’means that ingenious men have 
hit upon to explain their own conceptions of things to others; 
and which, therefore, like books, have no ufes more extenfive 
than the views of human ingenuity ; but fuch as the air pump, 
condenfing engine, pyrometer, &c. (with which electrical 
machines are to be ranked) and which exhibit the operations of 
nature, that is of the God of nature him(felf, which are infinitely 
various. By the help of thefe machines, we are able to put 
an endlefs variety of things into an endlefs variety of fituati- 
ons, while nature herfelf is the agent that fhows the refult. 
Hereby the laws of her aétion are’ obferved, and the moft 
important’ difeoveries may be made; fuch as thofe who firft 

Gontrived the inftrument could have'no idea of. 
“In elettricity, in particular, there is the greateft room to make 
new difcoveries. It isa field but juft opened, and’ requires 
no great ftock of particular preparatory knowledge: {0 that 
ly perfon who is tolerably well verfed in experimental phi- 
lofophy, may prefently ‘be upon a level with the moft expe- 
tienced electricians. Nay, this hiftory fhows, that feveral raw 
adventurers have made themfelves as confiderable, as fome who 
b 2 have 


xii THE’ PREFACE.’ 


have been, in other refpeéts, the greateft philofophers: I need 
not tell my reader ‘of how great weight this confideration is, 
to induce him to provide himfelf with an eleétrical apparatus: 
The pleafure arifing from the moft trifling difcoveries of one’s 
own far exceeds what we receive from underftanding the much 
more important difcoveries of others ; anda mere reader has no 
chance of finding new truths, in comparifon of him who now 
and then amufes himfelf with philofophical experiments. 

Human happinefs depends chiefly upon having fome object 
to purfue, and upon the vigour with which our faculties are 
exerted in the purfuit.. And, certainly, we muft be much 
more interefted in purfuits wholly our own, than when we are 
merely following the track of others. Befides, this pleafure 
has reinforcements from a variety of fources, which I fhall 
not here undertake to trace ; but which contribute to heighten 
the fenfation, far beyond any thing elfe of this kind that can 
be experienced by a perfon of a fpeculative turn of mind. 

Ir is a great recommendation of the ftudy of electricity, 
that it now appears tobe, by no means, a/fmall object. The 
electric fluid is no local, or occafional agent in the theatre of 
the world. . Late difcoveries thow that its prefence and effeats 
are every where, and that it acts,a principal part in the grand- 
eft and moft interefting fcenes of nature. It is not, like 
magnetifm, confined to one kind of bodies, but every thing 
we know is a conduétor or non-conduétor of electricity, Thefe 
are properties as effential and important as any they are pof- 
feffed of, and can hardly fail to how themfelves wherever the 
bodies are concerned. 

HITHERTO 


p-Hrruerto- philofophy has been. chief: converfant about 
the more fenfible properties of bodies ; electricity, together 
with chymiftry, - sand the doétrine of light and colours, feems 
to be giving us an inlet into their internal ftru€ture, on which 
all their fenfible properties depend. By purfuing this new 
light, therefore, the bounds of natural {cience may poffibly be 
extended, ‘beyond. what we can now form an idea of... New 
worlds may open to our view, and the glory of the great Sir 
Tfaac Newton himfelf, and all his contemporaries, be eclifped, 
by anew fet of philofophers, in . quite a new field of fpecu- 
ation... Could that great man revifit the earth, and view the 
experiments of the prefent race of electricians, he would: be 
no lefs‘amazed than Roger Bacon, or Sir Francis would have 
been at his. The cleric thock itfelf, if it be confidered 
‘attentively, will appear almoft as fuprifing, as any difcovery 
that he made; and the man who could have made that 
difcovery, by any reafoning @ priori; would have been réeck- 
oned a very great genius: but electrical difcoveries have been 
- made fo much by accident, that it is more the powers of nature; 
than of human genius, that excite our wonder with refpeé to 
them. But if the fimple eleG@tric fhock -would have appeared 
fo extraordinary to Sir Ifaac Newton, what would he have 
‘faid upon fecing the effects of a modern electrical battery, 
and an apparatus for drawing lightning from ‘the: clouds! 
What inexpreffible pleafure would it give a modern electrician, 
were'the thing poffible, to entertain fuch a man as Sir Ifaac 
fora few hours with his principal experiments ! 
To return from this excurfion to the bufine{s of a preface: 
‘Befides annie the hiitory of ele€trical difcoveries, in the or- 
der 


xiv THE PREFACE, 


der in which they were made, I thought it neceffary, in or- 
der to make the work more ufeful, efpecially to young elec- 
tricians, to fubjoin a methodical treatife on the fubject, con- 
taining the fubftance of the hiftory in another form, with ob- 
fervations and inftructions of my own. — The particular ufes 
of thefe parts of the work are exprefled at large in the intro- 
dutions to.them. And, in the laft place, I have given an 
account of fuch original experiments as. I have been fo fortu- 
nate as to hit upon myfelf. 

Lintitte the work the Aiftory and prefent fate of electricity; 
and whether there: be any new editions of the whole work or 
not, care will be taken to preferve the propriety of the title, 
by occafionally printing app1T10ns, in the fame fize, as new 
difcoveries are made ;_ which will always be fold at a reafon- 
able price to the purchafers of the book; or given gratis, if 
the: bulk be inconfiderable. . 

ConsiDERING what refpectable nels, have already hie 
noured this work with their valuable communications, I hope 
it will not be deemed arrogance in. me, if I here advertife, 
that if any perfon fhall make difcoveries in electricity, which 
he would chufe to fee recorded in this. hiftory, he will oblige 
me by a communication of them; and.if they be really origi- 
nal,’ a proper place fhall, certainly be affigned to them in the 

next edition, or paper of additions;, - And. I hope that, if 
electricians in general would fail.into this method, and make 
either a periodical, or occafional, . but joint, communication 
of their difcoveries to the public, the greateft,advantage would 
thence accrue to the fcience. 

bi bufinefs of philofophy is fo multiplied, that all the 

books 


THE PREFACE, xv 


- books of general philofophical tranfaétions cannot be purchaf- 
_ed by private perfons, or read by any petfon. It is high time 

to fubdivide the bufinefs, that every man may Have an oppor- 
tunity of feeing every thing that relates to his own favourite 
r tt and all the various branches of philofophy would find 
their account in this amicable feparation. Thus the nume- 
fous branches of a large overgrown family, in the patriarchal 
ages, found it neceflary to feparate ; and the convenience of 
the whdle, and the ftrength, and increafe of each branch were 

| by the feparation. Let the youngeft daughter of 
the feiences fet the example to the teft, and thow that the 


thinks: herefelf confiderable enough tomake her appearance in 


the world without the company of her fifters. 
_ Bur before this general {eparation, let each colle& toge- 
ther every thing that belongs to her, and march off with her 
whole ftock. To drop the allufion: let hiftories be written 
of all that has been done in every particular branch of {cience, 
_ and let the whole be feen at one view. And when once the 
entire progrefs, and prefent ftate of every {cience hall be fully 
and fairly exhibited, I doubt not but we fhall fee a new and 
capital @ra commence in the hiftory of all the fciences. Such 
an'eafy, full) and’and comprehenfive view of what has been 
done hitherto could not fail to give new life to philofophical 
It would fuggeft an infinity of new experiments, 
and ‘would tindoubtedly greatly accelerate the progrefs of 
knowledge ; which is at prefent retarded, as it were, by its 
own weight, and the mutual entanglement of its feveral parts. 
*°Twirr juft throw outa further hint, of what, I think, 
might be favourable to the increafe of philofophical knowledge. 
At prefent there are, in different countries in Europe, large 
incor- 


oe” 


xvi THE PREFACE, 


incorporated focieties, with funds for promoting philofophical 
knowledge in: general... Let philofophers now, begin to fub- 
divide themfelves, and enter into {maller combinations. Let 
the feveral companies make fmall funds, and appoint a direét- 
or of experiments. Let every member. have a ‘right to ap- 
point the trial of experiments in fome proportion to the fum 
he fubferibes, and let a periodical account be publifhed of the 
refult of them all, fuccefsful or unfuccefsful. In this manner, 
the powers of all the members would be united, and increafed. 
Nothing would be left untried which could be compafied at 
a moderate expence, and it being one perfon's bu/ine/s to attend 
to thefe experiments, they would be made, and reported 
without lofs of time. Moreover, as-all incorporations in thefe 
fmaller focieties fhould be avoided, they would be encouraged 
only in proportion as they were found to be ufeful ; and fuc+ 
cefs in fmaller things would excite them to attempt greater. , 

I sy no means difapprove of large, general and: ineorpo- 
rated focieties. They have their peculiar ufes too; but we 
fee by experience, that they are apt to grow too large, and. 
their forms are too flow for the difpatch of the minutia of bue 
finefs, in the prefent multifarious ftate of philofophy, Let 
recourfe be had to rich incorporated focieties, to defray. the 
expence of experiments, to which the funds of fmaller focie- 
ties thall be unequal. Let their tranfactions contain.a fum- 
mary of the more important difcoveries, ‘colleéted |from the 
fmaller periodical: publications. Let them, by rewards, and 
other methods, encourage thofe who diftinguith themfelves 
in the inferiour focieties ; and thus give a Deere 


to the venn bufinefs of capa 
I wist 


THE PREFACE. xvii 


ot: wist all the incorporated philofophical focieties in 

join their funds (and I with they were fufficient 

for the purpofe) to fit out thips for the complete difcovery of 

the face of the earth, and for many capital experiments which 
can only. be made in fuch extenfive voyages. 

‘Princes will never do this great bufinefs to any purpofe. 
The {pirit of adventure feems to be totally extiné in the pre- 
fent race of merchants. This difcovery is a grand defideratum 
in fcience; and where may this pure and noble enthufiafm for 
fuch difcoveries be expected but among philofophers, men 
uninfluenced by motives either of policy or gain? Let us 
think ourfelves happy if princes give-no obftruétion to fuch 
defigns. Let them fight for the countries when they are dif- 
covered, and let merchants fcramble for the advantage. that 
may be made of them. It will be an acquifition to philofo- 
phers if the feat of war be removed fo far from the feat of 
f{cience ; and freth room will be given to the exertion of ge- 
nius in trade, when the old beaten track is deferted, when 
the old fyftem of traffick is unhinged, and when new and 
more extenfive plans of commerce take place. I congratulate 
the prefent race of philofophers on what is doing by the Eng- 
lith court in this way; for with whatever view expeditions 
into the South feas are made, they cannot but be favourable 
to philofophy. 

Narurat Philofophy is a fcience which more efpecially 
requires the aid of wealth. Many others require nothing but 
what a man’s own reflection may furnifh him with. They 
who cultivate them find within themfelves every thing they 
want. But experimental philofophy is not fo independent. 

: c Nature 


xviii THE + PREFACE, 


Nature will not be put out of her way, and fuffer her mate- 
rials to be put into all that variety of fituations which philo- 
fophy requires, in order to difcover her wonderful powers, 
without trouble and expence. Hence the patronage of the 
great is effential to the flourifhing ftate of this {cience. Others 
may projet great improvements, but they only have the 
power of carrying them into execution. 

Besipes, they are the higher claffes of men which are moft 
interefted in the extenfion of all kinds of natural knowledge ; 
as they are moft able to avail themfelves of any difcoveries, 
which lead to the felicity and embellithment of human life. 
Almoft all the elegancies of life are the produce of thofe po- 
lite arts, which could have had no exiftence without natural 
fcience, and which receiye daily improvements from the fame 
fource. From the great and the opulent, therefore, thefe 
fciences have a natural claim for protection; and it is evi- 
dently their intereft not to fuffer promifing inquiries to be 
fufpended, for want of the means of profecuting them. 

Bur other motives, befides this felfith one, may reafonably 
-be fuppofed to attach perfons in the higher ranks of life to 
the fciences; _motives more exalted, and flowing from the 
moft extenfive benevolence. From Natural Philofophy have 
flowed all thofe great inventions, by means of which man- 
kind in general are able to fubfift with more eafe, and in 
greater numbers upon the face of the earth. Hence arife 
the capital advantages of men above brutes, and of civiliza- 
tion above barbarity. And by thefe fciences alfo it is, that 
the views of the human mind itfelf are enlarged, and our 


common nature improved and enobled. It is for the honour 
of 


THE PREFACE. xix 


of the ipsa therefore, that thefe {ciences fhould be culti- 


vated with the utmoft attention. 

- Anp of whom may thefe enlarged views, comprehenfive 
of fach great objects, be expeéted, but of thofe whom divine 
providence has raifed above the reft of mankind. Being free 
from moft. of the cares peculiar to individuals, they may.em- 
brace the interefts of the whole fpecies, feel for the wants of 


eri eer be concerned to fupport the dignity of human 


nature. 

aipiaddaie would I indulge the hope, that we fhall foon fee 
thefe motives operating in a more extenfive manner than they 
have hitherto done ;* that by the illuftrious example of a few, 
a tafte for natural fcience will be excited in many, in whom 
it will operate the moft effectually to the advantage of fcience 
and of the world; and-that all kinds of philofophical inquiries 
will, henceforward, be conducted with more: fpirit, and 
with more fuccefs than ever. 
- Were I to purfue this fubject, it would carry me far 
beyond the reafonable bounds of a preface. I hall therefore 
conclude with mentioning that fentiment, which ought to be 
uppermoft in the mind of every philofopher, whatever be the 
immediate objec of his purfuit; that fpeculation is only of 
ufeas it leads to pradfice, that the immediate ufe of natural 
fcience is the power it gives us over nature, by means of the 
knowledge we acquire of its laws; whereby human life is, in 
its prefent ftate, made more comfortable and happy; but that 
the greateft, and nobleft ufe of philofophical f{peculation is 
the difcipline of the heart, and the opportunity it affords of 
inculcating benevolent and pious fentiments upon the mind. 

¢2 A PHI« 


Be ‘THE PREFACE. 


“A PHILOSOPHER ought to be fomething’ greater, and better 
thea another man. The contemplation of the works of God 
thould give a fublimity to his virtue, fhould expand his be- 
nevolence, extinguith, ‘every thing mean, bafe, and felfith in 
his nature, give a dignity to all his fentiments, and teach 
him to afpire to the moral perfections of the great author of 
all things. What great and exalted beings would philofo- 
-phers be, would they but let the objects about which they 
are converfant have their proper moral effect upon their 
minds! A life {pent in the contemplation of the producti- 
ons of divine power, wifdom, and goodnefs, would be a 
life of devotion. The more we fee of the wonderful 
ftruéture of the world, and of the laws of nature, the 
more clearly da we comprehend their admirable ufes, to 
make all the percipient creation happy: a fentiment, which 
cannot but fill the heart with unbounded love, gratitude, and 
joy. 

__. Even every thing painful and difagreeable in the world ap- 
pears to a philofopher, upon a more attentive examination, 
to be excellently provided, as a remedy of fome greater incon- 
venience, or a neceffary means of a much greater happinefs ; 
fo that, from this elevated point of view, he fees all tempo- 
rary evils and inconveniences to vanifh, in the glorious prof- 
pect of the greater good to which they are fubfervient. Hence 
he is able to venerate and rejoice in God, not only in the 
bright fun fhine, but alfo in the darkeft thades of nature, 
whereas vulgar minds are apt to be difconcerted with the 
appearance of evil. 

Nor 


TORS THREE ASE = 


..))Nor is the cultivation ¢ of piety ufeful to us only as men, it 
_ seven ufeful ‘to. us as philofophers: and as true philofophy tends 
_ta. promote piety, fo a generous and manly piety is, recipro-_ 
» cally, fabfervient to the purpofes of philofophy; and this both 
- in a dire&t, and an indirect manner. While we keep in 
view the great final caufe of all the parts and the laws of 
- mature, we have fome clue, by which to trace the efficient 
» caufe, This is moft of all obvious in that part of philofophy 
_ which refpects the animal creation. As the great and excellént 
_ Dr. Hartley obferves. ‘* Since this world is a fyftem of be- 
.  nevolence, and confequently its author the objeé of un- 
| bounded love and adoration, benevolence and piety are our 
_ only true guides in our inquiries into it; the only keys 
. © which will unlock the myfteries of nature, and clues which 
_ “ Jead through her labyrinths. Of this all branches of natural 
_ « hiftory, and natural philofophy afford abundant inftances. 
Tn all thefe inquiries, let the inquirer take it for granted 
«« previoufly, that every thing is right, and the beft that can 
«* be ceteris manentibus; that is, let him, with a pious con- 
«* fidence, feek for benevolent purpofes, and he will be always 
« direéted to the right road; and after a due continuance in 
_ ‘it, attain to fome new and valuable truth: whereas every 
«other principle and motive of examination, being foreign 
_ to the great plan on which the univerfe is conftruéted, 
«¢ muft lead into endlefs mazes, errors, and perplexities. * 
 Wirn refpe& to the indire& ufe of piety, it muft be ob- 
ferved, that the tranquility, and chearfulnefs of mind, which 


* Hartley’s Obfervations on Man, Vol. z. p. 245. 
refults 


xxit TIDE. 1 RREF ACE. 


refults from, devotion forms an excellent temper for conduéting 
philofophical inquiries; 'tending to make them both:more 
pleafant,, and. more fuccefsful. The fentiments of religion 
and piety tend to cure the mind of envy, jealoufy, conceit, 
and every other mean paflion, which both difgrace the lovers 
of feience, and retard the progrefs.of it, by laying an undue 
bias upon the mind, and Ainetion it from the calm purfuit 
of truth, 

Last ry; «let it bls avionsbanish that a tafte for fcience, 
pleafing, and even honourable as it is, is not one of the 
higheft paffions of our nature, and the pleafures it furnithes.are 
even but one degree, above thofe of fenfe ; and therefore that 
temperance. is requifite in all {cientifical purfuits,  Befides 
the duties of every, man’s proper ftation in life, which ought 
ever tobe held facred and inviolate, the calls of piety, com- 
mon friendfhip, and many other avocations ought generally 
to be heard before: that of ftudy.:. It is therefore only a {malt 
fhare of their leifure that moft men can be juftified in giving, to 
the purfuit of fcience; though this thare is more or lefs, in 
proportion to. a man’s fituation in life, his natural abilities, 
and the opportunity he has for condutting his inquiries. 

I sat conclude with another paflage from Dr. Hartley 
to this purpofe. .«« Though the purfuit, of truth be.an:en~ 
«* tertainment and employment fuitable. to our rational -na~ 
“* tures, and a duty to him who is the fountain of all know~ 
«© ledge and truth, yet we muit make frequent intervals and 
«« interruptions; elfe the ftudy.of f{cience, without a view ta 
« God and our duty, and from a vain defire of applaufe, 
«« will get poffeffion of our hearts, engrofs them wholly, and 


“e by 


THE PREFACE. xxiii 


«¢ by taking deeper root than the purfuit of vain amufements, 
«< become, in the end, armuech more dangerous, and obfti- 
*¢ nate evil than that. Nothing can eafily exeeed the vain- 
«* glory, felf-conceit, arrogance, emulation, and envy, that 
“ fe in the eminent profeffors of. the fciences, Ma- 
«* thematics, Natural Philofophy, and even Divinity ittelf. 
«« Temperance in thefe ftudies is, therefore, evidently re- 
«« guired, both in order to check the rife of fuch ill paffions, 
« and to give room for the cultivation of other effential parts 
« of our natures. It is with thefe pleafures as with the fen- 
« fible ones; our appetites muft not be made the meafure of 
“ our indulgence, ‘but! we ought tovrefer all to'a higher rule. 

« Bur when the purfuit of truth is directed by this higher 
« rule, and entered.tpon withia view to the glory of God, 
* and: the good.of niankind, there is no employment. more 
« worthy of our natures, or more conducive to their purifi- 
«« cation and perfection. * 


* Hartley's Obfervations on Man, Vol. 2. p. 255, &c. 


fe sels 


Aig Cab skins Noor Le Ss 


Eee Se 


Tue Hisrory oF ELecTrRicitTy, 


PERIOD I. 


EXPERIMENTS and difcoveries in eleétricity prior to 
thofe of Mr. Hawketbee. : page 1 


PER OD: 11: 
The experiments and difcoveries of Mr. Hawkebee. P- 15 
PERIOD Ill. 


The experiments and difcoveries of Mr. Stephen Grey, which 
were made prior to thofe of Mr. Du Faye, and which 


bring the biftory of electricity to the year 1733. p- 26 
PERIOD IV. 
The experiments and difcoveries of Mr. Du Faye. P- 45 


PER 1,0 :D- iV; 
The continuation, and conclufion of Mr. Grey's experiments. ps 54. 
PERIOD 


THE? “CONTENTS. Xx 


‘PERIOD? VI. 


The se gny pi of Dr. Defaguliers. page 64 . 
at ae PERIOD,.VIL , 
ia, the Bacmane) and of Dr. Watfon, before the 


difcovery of the Leyden phial in the year 1746. p- 70 
PERIOD. VU 
The biftory of elettricity, from the difcovery of the Leyden phial 


‘in the year 1746, till Dr. Franklin's difcoveries. 81 
ie J: The hiftory of the Leyden phial itfelf, till Dr. Frank- 
lin’s difcoveries relating to it. ib. 


Sec. II. The methods ufed by the French and Englifh philofophers, 
to meafure the diftance to which the eleétric fhock.can be car- 


ried, and the velocity with which it paffes. p- 100 
Sec. II. Mifcellaneous difcoveries of Dr. Watfon, and others, 
till the time of Dr. Franklin. p- 111 


Src. IV. Experiments on animal and other organized bodies in 
this period, and other experiments connected with them, made 
chiefly by the Abbé Nollet. P- 135 

Sec. V. The hiftory of the medicated tubes, and other communi- 
cations of medicinal virtues by electricity, with their various 


_refutations. p- 146 
PERIOD IX. 
The experiments and difcoveries of Dr. Franklin. p- 158 
See. I. Dr. Franklin’s difcoveries concerning the Leyden phial, 
—* conneéted with them. ; ib. 


d SEC. 


XXVi THE CONT ENTS. 


Sec. II. Dr. Franklin’s difcoveries concerning the fimilarity of 
lightning and eleétricity. page 170 
Sec. II. Mifcellaneous difcoveries of Dr. Franklin and his 
Sriends in America during the fame period. p- 185 

Pe ty Wey: ee a 
The biftory of elericity, from the time that Dr. Franklin made 
his experiments in America, till the year 1766. P- 193 
Sec. I. Improvements in the elelrical apparatus, with experi- 
ments and obfervations relating to it. Pp. 195 
Sec. II. Objervations on the conduéting power of various fub- 
” fances, and particularly Mr. Canton’s expriments on air ; and 
Signior Beccaria’s'on air, and water. - p. 204 
“Sec. III. Mr. Canton’s experiments and difcoveries relating to 
the'furfaces of ele&ric'bodies, and othérs made in purfuance of 
them, ‘or relating to'the fame fubje® ; all tending to afcertain 
ithe \diftinEion between the two eleépricities. 'p. 220 
a Sc. IV. Mr. Delaval’s experiments ° ‘relating Yo ‘the “two tlec- 
tricities, ‘and bis’ poate ‘with Mr. Canton wipoh ‘that 
fuubjeB. Pp. 237 
Rasa V. Mr. Canton’s experiments and \ uiftoveries ‘relating to 
bodies immerged in eletiric atmofpheres, with’ ome aditoveries of 
‘thir, made by purfuing them. "ps 246 
Sec. VI. Mr. Symiher’s experiments telating to the two elec- 
tricities, and thofe made 4 Johanne Kepcifon ‘Gigne wy 
purfuance of them. jor el ey Po 
Sec. VII. The biftory of the Leyden: Tisaboniatinandsn »pese8z 


b Src. 


AEE. (CLOCNoT E Nits. xxvii 
“Sec. VIII. Experiments and obfervations concerning electric 
«Tights page 297 
Sre. IX. The eleftricity of the Tourmalin. p- 314 


SEC. X. Difcoveries that have been made fince thofe of Dr. 
Franklin, with re/ped to the famene/t f lightning and elec~ 


tricity. P. 327 
Sec. XI. Objervations on the general ftate of eleétricity ip the 
‘ atmofphere, and its more ufual effets. p: 362 


Sec. XII. The attempts that have been made to explain fome of 
* the more unufual appearances in the earth and heavens by elec 
sf! tricity. P- 378 
Sec. XIII. Odfervations on the ufe of metallic conduétors ta. 

Secure buildings, Gc. from the effeéis of lightning.  p. 398 


Sec. XIV. Of medical electricity. p- 408 

Sec. XV. Mifcellaneous experiments and difcoveries made within 

this period, P+ 423 
PART. ..H: 

A SERIES or PROPOSITIONS, comprisING ALL THE 

GENERAL PROPERTIES OF ELECTRICITY. P- 433 
PAR To TE. 

THEORIES or ELECTRICITY. p- 441 


Sec. I. Of philofophical theories in general, and the theories of 
eleétricity preceding that of Dr. Franklin. tb. 


Sec. II. The theory of pofitive and negative electricity. p. 4.55 
Sec. II. Of the theory of two electric fluids. p- 468 
d2 PAR? 


xxviii THE CONTENTS. 


PAR T».VIV. oe 32 
DESIDERATA IN THE SCIENCE OF ELECTRICITY, AND 
_ HINTS FOR THE FURTHER EXTENSION OF IT. page 497 
Sec. I. General obfervations on the prefent fate of electricity. ib. 
Sec. II. Queries and hints calculated to promote further difco- 


veries in electricity. p- 487 
I. Queries and hints concerning the electric fluid. ib. 
Il. electrics and conductors. p. 489 
Ill. excitation. Pp. 49° 
IV. electrification. Pp. 492 
Ve 


the ed of charging elec- 
trics. P- 493 


VI. ‘the eleetricity of glafs. p. 494 
Vil. the effe& of eleétricity on ani- 
mal bodies. p- 496 
vil. -—— the eleftricity of the atmof- 
phere. P?497 
Sec. III. Branches of knowledge peculiarly ufeful to an elec- 
trician. Ps 499 


PAR To Xx 


OF THE CONSTRUCTION OF ELECTRICAL MACHINES, 
AND THE PRINCIPAL PARTS OF AN ELECTRICAL AP- 


PARATUS. p- 508 
Sec. I. General obfervations on the conftrudtion of an clec- 
trical apparatus. ib. 


Sec. II. 4 defcription of fome particular electrical machines, 
with obfervations on their principal advantages and defeéts. 
Pres-5 

P) AiR 


THES{CONTENTS. xxix 


ree kere VT, 
PRACTICAL MAXIMS FOR THE USE OF YOUNG ELEC- 
" TRICIANS. Pa8e 535 

° PART. VIL. 
A pEscriPTION oF THE Most ENTERTAINING EX- 
_ PERIMENTS PERFORMED BY ELECTRICITY.  p. 547 
src. L. Entertaining experiments in which the Leyden phial is 
not ufed. — P- 551 
Sec. II. Entertaining experiments performed by means of the, 
Leyden phial. p- 561 
Src. JI. Entertaining experiments made dy 4 combination of 
philofophical inftruments, p. 569 

PART. VIII. 
NEW EXPERIMENTS In ELECTRICITY, MADE IN THE 
YEAR 1766. - P- 573 
Sec. I. Experiments on excitation, particularly of tubes in 
which air is condenfed, and of large glafs globes. page 581. 
Sec. II. Experiments which prove a current of air from the 
points. of bodies electrified either pofitively or negatively. p. 591 
Src. Il]. Experiments on mephitic air, and charcoal. p. 598 
Sec. IV. Experiments on the conducting power of various 
Jubfiances. p- 609 


Src. V.° Experiments on the diffufion of eletricity over the 
furfaces of glafs tubes, containing a new method of giving the 
electric fhock. p- 621 


Sec. VI. 


XXX THE CONTENTS. 


Sec. VI. Experiments to. verify feveral particulars of Signior 
Beccaria’s theory of eleftricity; particularly concerning the 
elettric matter carrying into its path light fubjtances to affift its 


paffage. Page 635 
Sec. VII. Various experiments relating to charging and dif- 
charging glafs jars and batteries. p- 642 
Src. VIII. Experiments on animals. p- 653 
Sec. IX. Experiments on the circular {pots made on pieces of 
metal by large eleétrical explofions. p- 659 


Sec. X. Experiments on the effetts of the eleGrical explofion 
difeharged through a brafs chain, and other metallic fub- 
frances. p- 672 

Sec. XI. Experiments on the paffage of the electrical explo- 
fion over the furface of ome conduéting fubftances, without 


entering them... p- 685 
See. XII. Experiments on the Tourmalin. p- 697 
Sec. XIII. Mifcellaneous Experiments. Pp» 714 


IL Objervations onthe electric park taken paar Jfeveral a 
of metal. 
Il. Aideception relating to the direttion of the electric fpark:p.71 § 
III. An-experiment intended to afcertain whether electric fubfan= 
es, in their natural flate, contain more of the electric fluid 
than conduétors. +. ps 716 
IV...Tbe mufical tone. of various difcharges afcertained. ib. 
‘V. Experiments on the effects of giving a metallic tinge to the 
Surface of glafs. p- 718 
Vis 


THE CONTENTS. xxxi 


VI. An experiment intended to afcertain whether fermentation 
contributes to the produétion of electricity. p- 720 


- VII. An experiment intended to afcertain whether evaporation 


contributes to the production of electricity. page 7a1 
VIII. An experiment intended to afcertain whether vg ron be 
accelerated or retarded by electrification. 
IX. The examination of a glafs tube, which had been a long time 


charged and hermetically fealed. p- 722 
X. The weight requifite to bring Jome bodies into conta afcer- 
tained by the electrical explofion. ib. 
XI. The effect of the eleétrical explofion tranfmitted through va- 
rious liquors. Pp: 724 
XII. Odfervations on the colours of eletric light. Pp: 725 
XIII. Odfervations on the fall wires that collect eleftricity from 
the excited globe. p- 727 
XIV. Experiments intended to afcertain the difference in the con- 
duéting power of different metals. p- 728 
XV. Experiments with an ele&rified cup. p- 731 


ite CTE STOO” og 9 t 
NOUS Hones sah ayes apeyg > Sigh teiwrade, eh TV 
ostitg Pi Phy ho wg tiak ica et vial be , P 
ri Aelintns urgent oh beaeiert jacvit 
*Y Ds F 8 Cw 
13K AR ENP ig ono gs eh ot » 
Agate 5 abivder ads ip 93 avbuvin’ inet are ry TL. 
a3 See PAY 1 as habrasset - 9 tintielssin 
vei el x “ Tas wou . a *y. 
- een clingy, aagaineetal: Eadey bain. d: 
wa uke ca i hay, soos Ao i a a 
Ps oe ithe “i Mtelighquy tusks. att ae vine vt 
<nit tg ite Weis ttlatalaasae BATHE he Hed x 
. gin vy 
A wero ye i he ; 
7 wtb Wanisaa: ube 
Sige Peet cone eeny wane 


THE 


HIS TORY 


AND PRESENT STATE OF 


ELECTRICITY. 


PART I. 
Tue History or ELeEctTRICITY. 


PERIOD I. 


ExPERIMENTS AND DISCOVERIES IN ELECTRICITY PRIOR 
To THoseE oF Mr. HAwKESBEE. 


HE hiftory of philofophy contains nothing earlier 

than the obfervation, that yellow amber, when 

[ rubbed, has the power of attracting light bodies. 
Thales of Miletus, the father of the Ionic philofophy, who 
flourithed about fix hundred years before Chrift, was fo 
much ftruck with this property of amber, that he imagined 
it was animated, But the firft writer who exprefily mentions 
this fabftance is Theophraftus, who flourifhed about the year 
300 before Chrift. He fays, in his book concerning precious 
ftones, fect. 53, that amber ‘ne he fuppofes to be a native 
foffil) 


S THE DISCOVERIES Part I. 


foflil) has the fame property of attracting light bodies with 
the lyncurium ; which, he fays, attracts not only ftraws, 
and fmall pieces-of ftioks, but-even thin.pieces of copper and 
iron. -What-he fays farther of the lyncurium will be related 
under the article of the tourmalin, which Dr. Watfon has, in 
a manner, proved to be the fame fubftance. ; ‘ 

FRoM »erpm, the Greek name for amber, is derived the 
term Erecrriciry, which is now extended to fignify, not 
only the power of attracting light bodies inherent in amber, 
but other powers connected with it, in whatever bodies they 
are fuppofed to refide, or to whatever bodies they may be 
communicated. + 

Tue attractive nature of amber is occafionally mentioned 
by Pliny, and other later naturalifts; particularly by Gaffen- 
dus, Kenelm Digby, and Sir Thomas Brown ; but excepting 
the eleétricity of the fubftance called jet, the difcovery of 
which was very late (though I have not been able to find its 
author) no advances were made in electricity till the fubje& 
was undertaken by William Gilbert, a native of Colchefter, 
and a phyfician at London; who, in his excellent Latin trea- 
tife de magnete, relates a great variety of electrical experi- 
ments. Confidering the time in which this author wrote, 
and how little was known of the fubject before him, his dif- 
coveries may be juftly deemed confiderable, though they appear 
trifling when compared with thofe which have been made 
fince his time. 

To him we owe a great augmentation of the lift of electri- 
cal bodies, as alfo of the bodies on which electrics can .act ; 
and he has carefully noted feveral capital circumftances re- 

lating 


Pexovl. © 9 OF GILBERT. ; 


lating*to ‘the manner of their ation, though his theory of 
ele&tricity was'very imperfect, as might be expected. 

‘Ameer ‘and jet were, as I obferved before, the only fub- 
ftances' which, before his time, were known to have thé 
property of attracting light bodies when rubbed; but he 
found the fame property in the diamond, fapphire, carbuncle, 
rit, amethyft, opal, vincentina, Briftol flone, beryl, and chryftal: 
He alfo obferves that g/a/s, efpecially that which is clear and 
tranfparent, has the fame property ; likewife all Sattitious gems; 
made of glafs or chryftal ; g/a/t of antimony, moft JSparry fub- 
frances, and belemnites. Laftly, he concludes his catalogue of 
electric fubftances with fulphur, maftic, Sealing wax made of 
gum lac tinged with various colours, bard rofin, fal gem, talk, 
and roche alum. Rofin, he faid, poffeffed this property but in 
afimall degree, and the three laft mentioned fubftances only 
when the air was clear and free from moifture, 

Att thefe fubftances, he obferves, attracted not only ftraws, 
but all metals, all kinds of wood, ftones, earth, water,’ oil ; 
in thort, whatever is folid, and the obje& of our fenfes, 
But he imagined that air, flame, bodies ignited, and all 
matter which was extremely rare was not fubje& to this 
attraction. Grofs fmoke, he found, was attracted very fen 
fibly, but that which was attenuated very little, 

Friction, he fays, is; in general, neceflary to excite the 
Virtue of thefe fubftances ; though he had one large and 
fmooth piece of amber which would a@ without friction. 
But with tefpect to this he probably deceived himfelf, The 
moft effeftual frigtion, he obferved to be that which was 
light and quick; and he-found that eletrical appearances 
a ; B2 were 


, THE DISCOVERIES Part I. 


were ftrongeft when the air was dry, and the wind north or 
eaft, at which time electric fubftances would a& ten minutes- 
after excitation. But he fays, that a moift air, or a fouther- 
ly wind almoft annihilates the eletrical virtue. The fame 
effe& he. alfo obferved from the interpofition of moifture of 
any kind, as from the breath, and many other fubftances, 
but not always from the interpofition of farfnet. He fays 
that light and pure oik fprinkled upon electrics, after excita- 
tion, did not obftruct their virtue, but that brandy, or {pirit 
of wine did. He alfo fays, that chryftal, talk, glafs, and all 


- other eleétrics loft their virtue after being burned or -roafted. 


But this was, in fome meafure,a miftake. The heat of the 
fun, colleéted by a burning glafs, he fays, is fo far from ex- 
citing amber, and other electrics, that it impairs the virtue 
of them all ; though, when eleétrics have been excited, they. 
will retain their virtue longer in the fun-thine thatri in the 
fhade. 

Mosr of the experiments of this author were made witl: 
long thin pieces of metal, and other fubftances, fufpended 
freely on their centers, ‘to.the extremities of which he pre- 
fented the electrics he had excited. His experiments on 
water were made by prefenting a round drop of water’ upon 
a dry fubftance to the excited eleétric; and it is remark- 
able, that he obferved the fame ‘conical figure of the 
electrified drops which Mr.*Grey afterwards difcovered, 
and which will be related more at large in its proper place. 
Gilbert concluded, that’ air was not affected by the eleétric 
attraction, becaufe the flame of a candle was not: for the 
flame, he fays, would be difturbed if the air had the leaft 
motion given toit. . 
: Cissus 


| Perfop I. : OF Mr. BOYLE. $ 


--Grvnert imagined that electrical attraction was performed 
in the fame manner as.the attraction of cohefion. 'Two drops 
of water, he obferved, ruth together- when. they are 
brought into contaé, and electrics, he fays, are virtually 
brought into contact with the bodies they act upon, by means 
of their -efluvia, excited by friction. 

Amone other differences between electric ded magnetic 
attra@ion, fome of which are very juft, and others whimfical 
enough, he fays, that magnetic bodies ruth together mutually; 
whereas in ‘eleétrical attraction it is only the ele@tric that 
éxerts any power. He obferves alfo particularly, ‘that'in 
magnetifm there is both attraction and ‘repulfion, © but. in 
ele&tricity only the former, and never the latter. * 

' Such were the difcoveries of our countryman Gilbert, who 
may juftly be called the father of modern eletricity, though 
it be true'that he left his child in its very infancy. 

Sir Francis Bacon, in his Phyfiological Remains, gives a 
catalogue of bodies attractive and not attractive; but it dif- 
fersin nothing worth mentioning from that of Gilbert, and he 
does not feem to’have made any obfervations of his own re~ 
lating to the fubject. 

Tuese remarkable phenomena relating to amber,, and. o+ 
ther electric fubftances did not efcape the attention of the in+ 
quifitive and fagacious Mr. Boyle, who flourithed about the 
year 1670. He made fome addition to the catalogue of elec- 
tric fubftances, and attended to fome circumftances relating 
to electric attraction which had efcaped the obfervation of 
Philofophers who lived before him. 


* Gilbert de magnete, Lib. z. Cap. 2. 


6 THE, DISCOVERIES Parnk 


He found that the hard cake which remains after evapo- 
rating good turpentine: was ele@trical,..as alfo the hard mafs 
which remains after diftilling petroleum and fpirit of nitre, 
glafs of lead, the caput mortuum of amber; and the cornelian 
but he could not: find that property in the emerald, and 
he thought that glafs poflefied it but in a very low degree. 

He found, that the electricity of all bodies capable of 
having it excited, in them was: increafed by wiping, and 
warming them, previous to their being rubbed. By this 
means he madean electric body no bigger than a pea, move 
a fteel needle, which was freely poifed, three minutes after he 
had: left off rubbing it. .He alfo found, that it was ufeful to 
have the furfaces of electric bodies made very fmooth, except 
in the cafe of one diamond on. which he tried fome experi- 
ments, which, though it was rough, was, he fays, pofiefled 
of a ftronger electrical virtue than any polifhed one he. had 
met with. ~ 

He obferved that excited clerics would attra& all kinds 
of bodies: promifcuoufly, whether electric or not; that excited - 
amber, for inftance, would attract both powder jof amber, . 
and fmall pieces of it; differing, as he takes notice, from ™ 
the property,of the load-ftone, which aéts only on one kind i 
of matter. «He found, that-his electrics would attract {moke 
very eafily, and.takes fome pains to account for their not 
fenfibly attrating flame, which. Gilbert excepted from the 
bodies attracted:byreleCtricity. als 

‘Tuese attractions, he found, did not ‘denead apapiiie air: )) 
-for he obferved that they took place in vacuo. He fufpended | 


a piece of excited amber over a light body in a glafs receiver, 
boise and 


Preropl. |. OF Mr. BOYLE. © > 
and faw, that when a vacuum was made, and the amber let 
ce ‘body, it was attracted, as iki had been 
"in the open air. * 
Mr. Borie made an experiment to try whether an excited 
-eleétvic was aéted upon by other bodies as ftrongly as it a&ed 
upon’ them, and it fucceeded: for, fufpending his excited 
electric, the faw that it was fenfibly moved by the approach 
of any other body, We thould now be furprifed that any 
perfon fhould not have concluded a priori, that if an electric 
body attraéted other bodies, it muft in return be attracted by 
them, action and feaétion being univerfally equal to one 
another. But it muft be confidered, that this axiom was not 
fo well underftood in Mr. Boyle’s time, nor until it was after- 
wards explained in its full latitude by Sir Ifzac Newton. + 

_ Turse few experiments of Mr. Boyle’s, we fee, relate 
only toa few circumftances attending the fimple property of 
eleGric attraction. The neareft approach that he made to 
‘the difcovery of electrical repulfion was his obferving, that 
Tight bodies, as feathers, &c. would cling to his fingers, and 
- other fubftances, after they had been attra@ted by his eleétrics, 
‘He had never feen the eleétric light, and little‘imagined 
what aftonithing effets would be afterwards produced by the 
fame wonderful power, and how large a field he was opening 
' for philofophical fpeculation in future time. 

Mr. Boyre’s theory of eleGtrical attraction was, that the 
electric emitted a glutinous ¢ffluvium, which laid hold of 
Amal bodies in its way, and, in its return to the body which 


- Hier de VeleGtricité, p. 6. + Boyle’s. Mechanical production of eleétricity. 
emitted 


8 THE! DISCOVERIES Parr I. 


emitted it, carried thém back with it.’ One!James*Hartman, 
whofe account’ of ‘amber is’ publifhed in the Philofuphi- 
cal Tranfactions, * pretends to prove by experiment, that 
electric attraction wa’ really owing to the emiffion of glutinous 
particles. He took two electric fabftances, viz. ‘pieces of co- 
lophonia, ‘and from one of them made’a diftillation of a black 
balfam, and thereby deprived it of its attractive power. He 
fays, that the ele@ric which was not diftilled retained its 
fatty fubftaice, ‘whereas the other was; by diftillation, re- 
duced to'a mere caput mortuum, and retained no degree of its 
bituminous fat. In-confequence of this hypothefis, he gives 
it as-his opinion, ‘that amber attracts light bodies’ more 
powerfully than other fubftances, becaufe it emits oily and 
\tetthonee effluvia more copioufly than they do. 

“ConTEeMPORARY with Mr. Boyle was Otto Guericke, 
Burgomafter of Magdebourgh, and the celebrated inventor of 
the-air-pump, whois likewife intitled to a diftinguithed place 
among the firft improvers of eleétricity. 

Tuis philofopher made his - “experiments with a globe of 
fulphur, made by melting that fubftance in a hollow globe 
of glafs, and afterwards breaking the-glafs from’ off it. He 
little imagined that the glafs globe itfelf, with or without the 
fulphur, would have’ anfwered his purpofe as well. This 
globe of fulphur ke mounted upon an axis, and whirled it in 
a wooden frame, rubbing it at the fame time with his hand ; 
and by this means‘he performed all the — ee 
-which were-known before his time: 

His was the difcovery, that a body once errata by an 
yexcited electric was repelled by it, and not attracted again 


* Abridgment, Vol. 2. p. 473. PH 
t 


Penton, OF OTTO GUERICKE. 9. 


ill i t had been | touched by fome other body. _ In this manner 
he kept feather a long time fufpended in the air above his 
fulphur gl e; but he obferved, that if he drove it near a 
linen thread, or the flame of a candle, it inftantly retreated 
one pete as amie been.in contact with anny fenfi- 

ee ee 

EITHER the Sound, nor the light produced by the exci- 

satice. of his globe efcaped the notice of this accurate philo- - 
fopher, though he feems not to have obferved them in a very 
great degree : for he was obliged to hold his ear near the globe 
to perceive the hifling found of the eledtric fire; and he com- 
pares, the, light which. it gave in, the fame circumftances to 
that which is feen when fugar is pounded in the dark. 
_ Bur the moft remarkable experiments of this philofopher 
were two, which depend upon a property of the electric fluid 
that has not been illuftrated till within thefe late years; viz. 
that bodies immerged in electric atmofpheres are themfelves 
electrified, and with an eleGtricity oppofite to that of the at- 
mofphere. Threads fufpended within a fmall-diftance of his 
excited globe, he obferved to be often repelled by his finger 
‘brought near them, and that a feather repelled by the globe al- 
Ways turned the fame face towards it like the moon with refpect 
to the earth. This laft experiment feems to have been wholly 
overlooked by later, eleGricians, though it is a very curious 
one, and may be made with fo much cafe. * 

JA MucCH finer appearance of electric light than that which 

Otto Guericke’s fulphur globe exhibited was obferved by 


* Experimenta Magdeburgica, Lib. 4. Cap. 15. 


Cc Dr, 


10 EXPERIMENTS Part I. 


Dr. Wall. ‘The account of it is publifhed in the philofo- 
phical tranfactions. * 

MAKING experiments upon artificial phofphorus, which he 
took to be an animal oil coagulated with a mineral acid, he 
was led to conjecture that amber, which he fuppofed to be a 
mineral oil coagulated with a mineral volatile acid, might be 
a natural phofphorus ; and with this view he began to make 
experiments upon it, the refult of which, being very curious 
and furprifing, it will be moft agreeable to my readers to fee 
in the very words of the obferver himfelf. 

«* T rounp,” fays he, “ by gently rubbing a well polithed 
“¢ piece of amber with my hand in ‘the dark, that it pro- 
“ duced a light: ‘whereupon I got a pretty large piece of 
**-amber, which I caufed to be made long and taper, and 
«« drawing it gently through my hand, being very dry, it 
“¢ afforded a confiderable light. , 

«« T ruen ufed many kinds of foft animal fubftances, and 
*¢ found that none did fo well as wool. And now new phe- 
“* nomena offered themfelves: for, upon drawing the piece 
«* of amber fwiftly through the wollen cloth, and fqueezing 
“< it pretty hard with my hand, ‘a prodigious number of little 
«« cracklings were heard, and every one of thefe produced a 
«« little flath of light; but when the amber was drawn gently 
«« and flightly through the cloth, it produced only a light 
«* but no crackling; but by holding ones finger at a little’ dif- 
«© tance from the amber, a large crackling is produced, with 
‘© a great flath of light fucceding it. © And, what to me is 


* Abridgment, Vol. 2. p. 275. 
‘ oe very 


| 
| 


Pertop I. ‘ OF Dr. WALL. Th 


« very furprifing, upon its eruption, it ftrikes the finger very 
« fenfibly,» wherefoever applied, with a puth or puff, like 
“« wind: The crackling is full as loud as charcoal on fire, 
«* and’ five or fix -cracklings, or more, according to the | 
«« quicknefs of placing the finger, have been produced from 
«one fingle fri@tion, light always fucceeding each of them. 

« Now I make no queftion, but upon ufing a longer and’ 
“ larger piece’ of amber, both the cracklings and light 
“ would be much greater, becaufe I never yet found any 
« crackling from the head of my cane, though it'is a pretty 
“ Jarge one.’ This light-and crackling feems'in fome degree’ 
« to reprefent thunder and lightening.” 

_ Arrer reciting this experiment, he gives it as his opinion, 
that all, or moft bodies which have an eleétricity give light, 
and that-it is the light which is the caufe of their being 
ele&trical.: He found that light couldalfo be produced by rub- 
bing jet, red fealing wax, made’with gum lac and cinnabar, 
and the diamond. He-even imagined he could diflinguifl: 
true from’ falfe diamonds: by this teft. 

Norwirustanpinc Dr. Wall made this Beautiful difco- 
very, as he imagined (for he’ feems not to have feen what 
Otto Guericke had written) of light proceeding from amber 
and other eleétric bodies, we fee that he laboured under a 
great deal of confufion and mifapprehenfion with refpect to it. 
He fays;:that one thing appeared ‘ftrange to him in the courfe 
of thefeexperiments; which was, that though, upon friétion 
with wooll in the day time, the cracklings feemed to be full 
a§ many and as large, yet that by all the trials which he made, 
ba little light appeared, though in the darkeft room. He 

C2 fays 


12 EXPERIMENTS OF Part fF. 


fays that the beft time for making thefe experiments is when 
thefun is 180 below the horizon, and that when the fun was fo 
low, though the moon fhone ever fo bright, the light was the- 
fame as in the darkeft room, which made him chufe to call 
it a noctiluca. j 
Ir is remarkable that Dr. Wall compares the light and 
the crackling of his amber to thunder and lightning: fo early 
was a fimilarity between -the effects of electricity and light- 
ning obferved. But little was it imagined that the refemblance 
between. them extended any farther than to appearances and 
effects. That the caufe was the fame in both was.a difcovery 
referved for Dr. Franklin in a much later period. 
Tue great Sir Ifaac Newton, though he by no means makes 
a principal figure in the hiftory of electricity, yet made fome 
electrical obfervations which engaged the attention of his 
philofophical friends, and which, independent of their being 
made by him, do well deferve to be tranfmitted to pofterity- 
They feem to thew that he was the firft who obferved, that 
excited glafs attracted light bodies on the fide oppofite to that 
on which it was rubbed. 
Havine laid upon the table a round piece of glafs, about - 
two inches broad, in a brafs ring, fo that the glafs might be 
one eight of an inch from the table, and there rubbing the 
glafs-brifkly, little fragments of paper laid on the table, 
under the glafs, began to be attraéted, and move nimbly to 
and fro. After he had done rubbing the glafs, the papers 
would continue a confiderable time in various motions ; fome- 
times leaping up to the glafs, and refting there a while, then 
leaping down and refting there, and then leaping up and 
down 


Pentop I. ‘SIR’ ISAAC NEWTON. 13 


‘<niiecgpiguicical this fometimes in lines. feemingly » perpen- 
dicular tothe table, fometimes in oblique ones; fometimes: 
-alfo leaping up in. one arch,. and leaping down in another, 
divers times together, without fenfibly refting between; 
fometimes: fkipping’in.a bow: from one part of the glafs to a~ 
-nother, without touching the table, and fometimes hanging 
by a-corner, and turning often about very nimbly, as if they 
had: been. carried about in-the midft of a whirlwind, and be~ 


ing otherwife: varioufly. moved, every: paper with a different 


-motion:» Upon his fliding his finger on the upper fide‘of the 
-glafs;.though neither the: glafs nor the inclofed»air:-below 
were moved, yet he obferved, that the papers,.as they hung 
under the glafs, would receive fome new motion, inclining 
this way or that, according as he moved his finger. » 

Some of the motions, as that of hanging by. a. corner and 
twirling about, and that of leaping from one part of the glafs. 
to another without touching the table happened but feldom ; 
_ but, he fays, it made him take the more notice of them.* 
_. Aw account of this experiment Sir Ifaac fent to the mem- 
bers of the R. Society in the year 1675, defiring it might be 
tried by them, and after fome ineffe€tual attempts, and re- 
ceiving further. inftruétions, how. to.make it,. they at length 
fucceeded, and the thanks of the fociety were formally re-- 
turned to him. + 
_ Upon repeating the experiment with fome variety of cir-- 
cumftances, Sir Ifaac obferves, that rubbing varioufly, or 
« with various things, altered the cafe. At one time he rub- 
bed a glafs four inches broad, and one fourth thick with a 


* Birch’s Hift. of the R. Society, Vol. 3, pe 260, &c. + Ib. 271. 
‘ napkin 


14 THE’ DISCOVERIES Parr I. 


- napkino twice as-much as he ufed to do with his gown, and 
nothing would ftir, and yet prefently after, rubbing: it with 
fomething elfe, the motion foon began. After the glafs had 
been» much» rubbed, he: thought the motions were not fo 
lafting, and the day following he found the motions fainter, 
and more difficult to be excited than at firft.* . 

S1r Isaac alfo mentions electricity intwo queries annexed 
to his treatife-on Optics, from which we learn, that:he ima- 
gined electric bodies when excited emitted: an elaftic 
fluid, which freely penetrated glafs, and that the emiffion 
was performed by the vibratory motions of the parts of the 
excited bodies. + 


* Birch’s ‘Hilt. of the R. Society, Vol. 3. p. 270. 


+t Newton’s Optics, oftavo p. 314, and 327. 


PERIOD 


‘Person II. OF Mr. HAWKESBEE, Ig 


PERIOD IL. 


wa? : ' } 


Tue EXPERIMENTS AND DISCOVERIES, OF Mr. HawkesBeEe. 


FTER Gilbert, Mr. Boyle, and Otto Guericke,. 
Mr. Hawketbee, -who wrote in the year; 1709, diftin- 
guithed, himfelf by experiments and difcoveries in electricity. 
He firft- obferved the, great electric.power of glafs, the light 
proceeding from it,. and the noife occafioned by it,. together 
with a variety of: phenomena relating to ¢le&tric attraction. 


‘and repulfion...: He was: indefatigable in making experiments, 
and there are few perfons te-whom we are more indebted for 


a.real advancement of this branch of knowledge. :, This will 
appear by the following fuccinét account of his experiments, 
related not -exa@tly in the order. in which he has. publithed 
them, but. according to their connection. This method I 
have chofen as beft adapted. to give the moft diftinét view. of: 
the whole.. 

I suaru firft relate:the experiments. he made concerning 
electric attraction and repulfion, in many of which.we {hall 
fee reafon:to.admire his ingenious, contrivances,.and hall fee 
that little was added to his obfervations, till the capital dif-. 
eoyery of a plus and minus electricity by Dr. Watfon and Dr. 
Franklin,. and «the farther <illuftration of that doétrine by 
Mr. Canton. 

Tue 


16 . THE DISCOVERIES Parr I. 


Tue moft curious of his experiments concerning electric 
attraction and repulfion are thofe which fhew the diretion in 
which thofe powers are excited. 

Havine tied threads round a wire hoop, and brought it 
near to an excited globe or cylinder, he obferved, that the 
threads kept a conftant direétion towards the center of the 
‘globe, or towards fome point in the axis of the cylinder, in 
every pofition of the hoop; that this effect would continue 
for about four minutes after the whirling of the globe ceafed, 
and that the effect was the fame whether the wire was held 
‘above, or under the glafs ; or whether the glafs was placed 
with its axis parallel, or perpendicular to the horizon. 

He obferved, that the threads pointing towards the center 
of the globe were attracted and repelled by'a finger prefented 
to them} that if the finger, or any other body, was brought 
very fiear the! threads, they would be attraéted’; but'that if 
jt were brought to the diftance of about an inch, they would 
be repelled, ‘the reafon of which difference he eid not feem to 
be i RE * 

He tied threads to the axis of a globe and cylinder, and 
Fea ‘that ‘they diverged every way in ftraight lines from the 
place whee they were tied, whén the globe was Whirled and 
rubbed. In both cafes, he fays, the threads would be re- 
pelled by the finger held on the Soper fide of the glafs, 
even ‘without | touching the «glafs ; ' though they would 
fometimes faddenly jump towards it. + He obferved further, 
that’ by blowing with his mouth towards the the glafs, at 


+ Phyfico-Mechanical Experiments, p. 75. + Ib, p. 78: 


Pertop Il. OF Mr. HAWKESBEE. 17 


_ three or four feet diftance, the threads would have'a very 
confiderable motion given to them. 

_He found that threads, hanging freely in an unexcited 

globe, at reft, would be moved by the approach of any excited 
electric at a confiderable diftance, except in moift weather; 
which failure he accounts for, by fuppofing the moifture oh 
the furface of the glafs prevented the free paflage of the elec~ 
tric effluvia through it. * 
_ Tue varieties he obferved on the appearances and proper- 
ties of the electric light, are even more curious and furprifing 
than his difcoveries concerning electric attraction and repul- 
fion. It is fomething remarkable that Mr. Hawkefbee’s tran- 
fition to electric light was like that of Dr. Wall, viz. from 
the light of phofphorus. 

Mr. Hawkessee firft produced a confiderable quan- 
tity of light by fhaking quick-filver in a glafs veffel, 
out of which the air was exhaufted. Sometimes what he calls 
ftrange flathes of pale light were {een darting in a variety of 
dire€tions, when the mercury was put in motion within an 
exhaufted receiver. But the difcovery was probably acci- 
dental, and he did not feem, at that time, to know the rea- 
fon of the appearance. He called this light the mercurial 
phofpborus, and did not confider the glafs as any way con- 
cerned in producing it. 

- He alfo found, that this appearance of eledtric light (which 
he ftill calls the mercurial phofphorus) did not require a very 
perfe& vacuum, nor even a near approach to it.{ Nay he 


* Phyfico-Mechanical Experiments, p.160. +Ib.12. ft Ib. 14. 


D fometimes 


18 THE. DISCOVERIES Part I, 


fometimes produced that appearance of light by fhaking mer- 
cury in a veffel in which the air was of the fame denfity with 
the external atmofphere, but ftill he had no idea of the glafs 
contributing to the phenomenon. * 

He obferved a ftrong light in vacuo, and a fmall one in 
the open air, from rubbing amber upon woollen, but feems 
to have confidered it as any hard body rubbing againft a foft 
one. He alfo obferved a vivid purple, and afterwards a pale 
light produced, by rubbing glafs upon woollen in vacuo. ¢ 
He fays that every freth glafs firft gave a purple, and then a 
pale light, and that woollen tin&ured with falts or fpirits 
produced anew, ftrong, and fulgurating light. || 

In the following experiments we find his ideas of eleGric 
light much more diftiné, and the appearances the fame that 
are ufually exhibited by our prefent electrical machines, the 
ftructure of which, we fhall find to be nearly the fame with 
thofe which he ufed. 

He provided himfelf with a machine in which he could 
whirl a glafs globe ; and he obferved, when the air was ex- 
haufted out of it, that, upon applying his hand to the globe, a 
ftrong light appeared on the infide, and, upon letting in the 
air, he obferved the light on the outfide alfo; but with fome 
very confiderable differences in its appearances, fticking upon 
his fingers, and other bodies held near.the: globe. ‘He alfo 
obferved, upon this occafion, that one fourth of an atmof- 
phere in the globe did very little-diminith the light within. 
It is pleafing to obferve, that the fimilar appearance in this 


* Phyfico-Mechanical Experiments, p. 18. + Ib. 2€. } Ib, 32. {| Ib. 34. 


experiment 


Perop Il. OF Mr. HAWKESBEE 19 


nent, and that with mercury in vacuo before-men-. 
Goned, made him fufpect, though only fufpea, that the light 
n the former cafe proceeded not. from the mercury 

but from the glafs. 

_ Tur next experiment is of a very delicate and curious na- 
ture. Iti is not to be wondered at, that Mr, Hawkefbee did 
not - underftand the circumftances which contributed to it, as. 
the explication of it depends upon principles which were not 
_ ‘difcovered till a much later period by Mr. Canton. 

~ Horprne an exhaufted globe within the effluvia of an ex- 

cited one, he obferved a light in the exhaufted globe, which . 

prefently died away if it was kept at reft, but which was re- 
_vived, and continued very ftrong, if the exhaufted globe was 
. kept in motion. Prefenting an exhaufted tube to the eflluvia 
of an excited globe, it produced what he calls an interrupted 
flathing light. He imagined that the exhaufted globe was 
excited by the attraction of the effluvia from the other globe, 
fo little did he underftand the true caufe of this curious ex- 
periment. * When he fays that light is producible by the ef- 
_ fluvia of one glafs falling upon another, he adds; that electric, 

_ (by which he means attractive) matter, is not to be brought 
~ forth bya any fuch feeble ftrokes. He had before obferved 

that, upon rubbing an exhaufted tube, it difcovered no attrac- 

tive power, nor gave any light outwards, but only inwards. 
‘Hefound that when the friction was performed in vacuo noelec- 
tricity (that is attraGtion) could be produced ;+ but that though 
the attraétive quality required the prefence both of the exter- 


* Phyfico-Mechanical Experiments, p. $2. + Ib. 242. 
D2 nal 


20 THE DISCOVERIES Part I. 


nal and internal air, in order to its thewing itfelf, yet the Aight 
requires the prefence of only one of them in order to its ap- 
pearance; for that either a glafs globe full of air rubbed in 
vacuo, or with its air exhaufted and rubbed én pieno, would, 
produce a very confiderable light. * 

He fays alfo, that thofe lights are lefs fenfibly affected by 
the return of air which are produced by the attrition of ex- 
haufted glafs in pleno, than thofe which are produced by the 
attrition of glafs full of air in vacuo; for that, in the for- 
mer cafe, no great alteration was found in the light or colour, 
until a certain quantity of air was let in to the infide of the 
exhaufted glafs; but that, in the latter cafe, both light and 
colour were fenfibly changed, upon every admiffion of air to 
the outfide of the full glafs. + 

Tue greateft electric light Mr. Hawkefbee produced, was 
when he enclofed one exhaufted cylinder within another not 
exhaufted, and excited the outermoft of them, putting them 
both in motion. Whether their motions confpired or not, 
he obferved, made no difference. When the outer cylinder 
only was in motion, he fays, the light was very confiderable, 
and fpread itfelf over the furface of the inner glafs. What 
furprifed him moft was, that after both glaffes had been in 
motion fome time, during which the hand had been applied 
to the furface of the outer glafs, the motion of both ceafing, 
and no light at all appearing, if he did but bring his hand a- 
gain near the furface of the outer glafs, there would be flathes 
of light, like lightning, produced in the inner glafs ; as if, he 


* Phyfico-Mechanical Experiments, p. 248. + Ib. 249. 
fays, 


‘Perron. OF Mr. HAWKESBEE, at 


-fays, the effluvia from the outer glafs had been pufhed with 
-more force upon: it by means of the approaching hand. * 
This expetiment was fimilar to thofe which he made with 
the excited and exhaufted globe, and.with the exhaufted tube ; 
and his reafoning upon it fhews, that he was ftill far from be- 
ing fully apprized ha all the circumftances attending this 
fogs iy lattttgenctit bese: 

Tue next experiments which I fhall relate of Mr. Hawkef- 
_ bee’s are thofe which fhew the great copioufnefs, and ex- 
treme fubtilty of electric light. They are really amazing, 
_ and have not yet been purfued.in the manner they deferve. . 

_ He lined more than half of the infide of a glafs glabe with 
_ fealing wax, and having exhaufted the globe, he put it in mo-~ 
tion; when, applying his hand to excite it, he faw the thape 
and figure of all the parts of his hand diftin€tly and perfe@ly_ 
on the concave fuperficies of the wax within. It was as if 
there had only been pure glafs, and no wax interpofed be- 
tween his eye and his hand. The lining of wax,. where it 
was fpread the thineft, would but juft allow the fight of a 
candle through it in the dark; but in fome places the wax 
was, at leaft, one eighth of an inch thick; yet even in thofe 
places the light and the figure of his hand were as diftinguifh~ 
able through it as any where elfe. Nay though, in fome 
places, the fealing wax did not adhere fo clofely to the glafs 
as in others, yet the light on thefe appeared juft as on the 


: reft. + 3) 
* Phyfico-Mechanical Experiments, p.87,  — ¢_ ‘Ib. 168, 
THESE 


22 THE DISCOVERIES. Part I. 


Tuese experiments fucceeded equally with pitch inftead of 
fealing wax. And he obferved, that when the air was let 
into the glafs, every part of it, tlie lined part and the unlined, 
feemed to attract with equal vigour.* Melted flowers of 
fulphur had no fuch effect, but common fulphur anfwered as 
well as fealing wax, or pitch. Inboth thefe laft experiments 
the fulphur was found to have been feparated from the glafs.-+ 

Usinc a large quantity of common fulphur in the fame 
manner, the light in the infide was four times as great, but 
the figure of his fingers was not fo diftinguifhable as in the 
former cafes. He likewife obferved, that on the part near 
the axis, where the fubftance of the fulphur was the greatett, 
no light was produced ; which he attributed, chiefly, to the 
flownefs of the motion in that place. ¢ 

Upon _the admiffion of a fmall quantity of air into the 
globe, thus partially lined with fealing wax, the light wholly 
difappeared on the part covered with the wax, but not on 
the other.. 

He alfo obferved, that when all the air was let in, and the 
hoop of the threads before-mentioned held over the glafs, the 
threads were attracted at greater diitances by the part which 
was coated with the wax than by the other: when all the air 
was exhaufted, he ays, the wax would attract bodies placed 
near the out-fide of the glafs; that even in this cafe, the 
threads preferved their central direGtion, though not fo vigo- 
roufly as when the air was let in; but that they would not be 


* Phyfico-Mechanical Experiments, p. 269. + Ib. 274. t Ib. 275 
attracted 


Pertop II.. OF Mr. HAWKESBEE, 23: 


attraéted at Peetienn chess west ei eRabssae; rem ‘of the 
Mr. = el was not unattentive to sth found made: 
- by the emiffion of, the electric effluvia, or to the manner in 
which it effected the fenfe of feeling. He obferved, that 
when an excited tube’ of glafs attracted various bodies, and ’ 
threw light upon them as they were held near it, a noife, 
which he calls a /napping, was likewife heard, He alfo fays, 
that the rubbed tube, held near the face, gave a feeling as if 
fine hairs had been drawn over it ; and when he repeated the 
experiment of whirling and rubbing the glafs globe, he ob- 
ferved the light to proceed from it ‘with fome noife, and to 
make a kind of preffure upon the finger, when it was held 
within half an inch of it. * 
Nor was Mr. Hawkefbee’s attention confined to the elec- 
tric power of glafi. He made experiments with a globe of 
«wax, in the center of which was a globe of wood; 
from which he concluded, that the eletricity of fealing wax 
was, in general, the fame with that of glafs, but different 
from it in degree. “He could not make any Jight adhere to 
his finger when'prefented to the excited fealing wax, any 
_ more than when it was ais to an exhaufted and excited 
globe of glafs. 
He provided himfelf, in like manner, with a globe of ful- 
phur, and another of rofin with a mixture of brick duit, but 
the fulphur could hardly be excited at all; whereas the rofin 
a&ted more powerfully than the fealing wax had done. ‘This 


* Phyfico-Mechanical Experiments, p. 65. 
he 


lot 


24 _. THE DISCOVERIES Part I. 


_he afcribed to its being ufed while it was warm: for, in the 


fame warm ftate, it attracted leaf bocals isi thine any attrition 
at all. * 

He fays, that. the excited eee gave no light j in the dark, 
and-the fulphur but little. + 

Wiru refpect to the power of ele@tricity in general, he ob- 
ferved, that a flight friction was fufficient to excite it, andthat 
a greater preflure, or a more violent motion did not confiderably 
increafe it. He fays, that all the phenomena of electricity 
were improved by warmth; and diminifhed by moifture ; 
which he attributed to the refiftance that the aqueous parti- 
cles ave to the effluvia; and, like Mr. Boyle, and others 
before him, he was confirmed in this hypothefis, by finding, 
that the interpofition of linen cloth prevented any effects from 


-being obferved beyond it. 


He alfo obferved, that when the tube was filled with other 


matter-than air, as with dry writing fand (which he actually 


tried) the attractive power of the-effluvia was confiderably a- 
-bated, but he did not know what kind of bodies would pro- 
duce that effe&. He-himfelf.obferves, that he found the e- 
leétric virtue of a folid cylinder of glafs to be, not indeed quite 
fo ftrong, as that of a hollow tube, but more permanent. || 
Tuat Mr. Hawkefbee, after all, had no clear idea of the 


-diftinétion of bodies into eleétrics and non electrics, appears 


from fome of his laft experiments, in which he attempted to 
produce electric appearances from metals, and from ithe rea- 
fons he gives for his want of fuccefs in thofe attempts. ‘* From 


* Phyfico-Mechanical Experiments, p. 154. +b. 156. Ib. 52. || Ib. 64. 
“ thefe 


Prriop I. OF Mr. HAWKESBEE. as 


« thefe experiments,” he fays, «* I may fafely conclude, that 
« if there be any. fuch quality as light to be excited from a 
“ brafs body, under'the forementioned: circumftances,” viz. 
of whirling and rubbing, ‘¢ all the attrition of the feveral bo~ 
« dies I have ufed for that purpofe, have been too weak to 
*« force it from it.» And indeed, confidering the clofenefs of 
« the parts of metals, and with what firmnefs they adhere, 
« entangle, and attract one another, a {mall degree of attri- 
“ tion is not fufficient to put their parts into fuch a’ motion 
as to produce an electrical quality, which quality, un- 
« der the forementioned circumftances, I take to be the ap- 
_ pearance of light in fuch a medium. 
ConsmpeRING what great fuccefs Mr. Hawkefbee had with 
his globe of glafs, and his machine to give motion to it, it is 
furprifing that the ufe of it fhould be fo long difcontinued 
after his death. To this circumftance we may perhaps, in a 
great meafure, afcribe the flow progrefs that was afterwards 
made in electrical difcoveries. Mr. Hawkefbee’s fucceffors 
confined themfelves to the ufe of tubes. I fuppofe becaufe. 
they were lighter, more portable, and more eafily ma- 
naged in the experiments which they chiefly attended to: but 
the ufe of the globe would: certainly have put them much 
fooner in the way of making the capital difcoveries, which 
were afterwards made in electricity. 


— oe 


E PERIOD 


26 THE DISCOVERIES Part I. 


PERTOD II, 


THE EXPERIMENTS AND DISCOVERIES OF Mr. STEPHEN 


GREY,’ wHICH WERE MADE PRIOR To THOSE oF Mon= | 


SIEUR DU FAYE, AND WHICH BRING THE HISTORY) oF 
ELECTRICITY, TO: THE YEAR 1733. 


OTWITHSTANDING, the important difcoveries. of 


Mr. Hawketbee, and the promifing appearance they 


made, ag an opening to further difcoveries, we find, after him, 
a great chafm in the hiftory of electricity, an interruption of 
difcoveries, and, as far. as we can learn, of experiments too, 
for the {pace of near twenty years; and ata time when philo- 
fophical knowledge of every other kind was making the moft 
rapid progrefs under the aufpices of the great Sir Haac New- 
ton. But the attention of this great man happened to be en- 
gaged by other fubjeéts, and this very circumftance might be 
the reafon why the attention of other pailetanhere was alfo 
diverted from eleétricity. _; 

ArTeR this long interval, commences a new zra in n the hits 
tory of electricity ; in which we fhall have the works of ano- 
ther labourer in this new field of philofophy to contemplate, 
viz. Mr. Stephen Grey, a penfioner at the Charter Houfe. 
No perfon who ever applied to this ftudy. was more affliduous 
in making cE periments, or had his heart more entirely in the 

work. 


ee 


Perron III. ea OF Mr. GREY. 27 


work. © This will appear by the prodigious numberof expe- 
riments he made; and’ fome confiderable difcoveries with 
which his: perfeverance -was crowned; as wellas by the felf 
deceptions, which his Spl ease for new — 
him to. 2 : im ils 3 

 Berore the year 17285! ite Stephen Lap had ante ob- 
i ferved,: in eleGtrical experiments made with a glafs tube, and 
a down feather tied to the end of a fmail ftick, that, after its 
fibres had been drawn toward the tube, they would, upon the 
tube's being withdrawn, cling tothe! ftick, as ifit had been 
an eleétric-body,.or as if there had ‘been fome electricity com-~ 
municated to the ftick, or tothe feathet: This put-him up- 
on thinking, whether, if the feather were drawn through his 
fingers, it might not produce the fame effect, by. acquiring 
fome degree of electricity... This. experiment: fucceeded:ac~ 
cordingly, upon his firft trial ; the {mall downy. fibres of the 
feather being attraéted by his finger, when held near it; and 
fometimes the upper part of the feather with its ftem would 
be attracted alfo. . . 

Ir will be obvious to every dlebisiciaii, shist the: fnccels of 
| this experiment depended upon) other principles than thofe to 
which he had a view in making it. Proceeding, however, in 

the fame manner, he found the following fubftances to be all 
eleGtric; bair, ilk; linen, woollen, paper, leather, wood, parch- 
ment, and ox gut in'which leaf-gold had. been beaten. | He 
made,all thefe fubftances very warm, and fome of them quite 
hot before he rubbed them. He found light emitted in the 
dark by the filk and the linen, but more efpecially by a piece 
of white prefling paper, which is of the fame nature with 


2 card 


28 THE DISCOVERIES ..'' Parr tl. 


card paper: Not only did this fubftance, when made as hot 
as his fingers could bear, yield alight; but, when his fingers 


were held near it, a light iflued from them alfo attended with - 


a crackling noife, like that produced by a glafs tube, aheeal 
not at fo great a diftance from the fingers.* . 

‘Tue preceeding experiments bring us to the eve of a very 
confiderable difcovery in electricity, viz. the communication 
of that power from native electrics to bodies, in which it is 
not capable of being excited; and alfo to a more accurate 
diftintion of eleGtrics from non eleétrics. I fhall relate the 

‘manner in which thefe important difcoveries were made 
pretty fully, but, at the fame time, ‘as faccinélly as poffible. 

In the month of February 1729, Mr. Grey, after fome 
fruitlefs attempts to make metals attractive, by heating, rub- 
bing, and hammering, recollected a fufpicion which he had 
fome years entertained; that, as a tube communicated its 

- light to various bodies when it was rubbed in the dark, it 
might poffibly, at the fame time, communicate an eleétricity 
to them, by which had hitherto been underftood only the 
power of attracting light bodies.» For’ this purpofe he pro- 
vided himfelf with a tube three feet five inches long, and 
near one inch and two tenths in diameter ; and to each end 
was fitted a cork, to keep the duft out when the tube was 
not in ufe. ; 

Tue firft‘experiments he made upon this occafion were in- 
tended to try, if he could find any ‘difference in its attraction 

when the tube was ftopped at both ends by the corks, and when 


* Philofophical Tranfaftions abridged, Vol. 8. p. 9. 
left 


Periop III. OF Mr. GREY. 29 


- left entirely open; but he could perceive no fenfible differ- 


ence. It was, however, in the courfe of this experiment 
that, holding a down feather over againft the upper end of 
the tube, he found that it would fly to the cork, being at- 
tracted and repelled by it, as well .as by the tube itfelf. 
He then held the feather over againft the flat end of the cork, 
and obferved, that it was attraéted and repelled many times 


together; at which, he fays, he was much furprifed, and con- 
cluded, that there was certainly an attractive virtue commu- 


nicated to the cork by the excited tube. 
- He then fixed an ivory ball upon a ftick of fir, about four 


inches long; when, thrufting the other end into the cork, he 


found, that the ball attracted and repelled the feather, even . 


‘with more vigour than the cork had done, repeating its at- 


tractions and repulfions many times fucceflively. He after- 
wards fixed the ball upon long fticks, and upon pieces of brafs 


and iron wire, with the fame fuccefs; but he obferved, that 


the feather was never fo ftrongly attracted by the wire, though 
it were held very near the tube, as by the ball at the end of 
it. 

Wuen a wire of any confiderable length was ufed, its vi- 
brations, caufed by the action of rubbing the tube, made it 
troublefome to manage. This put Mr. Grey upon think~- 
ing whether, if the ball were hung to a packthread, and 
fufpended by a loop on the tube, the electricity would not be 
carried down the line to the ball ; and he found it to fucceed 
according to his expectation. In this manner he fufpended 
various bodies to his tube, and found all of them to be capa 
ble of receiving eleétricity in the fame manner, 

AFTER 


30 THE DISCOVERIES Parr I. 


ArTeEr trying thefe experiments with the longeft light canes 
and reeds that he could conveniently ufe, he afcended a bal- 
cony twenty fix feet high; and, faftening a ftring to his tube, 
he found, that the ball at the end of it would attra&t light bo- 
dies in the court below. 

He then afcended to greater heights, and by putting his 
long canes in the end of his tube,’ and faftening a long ftring 
to the end of the canes, he contrived to convey the electricity 

-to much greater diftances than he had donegbefore ; till, be- 
ing able to carry it no further perpendicularly, he next at- 
tempted to carry it horizontally ; and from thefe attempts a-" 
rofe a difcovery, of which he was not inthe leaft aware when 
he began them. 

In his firft trial he made a loop ateach end of a packthread, 
‘by means of which he fufpended it, at one end, ona nail driven 
into a beam, the other end hanging downwards. Through 
the loop which hung down, he put the line to which his ivory 
ball was faftened, fixing the other end of it by a loop on 
his tube ; fo that one part of the line, along which the elec- 
tricity was to be conveyed, viz. that to which the ball was 
faftened, hung perpendicular, ‘the reft of the line lay hori- 
zontal. After this preparation, he:put the leaf brafs under 
the ivory ball, and rubbed the tube, but not the leaft fign of 
attraétion was perceived. Upon this he concluded, that 
when the eleétric virtue came to the loop of the packthread, 
which was fufpended on the beam, it went up the fame to 
the beam; fo that none, or very little, of it went down to 
the ball; and he could not, at that time, think of nif 


method to prevent it. 
On 


Periop III. _ OF Mr. GREY. 31 


On June the 30th 1729, Mr. Grey paid a vifit to Mr. 
Wheeler, to give him a fpecimen of his experiments ; when, 
after having made them from the greateft heights which the 
houfe would admit, Mr. Wheeler was defirous of trying 
whether they could not carry the ele¢tric virtue to a greater 
diftance horizontally. Mr. Grey then told him of the fruit- 
lefs attempt he had made to convey it in that direction: 
upon which Mr. Wheeler propofed to fufpend the line to 
be eleétrified by another of filk, inftead of packthread ; and 
Mr. Grey told him, it might do better, on account of its 
fmallnefs; as lefs of the virtue would probably pafs off by it 
than had done by the thick hempen line, which he had ufed 
before. With this expedient, they fucceeded far beyond their 
expectations. 

Tue firft experiment they made after this expedient occur- 
red to them,was in a matted gallery at Mr. Wheeler’s houfe 
July 2d. i729, about ten o'clock in the morning, as 
Mr. Grey, after his ufual manner, has minutely recorded it, 
About four feet from the end of the gallery, they faftened a line 
acrofs the place. The middle part of this line was filk, the 
reft packthread. They then laid the line to which the 
ivory ball was hung,. by which the electric virtue was to be 
conveyed to it from the tube, and which was eighty feet and 
a half in length acrofs this filk line, fo that the ball hung a- 
bout nine feet below it. The other end of the line was, by 
a loop, faftened to the tube, which they excited at the 
other end of the room. After this preparation, they put the 
leaf brafs under the ivory ball, and, upon rubbing the tube, 
it was attracted, and kept fufpended for fome time. 

TuE 


32 THE DISCOVERIES /'''PaxrT. 


. Tux-gillery not permitting them to go any greater lengths 
saith: a fingle line of communication; ‘they contrived to return 
the line, making the whole length of it almoft twice that of 
the gallery, or about one hundred and forty feven feet, which 
anfwered very well. But, fufpecting that the attraction 
would ‘be ftronger without doubling or returning the line, 
they made ufe of a line one hundred and twenty four feet long, 
running in one direction in the barn; and, as they expected, 
they found the attraction ftronger than when the line had 
been returned in the gallery. 

Juxy the 3d. proceeding to make more returns of the line, 
the filk which fupported it happened to break, not being a- 
ble to bear the weight of it, when fhaken with the motion 
that was given to it by rubbing the tube. Upon this they 
endeavoured to fupport it by a fmall iron wire, inftead of the filk 
ftring: but this alfo breaking, they made ufe of a brafs wire 
a little thicker. But this brafs wire, though it fupported the 
line of communication very well, did not anfwer the purpofe 
of thefe young eleétrians: for, upon rubbing the tube, no 
eleétricity was perceived at the end of the line. It had all 
gone off by the brafs wire which fupported it. They had had 
recourfe to brafs wires, as being ftronger than their filk lines, 
and no thicker ; for the fame reafon that they had before ufed 
filk lines in preference to hempen ftrings ; becaufe they could 
have them ftronger, and at the fame time fmaller. But the 
refult.of this experiment convinced them, that the fuccefs of 
it depended upon their fupporting lines being //k, and not, as 
they had imagined, upon their being fmal/. For the electric 
virtue went off as effectually by the fmall brafs wire, as it 
had done by the thick hempen cord. 

BEING 


Pertop I. = OF Mr. GREY, 33 


« Brine obliged, therefore, to return to their filk lines, they 
contrived them to fupport very great lengths of the hempen 
line of communication ; and actually conveyed the electric 
virtue feven hundred and fixty five feet, nor did they perceive 
that the effect was fenfibly diminithed by the diftance..* 
_ In the fame manner,in which /é was found to be a non- 
conductor, it is, probable that, about the fame time, air, rofin, 
glafs, and perhaps fome other electric fubftances were found 
to have the fame property, though the difcovery be no where 
patticularly mentioned : for we fhall prefently find Mr. Grey: 
making ufe of them, ‘to infulate the bodies that he eledtrified. , 
_ Arrer this, they amufed themfelves with trying how large 
furfaces might be impregnated with the electric efluvia; elec- 
trifying a large map, table cloth, &c. They alfo carried the 
ele&tric virtue feveral ways at the fame time, and to a confider- 
able diftance each way. 
» Tue, magnetic effluvia, they,-found,) did not in 1 the leat 
interfere with the electric ; for when they had elec- 
trified the load. fone, with a key hanging to it, they both 
- attracted leaf brafs like other fubftances.” 
Pe SomETIME, after . this, Mr. ‘Wheeler, in the abfence of 
Mr, Grey, electrified ared hot poker, and found the. attrac- 
tion to be the fame as when it was cold. He alfo fufpended 
a live chicken upon.the tube by the legs, and found the 
Pt of it ftrongly electrical. + 
ts ft 1729, , Mr. Grey advanced one ftep further in 
his eAtrical operations. He found that he could convey the 
electric virtue from the tube to the line of communication 
Without, touching it, and that holding the excited tube near 


* Phil, Tranf. abridged, Vol. 7. p. 15. ¢ Ib. p. 16. 
: ’ F 


it 


54 THE DISCOVERIES Part-I. 


it was fufficient. Repeating his former experiments with 
this variation, in conjun@ion with Mr. Wheeler, and among 
others, carrying the electric virtue feveral ways at the fame 
time without touching the line, they always obferved, that 
the attraction was ftrongeft at the place which was moft re- 
mote from the tube; a fact which they might have obferved, 
if they had attended to it, in their former experiments. * 
SomeTiIME in the fame month, Mr. Wheeler and Mr. Grey 
in conjunction made fome experiments, in order to try 
whether the eleéric attraction was in proportion to the 
quantity of matter in bodies ; and with this view they electri- 
fied a folid cube of oak, and another of the fame dimenfions 
which was hollow ; but they could not perceive any difference 
in their attraGtive power; though it was Mr. Grey’s opinion, 
that the electric effluvia paffed nents all the parts of the 
folid cube. + 
On the 13th. of Auguft in the fame year, Mr. Grey made 
another improvement in his eleétrical apparatus, by finding 
that he could eleétrify a rod, as well as a thread, without infert- 
ing any part of it into his excited tube. He took a large pole 
twenty feven feet long, two iriches and one half diameter at 
one end, and one inch and one half at the other. It was a 
fort of wood which is called horfe beach, and had its rind 
on. This pole he fufpended horizontally by hair lines, and 
at the fimall end of the pole he hung a cork, by means of a 
packthread about one foot long, and put a fmall leaden ball 
upon the cork, to keep the packthread extended. Then the 
leaf brafs being put under the cork, the tube rubbed, and 
held near the larger end of the pole, the cork ball at the op- - 
* Phil. Tranf. abridged, Vol. 7. p. 17. + Ib. 
pofite 


Pemeol. “OF SMe. GRE Yai: re 


pofite end! attraéted the leaf brafs ftrongly, to the height of 
an inch or mores Mr. Grey alfo obferved, that though the 
leaf brafs was attracted’ by any part of the pole, it was not 
near fo ftrongly as by the cork. * 

Asour the beginning of September, Mr. Grey made ex- 
periments, ‘to thew that the eleétric effluvia might be car- 
ried in a circle, ‘as well as along lines, and be communicated 
from one circle to another; and alfo that it might be done 
whether the circles were-vertical, or horizontal. 
© Azour the latter end of autumn, or the beginning of winter 
1729, Mr. Grey refamed his inquiries after other electrical, 
bodies, and found many more.to have the fame property, but 
he mentions only the dry leaves of feveral trees; from 
whence he concluded, that the leaves of all vegetables had 
that attractive virtue. + 

We are now advanced to a new fcene of Mr. Grey’s elec- 
trical experiments, viz. upon fluids, and upon animal bodies. 
Having no other method of trying whether any fubftances 
could have the electric virtue communicated to them, but by 
making them raife/light bodies placed upon a ftand under 
them ; it may eafily be imagined, that they. could not well 
contrive 'to puta fluid body into that fituation. The only 
thing that Mr. Grey could do in this way, was to make ufe 
of a bubble, in which form a fluid is capable of being 
held in a ftate of fufpenfion. Accordingly, on March 2 3d, 
and 25th.'1730, he diflolved foap in Thames water, and fuf- 
pending a tobacco pipe, he blew a bubble at the head of it; 
and, bringing the excited tube near the fmall end, he found 
the bubble to, attract leaf brafs to the height of two, and of 
four inches. + 

* Phil. Tranf. abridged, Vol. 7. p. 18, + Ib. p. 19. t Ib. 
2 APRIL 


36: THE DISCOVERIES Pare I. 


Apri the 8th. 1730, Mr. Grey fufpended a boy on hair 
lines, in a horizontal pofition, juft as.all eleGtricians had, be- 
fore, been ufed to fufpend their hempen lines of communicati- 
on, and their wooden rods; then, bringing the excited tube 
near his feet, he found that the leaf brafs was attracted by his 
head with much vigour, fo as to rife to the height of eight, 
and fometimes of ten inches. When the leaf brafs was put 
under his feet, and the tube brought near his head, the at- 
traction was fmall ; and when the leaf brafs was brought un- 


_ der his head, and the tube held over it, there was no attrac- 


tion at all. Mr. Grey does not attempt to aflign any reafon 


. for thefe appearances. It was not till many years after this 
_ time, that the influence of points in receiving and emitting the 


electric effluvia was obferved. While the boy was fufpended, 
Mr. Grey, amufed himfelf with making the electricity ope- 
rate in feveral parts of his body, at the fame time; and at 
the ends of long rods, which he made him hold in his hands, 
and in diverfifying the experiment feveral other ways. * 


_» Iv is curious to obferve the inference wich Mr. Grey makes 
_ from thefe experiments. By them, fays he, we fee, that ani- 


mals receive a greater quantity of eleétrical fluid than other 
bodies; and that it may be conveyed from them feveral ways 
at the fame time, to confiderable diftances. He had no idea 


_that the bodies of animals receive electricity only by means of 
_the moifture that is in them, and that his hempen line of 


eommunication, and his wooden rods could not have been e- 
lectrified at all, if they had been perfeétly dry. 


"| In all thefe experiments Mr. Grey obferved, that the leaf — 
_ brafg was attracted toa much greater height from the top of 


* Phil. Tranf. abridged, Vol. 7.. p. 20. : 


ar 


ee ee ee ee ee ee ee ee ee 


‘Pétion WI. “OF Mr. GREY. 37 


“a narrow ftand than from the table; and, at leaft, three times 
higher than when it was laid on the floor of the room. 
* AsouT this time Mr. Grey communicated to the Royal 

"Society his fufpicion, that bodies attrated more or lefs ac- 
cording to their colour, though the’ fubftance was the fame, 
and the weight and fize equal. He fays, he found red, 
orange, and yellow attracted at leaft three or four times 
ftronger than green, blue, or purple; but he forbore com- 
municating a more particular account of them, till he had 
tried a more accurate method which, he fays, he had thought 
of, to make the experiments. The communication, however, 
was never made. The thing itfelf was only a deception, and 
the caufe of it will be fhewn in fome fubfequent experi- 
ments made by Mr. Wheeler. * 

Mr. Grey, having found that he could communicate elec- 
tricity to a bubble of foap and water, was encouraged to at- 
tempt communicating it to water itfelf. In order to this, he 
electrified a wooden difh full of water, placed on a cake of 
rofin, or a pane of glafs, and obferved, that if a {mall piece 
of thread, a narrow flip of thin paper, or a piece of fheet 
glafs was held over the water, in an horizontal pofition, at 
the diftance of an inch or fomething more, they would be at- 
tracted to the furface of the water, and then repelled; but he 
imagined that thefe attractions and repulfions were not re- 
peated fo often as rN would have been, if the body had been 
folid. 

Bur he siaitidhas contrived to thew the effect of electricity 
upon water in another and more effectual manner. As this 
experiment was very curious, and exhibited an appearance 

* Phil. Tranf’ abridged, Vol. 7. p. 22. 
which 


38 THE DISCOVERIES ‘Part I. 


which was quite new to the electricians of thofe times, I thall 
relate the ate “apie of it very fully, and generally in Mr. 
Grey's own words. * 

He filled a fmall cup with water higher than the brim, 
and when he had held an excited tube over it, at the diftan¢e of 
about an inch or more, he fays, that if it were a large tube, 
there would firft arife a little mountain of water from the top 
of it, of a conical form; from-the vertex of which 
there proceeded a light, very vifible when the experiment 
was performed in a dark room, and a {napping noife, almoft 
like that which was made when the finger was held near the 
tube, but not'quite fo loud, and of a more flat found. Upon 
this, fays he, immediately the mountain, if I may fo call it, 
falls into the reft of the water, and a it into a tremulous 
and waving motion. 

Wuen he repeated this experiment in the fun thine, he 
perceived that very fmall particles of water were thrown from 
the top’ of the mountain; and that, fometimes, there would 
arife a fine itream of water from the vertex of the cone, in 
the manner of a fountain, from which there iffued a fine 
ftream or vapour, whofe particles were fo fmall as not to be 
feen ;' yet, he fays, he was certain it muft be fo; fince the 
under fide of the tube was wet, as he found when he came 
to rub it afterwards.. He adds,’that he had fince found, that 
though there does not always arife that cylinder of water, yet 
that there is always a ftream of invifible particles thrown on 
_the tube, and fometimes to that degree as to be vifible on it. 
>> Wuen fome of the larger cups were wfed (his fizes were 
from’ three fourths to one tenth of an inch in diaineter) which, 

* Phil. Tranf. abridged, Vol. 7. p. 23. 2 
12 é 


_ 


a 


Pemop Til. «© OF Mr. GREY. - 39° 


lie fays, wete to be filled as high as could be done without 
running over; the middle part of the furface, which was flat, 
would be deprefied, upon the approach of the tube, into a 
concave, and the parts towards the edge be raifed; and that 
when the tube was held over againft the fide of the water, 
little conical: protuberances of water iffued out from it 
horizontally; and, after the crackling noife, returned to the 
reft of the water; and that fometimes fmall particles would 
be thrown off from it, as from the {mall portions of it above 
mentioned. 

- Tuts laft experiment he repeated with hot water, and found 

that it was attracted much more ftrongly, and at a much greater 
diftance than before. The fteam arifing from the vertex was 
in this cafe vifible, and the tube was fprinkled with large 
drops of water. ; 
_ He tried thefe experiments, in the fame manner, with quick 
filver, which was likewife raifed up, but, by reafon of its 
gravity, not to fo great a height as the water: but, he fays, 
that the fhapping noife was louder, and Jafted much longer 
than it did with the water. * 

Ir is not eafy to know what to make of the next {et of ex- 
periments which engaged the attention of Mr. Grey, or how 
far he deceived himfelf in the refults of them. He fancied 
that he had difcovered a perpetual attractive power in all elec- 
tric bodies which did not require heating, rubbing, or any 
kind of attrition to be excited. The following experiments, 
he imagined, proved the difcovery. 

He took nineteen different fubftances, which were either 
rofin, gum lac, fhell lac, bees wax, fulphur, pitch, or two 


* Phil. Tranf. abridged, Vol. 7. p. 24. 
or 


“42> THE DISCOVERTES  ‘PAvrT” 


or, three,of thefe differently compounded. -Thefe he ‘melted 
in a fpherical iron ladle; except the fulphur, which was beft™ 


done in aglafs veflel. When thefe were taken out of the ladle, — 


and their {pherical furfaces hardened, he fays, they would not 
attract until the heat was abated, or until they came to a™ 
certain degree of warmth; that then there was a {mall attrac- 
tion, which encreafed until the fubftance was poe when 
it was very confiderable. * 


Tue manner in which he preferved thefe fabftancesii ina’ 


{tate of attraction, was by wrapping them in any thing which 
would keep them from the external air. At firft, for the 
fmaller bodies, he ufed white paper, and for the larger ones, 
white flannel’; but he afterwards found that black worfted 
ftockings would do as well. Being thus cloathed, he put 


them into a large firm box ; where they remained, till he, 


had occafion.to make ufe of them. » 

He, obferved thefe bodies for thirty rita and pal that 
they continued to ac as vigoroufly as on the firft or fecond 
day ; and that they retained their power until the time of his 
writing, when fome of them had been prepared above fous 
months. 

He makes the moft pc tos mention, ofa large cone m 
ftone fulphur, covered with a drinking glafs in which it was 
made ; and.fays, that. whenever. the glafs was taken off, it 
would, attra& as ftrongly as the fulphur, which was kept 
covered in the box... In fair weather, the glafs would attract 
alfo, but not fo ftrongly as the fulphur, which never failed 
to attract, let the wind or the weather be ever fo: variable ; 
as would all the other bodies, only in wet weather, the at- 
tration was not fo great, as in fair weather, 


* Phil. Tranf. abridged, Vol. 7. p. 24. } 
He 


. 
> 


Period WI. © OF Mr. GREY.' 41 


He alfo mentions a cake of melted fulphur, which he kept 
without any | cover, in the fame place with the body above- 
mentioned, and where the fun did not thine upon them ; 
and fays, that it continued to attraé till the time of his 
writing; but that its attraction was not one tenth part 
that of the cone of fulphur which was covered. 

‘Tuese attractions he tried by a fine thread hanging from 
the end of a ftick. He held the electric body in one hand, 
and the ftick in the other ; and could perceive the attraction at 
as great a diftance as he could hold them. 

_ Ar the time of his writing, he was upon the fubject of 
permanent electricity in glafs, but had not then compleated 
his experiments. * 

Great light will be thrown upon thefe experiments of 
Mr. Grey by fome that will be hereafter related of Mr. Wilke. 
It is probable that the glafs veffel in thefe experiments was 
pofleffed of one electricity, and the fulphur, &c. of the other. 
But the two electricities were not difcovered till afterwards. 

We are now come to a different fet of electrical experi- 
ments, made by Mr. Grey and Mr. Wheeler in conjunétion, 
fimilar to fome of Mr. Hawketbee’s. 

In the firft place, Mr. Grey made fome experiments, which, 
probably unknown to him, had been made before by Mr. 
Boyle, on excited glafs, and feveral other bodies in vacuo, 
and found that they would attract at very near the fame dif- 
tance as in pleno. To determine this, he fufpended the ex- 
cited fubftance in a receiver of an air pump, and when it was 


_ * Philofophical Tranfaftions abridged, Vol. 6. p. 27. 
G exhaufted 


42 THE DISCOVERIES |) Parrl, 


exhaufted, he let the electric down to a proper diftance from 
fome light bodies, placed on a ftand below. The event was, 
as near as could be judged, the fame in vacuo as in the open . 
air, if the experiment was made in the fame receiver, and if 
the cleGtric was brought to the light bodies at the fame dif- 
tance of time from the act of excitation. * , 
Asour the latter end of Auguft 1732, Mr. Grey and 
Mr. Wheeler fufpended, from the top of a receiver, a white 
thread, which hung down to the middle of it. Then ex- 
haufting the receiver, and rubbing it, the thread was attracted 
vigoroufly. When it was at reft, and hung perpendicularly, 
the excited tube attracted it; and when the tube was taken 
away flowly, the thread returned to its perpendicular fituation ; 
but the tube being removed haftily, the thread jumped to 
the oppofite fide of the receiver. This laft effect followed, if 
the hand was hattily removed from the receiver; and at firft 
it appeared, in both cafes, unaccountable to them; but upon 
further confideration, they concluded, that it proceeded from 
the motion of the air, made by the tube, or the hand, which 
took off the attraction on that fide, and not on the other. + 
They alfo found, that an excited tube would attract the 
thread through another receiver, which was put over that 
in which it was fufpended. And, fometime after, Mr. 
Wheeler found, that the thread was attraéted through five 
receivers put one over another, and all exhaufted: He even 
thought that, in this cafe, the attraction was rather ftronger 
than when a fingle receiver was ufed. N. B. The more ef- 


® phil. Tranf. abridged, Vol. 6. p.27- + Ib. Vol. 7. p. 56. 
fectually 


Prhiop TI. § OF Mr. GREY. 43 


fedtually to keep any thing of moifture out of the receivers, 
which would have been of bad confequence in this experi- 
ment, inftead of wet leather, he made ufe of a cement made 
of wax and turpentine, which Mr. Boyle, ufed in his experi- 
ments. * 
. Tuese two gentlemen, about the fame time, made a cu- 
rious experiment which, they fay, fhewed, that attraction is 
communicated through opaque, as well as tranfparent bodies, 
notin vacuo. But a little knowledge of metal, as a conduc- 
tor of ele&tricity, would have fayed them the trouble they 
gave themfelyes. They took a large hand-bell, and taking 
out the clapper, they fufpended a cork, befmeared with 
honey, from the top of it; and fet it on a piece of glafs, on 
which they had put fome leaf brafS. The excited tube was 
then brought near feveral parts of the bell; and, upon taking 
f it up, feveral pieces of leaf brafs were found fticking to the 
cork, and others were removed from the places in which they 
had been left, having, probably, been attracted by the bell. 
We {fee by how fmall fteps advances were made in this 
fcience by fome experiments made by Mr. Grey, 16th June 
1731, and which he has thought worth recording ; 
though they contain hardly any thing which we thould 
think new, notwithftanding the difcoveries appeared pretty 
| confiderable to him. 
| He electrified a boy ftanding on cakes of rofin, as ftrongly 
as he had before electrified him when fufpended on hair lines. 
He afterwards electrified a boy fufpended on hair lines, by 


* Phil. Tranf. abridged, Vol. 7. p. 97. + Ib. 96. 


G2 means 


ee “THE! DISCOVERIES /! Pay Tt. 


means of a line of communication from another boy who was 
electrified, at fome feet diftance from him. He varied this 
experiment with rods and boys feveral ways; and concluded 
from it, that the electric virtue might not only be carried 
from the tube, by a rod, or line, to diftant bodies; but that 
the fame rod, or line, would communicate that virtue to ano- 
ther rod, or line, at a diftance from it; and that, by this other 
rod, or line, the attractive force might be carried to ftill more 
diftant bodies. This experiment fhews that Mr. ak sm 
-not properly confidered the line of communication, a 
body electrified by i it; as one and the fame thing, in an elec- 
trical view, differing only in form, as they were both alike 
- conductors of electricity. 
In December following, Mr. Grey carried this experiment 
- fomething further, by conveying electricity to bodies which 
odid not touch the line of communication, making it. pafs 
-throngh the center of hoops ftanding on glafs. One of his 
- hoops was twenty, another forty inches in diameter. * 


* Phil. Tranf. abridged, Vol. 7. p. 100. 


H 
PERIOD 


Penson IV. 29 OF) Ma. Duy FAYE. 45 


ba wlyh v ibietins &) 


Jinhbnag ent 4 Bartle pee HP yet Se sin) 
Sige !s PBR TOD sIve ia 
as a4 yal Bee) a Na St 5 i 

i re ios 


‘Tae extant AND DISCOVERIES oF Mr. Du FAYE. 
ae bi quails 


[ITHERTO the fpirit of cleGtricity feems to have been 
confined to England ; but, about this time, we find 

‘that it had paffed the feas, and that ingenious foreigners were 
ambitious of diftinguifhing themfelves, and acquiring reputa-_ 
tion in this new field of glory. Mr. Du Faye, intendant of 
‘the French king’s gardens, and member of the academy of 
‘ feiences at Paris, affiduoufly repeated the experiments above- 
a mentioned of Mr. Grey, and likewife added to the common 

*ftock feveral new ones of his own. To him we are alfo in- 
debted for the obfervation of feveral general properties of elec- 
tricity, or rules concerning the method of its action, which 
had not been taken notice of before, and which reduced to fewer 
propofitions what had been before difcovered concerning it. 
Thefe experiments of his were comprifed in fix long memoirs, 
inferted in the hiftory of the academy of fciences’ for the 
years 1733 and 1734. An account of them alfo makes an 
article in the Philofophical Tranfaétions, dated December 
27th 1733. 

Be found that all bodies, except metallic, foft, and fluid 
‘ones, might be made electric, by firft heating them, more 
or lefs, and then rubbing them on any fort of cloth. He 
alfo excepts thofe fubftances which grow foft by heat, as gum ; 


or 


46> THE DISCOVERIES VParri. 


or which diffolve in water, as glue. He alfo remarked, that 
the hardeft ftone and marble required more chafing and heat- 
ing than other bodies, ;and that the famerule obtains with re- 
gard to woods; fo that box, lignum vite, and other kinds 
of very hard. wood muft be chafed almoft to a degree of burn- 
ings whereas fir, lime tree, and cork require | but a moderate 
heat. * 

He fays, that, purfuing Mr. Grey’s experiments, to make 
water receive electricity,. he found ; that all bodies, without 
exception, whether folid or fluid, were capable of it, when 


they were placed on glafs flightly warmed, or only dried, and 


the excited tube was brought near them. He particularly 


mentions his having made the experiment with ice, lighted 


wood coal, and every thing that happened to be at hand at 
the time; and conftantly remarked, that fach bodies as were 


of themfelves the leaft ele@tric, had the greateft degree of 
cleétricity communicated, to them by the approach of the EX 


cited tube. 


He refutes Mr. Grey's ‘affertion concerning the different | 
electricity of differently coloured bodies, and fhews that it. 


proceeded not from the colour as a colour, but from the fub- 
{tance which was employed in dying it. 1 

“Havinc communicated the electricity of the tube, by 
means of a packthread, after Mr. Grey’s manner, he ob- 
ferved, that the experiment fucceeded better for wetting the 
line ; and though he made the experiment at the diftance of 
one thoufand two hundred and fifty fix feet, when the wind 
was high, the lin¢ making eight returns, and pailing through 
two different walks of a garden, that the ele@tric virtue was 
ftill communicated. + 


* Phil. Tranf. abridged, Vol. 8. p. 393. + Ib. p. 395. T 
HE 


PeriopdV. OF Mr. Du FAYE. AT. 


| Tur electric fpark from a living body, and which makes a 
‘principal part of the diverfion of gentlemen and ladies, who 
‘come to fee experiments in electricity, was firft obferved by 
Mr. du Faye, accompanied at that time, asin moft of his ex- 

“by the Abbe Nollet, who, afterwards, we fhall 
nd, did himfelf obtain a diftinguifhed name among electri- 
cians. 

“Mr. Du Faye, having got himfelf fufpended on filk lines, 
as Mr. Grey had done the child mentioned above, obferved, 
that, as foon as he was electrified, if another perfon ap- 

proached him, and brought his hand within an inch, or 
thereabouts, of his face, legs, hands, or cloaths, there im- 
mediately iffued from his body one or more pricking fhoots, 
attended with a crackling noife. He’ fays this experiment 
occafioned to the perfon who brought his hand near him, as 
well as to himfelf, a little pain, refembling that of the fudden 
prick ofa pin, or the burning from a fpark of fire; and that 
it was felt as fenfibly through his cloaths, as on his bare face, 
‘or hands. Hie alfo obferves, that, in the dark, thofe fnap- 
pings were fo many fparks of fire. * 

Tus Abbe Nollet fays he fhall never forget the furprize 
which the firft electrical {park which was ever drawn from the 
Hund body excited, both in Mr. Du Faye, and in himfelf.+ 

© He fays, that thofe fhappings and {parks were not excited, 
ifig bit'of wood; of cloth, or of any other fubftance than a 
living human body; was brought near him; except metal, 
Which produced very nearly the fame effectas the human body. 


"Phil. Tranf, abridged; Vol, 8, p. 395:°. 4 Lecons de Phyfique, Vol. 6. p. 408. 
alte He 


48 THE DISCOVERIES Parr I. 


He was not aware, that it was owing to points, or partial 


drynefs, in the fubftances which he mentions, that they did 


not take a full and ftrong fpark. He feems alfo to have been 
_under fome deceptions, when he imagined, that the flefy of 
dead animals gave only an uniform light, without any fhap- 
ping, or {parks. * 
Tue two next capital obfervations of Mr. Du Faye I fhall 
_repeat in his own words, becaufe they are importantand curious ; 
and yet theformer of them is little more that Otto Guericke had 
obferved before him. “ I difcovered,” he fays, «a very fimple 
** principle, which accounts for a great part of the irregula~ 
“© rities, and, if I may ufe the term, of the caprices, that 


** feem to accompany moft of the experiments in electricity. 


«* This principle is, that ele@ric bodies attra all thofe 
«* which are not fo, and repel them as foon as they are be- 


«* come electric, by the vicinity or contaét of the electric | 


“© body. Thus leaf gold is firft attracted _by the tube; ac- 
«© quires electricity by approaching it, and, confequently, is 
Ne immediately repelled by it; nor is reattracted, while it re- 
‘tains its eleétric quality. But if, while i it is ; thus fuftained 
«in the air, it chance to light on fome other body, it 
« ftraightway lofes its eledtricity, and confequently i is reat~ 
*« tracted by the tube; which, after having given it a new 
&s cleatricity, repels i ita fecond time ;, and this repulfion con- 
*« tinues as long as the tube, keeps i its,power. .. Upon apply- 
“« ing this principle to various experiments of electricity,.. one 
“« will be furprifed at the number of obfcure, and puzzling 


* Phil. Tranf: abridged, Vol. 8: p. 395: 


«© facts 


egiAavooeiad AKT &, 
‘OF Mr. Du FAYE. 49. 
: ion 2ew 5 


¢h4siOG Oo) Suiwo 27 } tert SIs WSs nt 
, it clears.up.”’ “By the help of this principle, 
particularly, endeavours to explain feveral of Mr.. Hawkef=, 

bee's experiments. * fasy Aid 
-f{-Citance,\ he fays,, has thrown in my way another,prin-, 
« ciple, more univerfal and remarkable than the )preceeding 


VOL Yani 


“one, and which cafts a new light upon the the fubjec of 
Wi tledeiey)- "Che principles, that there) are. two diftin@, 


i ad of éele&tricity, very different from one another ;\ one, 


f which A-call vitreous, the other refinous. electricity. 
rf \e firft is that of slafs, rock-chryftal, | précious ‘ftones,. 
, airit as t g P 
“hair of animals, wool, and many other, bodies. |The fe-= 


“cond is that of amber, copal,.. gum’ lacy, filk,| thread, 
. paper, and a vaft number of other fubftances.. The cha- 
 tagteriftics of thefe two cledtricities is, that they repel 
« them(elves, and attraé&t éach other: | Thus a-body of the 
“vitreous! eledtricity: repels all other bodies poffefled of the 
vitreous, and on the contrary; attracts all thofe of the refi-. 
« ‘nous ele@tricity. The refinous, alfo, repels the refinous, 
« and attraéts the vitreous. From this principle, one may 
 eafily deduce the explanation of a great number’ of’ other 
«phenomena j! and it is probable, that this truth will lead us 
to the difcovery of many other things. 4 
“In ofder to know, immediately, to which of the two claf- 
fes of elettricity any body belonged, he made a filk thread 
cleétri¢al, "and brought it to the body, when it was excited. 
If it'repelléd the thread, he concluded it- was of the fame 
elericity with it, viz. refinous; if it’attra€ted it, he con- 
cluded it was vitreous.-+ 


7) * Phil. Tranf. abridged, Vol. 8. p. 396. + Ib. p. 397- 
H He 


50 THE DISCOVERIES Part I, 


He alfo obferved, that communicated electricity had the 
fame property as the excited. For having electrified, by the 
glafs tubes, balls of wood or ivory ; he found them to repel 
the bodies which the tube repelled, and to attra@ thofe 
which the tube attracted. If they had the refinous electricity 
communicated to'them, they obferved the fame rule, -by at~ 
trating thofe bodies which had the vitreous electricity com+ 
municated to them, and repelling thofe which had received 
the refinous. But, he obferves, the experiment would not 
fucceed, if the bodies were not made equally eleétrical ; for, 
if one ‘of them was! oweakly eledtrical, . it. would be: at~’ 
tracted by that which was much more ftrongly electrical,» va 

~ whatever quality it was. 

Tuis difcovery of the two electricities-was certainly a sige 
one, but was, notwithftanding, left very ‘imperfe& by Mr.’ 
Du Faye. We ‘thall fee that Dr.) Franklin found, that, in 
all probability, the vitreous electricity was pofitive, or a re» 
dundancy of electrical matter ; and the refinous, negative, oy 
a want of it; and that Mr. Canton has difcovered, that, it 


depends» upon. the furtace of \the! eleGtric. bodies, and — 


of the rubber; “ee the: eleGtricity ; be. i pin or 
negative. . 

Tue doétrine of two different Becarivitieed phedhited Wis ex- 
citing different fubftances, confiderable as the difcovery of it 
was, feems to have. been dropped: after: Mr. | Du Faye; and, 
thofe effects afcribed to other. caufes;. which i is “aH inftance 
that feience fometimes goes backwards. 

Mr. Du Faye himfelf feems at laft_ to ei dete the 

opinion, 


‘ 
Ne a ae 


Pertop IV. © OF Mr. Du FAYR. st 


opinion, which generally prevailed to the time of Dr. Franks 
lin; that the two eleétricities differed only in degree, and 
that the ftronger attracted the weaker :' not confidering that, 
upon this principle, ‘bodies poffefied: of the two electricities 
ought to attraét one another lefs forcibly, than if one of them 
had not been clecttified’at all, which is contrary: to fact. | 

Ir will be een'that, many?years: aftery: Mr. Kinnerfley of 
Philadelphia, +a’ friend ‘of. Dr. Franklin’s, being at: Bofton in 
New England, made fome experiments which again fhewed 
that. difference: of ‘the:two. electricities. »: Hes communicated 
shofe: experiments: oto DT, pencyee who, apenent and 
explained them..* 2.29 

Ir muft be be le of Mr. Du Faye, that 

» he ocommunicated cleétricity: from ,one ‘body to another, 

through the:interval of tenvor twelveinches,) in'the middle of 
which there was alighted candle. He alfo found, that red 
hot iron might be electrifiedvery well. ¢ 

Mr. Du Faye was the firft perfon*who paddies to ex~ 
cite a tube in which’ air was condenfed, and found the attempt 
ineffectual. Sufpecting this might be owing to’ moifture, 
which he might force into'the tube, in ufing his condenfing 
inftrument, ‘he cemented a large copper eolipile to his ‘tube, 
and compreffed the air in it, by putting the colipile upon 
the fire. After this, he turned a cock, which he had placed 
to prevent the'return of the compreffed air, and -difengaged 
the tube from the eolipile ; but: he ftill found the excitation 
to beimpoffible. The Abbe Nollet, who affifted at moft of this 


"See hisLetters. 4 Nollet’s Recherches, p. 203. Tb. p. 212. 


H 2 gentleman’s 


52 _.THE DISCOVERIES | Parrl. 


gentleman’sexperiments, declareshimfelf not fatisfied even with 
this precaution; thinking that the nonexcitation of the tube 
might ftill be owing tothe moifture, which always exifts in 
the air, and the particles of which muft be drawn nearer to- 
gether by condenfion.* In anfwer to this objection, Mr. 
Boulanger) fays,', that) a {mall glafs\ full of. water poured 
‘into a tube, and immediately thrown out again, will not de- 
ftroy the excitability of the glafs near {2 much as the conden+ 
fed air. + 
Ir mutt be ‘dierent that Mr. Granville Wheeler, in the 
autumn of the year/1732, made feveral curious: experiments, 
relating to the repulfive force of eledtricity.... Thefe he re- 
peated to Mr. Grey in the fummer following, and) defigned 
to: communicate them,’ through his hands, to the Royal 
Society; but, deferring the execution! of it from time to 
time, he was informed, that Mr. Du Faye had taken notice 
of the fame folution of the repulfive force. _ Upon this he 
laid afide all thoughts of communicating his difcovery to the 
public: but, finding that his experiments were different from 
thofeof Mr. Du Faye, he was perfuaded to publith them in 
the Philofophical Tranfactions for the year 1739. 
_ Te experiments were made by threads of various kinds, 
and other fubftances, hanging down from filk lines, and ge- 
nerally made to repel one another by the approach of an ex- 
cited tube. The refult of them all he comprifed in the 
three following propofitions. 1ft. That bodies made electrical, 
by communication with an excited electric, are in a ftate of 


* Nollet’s Recherches, p. 258. + Boulanger, p. 132. 
repulfion 


_ PentopIV. © OF (Ma. Du FAYE. 53 


_ Tepulfion with refpe& to fuch excited bodies. 2dly. That 
two, or more bodies, made eleétrical by communicating with 
an excited electric, are in a ftate of repulfion with refpeé to 
one another. 3dly. Excited ele@trics do themfelves repel one 
another. * 

One of his experiments, to prove the fecond of thefe pro- 
“pofitions, deferves to be mentioned for its curiofity.. He tied 
a number of filk threads together,» by a knot at each ex- 

tremity; when, upon electrifying them, the threads repelled 
one another, and the whole bundle was {welled out into a 
beautiful fpherical figure; fo that he could with pleafure, he 
fays, ‘obferve the knot at the bottom rifing upwards, as the 
“dleétricity and mutual repulfion of the threads increafed ; and 
‘he could not help imagining his bundle of filks to refemble 
‘a bundle of mufcular fibres. 
"By way of corollary to the fame propofition, he obferves, 
‘that it fuggefts, more plainly than any other known experi- 
“ment, a reafon for the diffolution of bodies in menftrua; viz. 
that the Particles of the folvend, having imbibed particles of 
the menftrua, fo as to be faturated with them, the faturated 
particles become repulfive of one another, feparate, and fly 
‘to pieces. + 


® Phil. Tranf. abridged, Vol. 8. p. 411. + Ib. p, 410 


PERIOD 


54 THE DISCOVERIES Part, 


PERIOD Ve 


THE CONTINUATION, AND CONCLUSION oF Mr. GREY’s 
EXPERIMENTS. : 


/{ R. GREY, upon refuming his experiments, expreffes 
& great fatisfaction that his former obfervations had'’been 
confirmed by fo judicious a philofopher as Mr. Du Faye, who, 
he acknowledges, had made feveral new ones of his own, par- 
ticularly that important luciferous one, as he calls it; which, 
put him upon making the experiments which follow, 
‘and which were made in the months of July and Auguift 
1734. * | ait, apis eel 
As Mr. Du Faye had faid, that the {nappings and the 
fparks, he had mentioned, were ftrongly excited by a piece 
of metal, prefented to the perfon fufpended on filk lines s 
Mr. Grey concluded, that if the perfon and the metal fhould 
change places, the effe& would be. the fame. “He, according- 
ly, fufpended feveral pieces of metal on filk lines, beginning 
with the common utenfils, which were at hand, as the iron 
poker, tongs, fire fhovel, &c. and found, that, when they 
were electrified, they gave {parks, in the fame manner as 


* Phil. Tranf. abridged, Vol. 8. p. 397. : 


the 


Periop VV. § OF Mr. GREY. 55 


the human body had done in like circumftances. . This-was. 

the origin of metallic conductors, which are in ufe to this 
oe oS at 

Mr. Grey-did not; at that time, think of making his ex- 
periments in the dark, in order to fee the light proceeding 
from the iron; not imagining, that electricity, communicated 
to metals, would have produced fuch furprifing phenomena, 
as, he fays, he afterwards found it to do. 

ContTinuinc his experiments at Mr. Wheecler’s, they 
found,’ that the flefh of dead animals exhibited, very nearly, 
the fame appearances as that of living animals, contrary to 
the affertion of Mr. Du Faye. 

» Bur what moft furprifed Mr. Grey, and the gentlemen 
then prefent, in the experiments he made upon that occafion, 
was the phenomenon above referred. to, and what he now 
calls @ cone, or pencil of electrical light; {ach -as is commonly 
“feen to iffue from an eleGtrified point. As this was the firft 
time that this phenomenon, which is now fo common, was. 
diftin@lly feen, I fhall relate the experiment, of which it was 
the refult, at large. 

'Mr. Grey, and his friends, provided themfelves with 
an iron rod four feet long, and half an inch in diameter, 
pointed at each end, but not fharp. Sufpending this iron rod 
upon filk lines in the night; and, applying the excited tube 
to’ one end of jit,’ they perceived, not only a light upon that 
end, but another iffuing from the oppofite end, at the fame 
time. This light extended itfelf, in the form of a cone, 


Ee 


* Phil, Tranf. abridged, Vol. 8. p. 398. 
whofe 


56° THE DISCOVERIES Part I. 


whofe vertex was at the end of the rod: and Mr. Grey fays, 


that he and his-company could plainly fee, that it confifted 
of feparate threads, or rays of light, diverging from the point 
of the rod, the exterior rays being incurvated.. This light 
appeared at every ftroke they gave the tube. 

Tuey likewife obferved, that this light was always siend- 
ed with a fmall hiffing noife, which, they imagined, began at 
the end next the tube, increafing in loudnefs till it came to 
the oppofite end. He fays, however, that this noife could 
not be heard, but by perfons who ftood near the rod, and at- 
tended to it. * 


Mr. Grey, repeating thefe experiments in‘ the September 


following, after his return to London, obferved an ap- 
pearance, which he fays, furprifed him very much. | After 


the tube had been applied to the iron rod, as before, ‘when. - 


the light, which had been feen at both ends, had difappear- 
ed; it was vifible again, upon bringing his hand near the end 
of the'rod; and, upon repeating this motion of his hand, the 


fame phenomenon appeared for five or fix times fucceflively ; , 
only the rays were, at each time, fhorter than the other. He, 


alfo obferved, that thefe lights, which were emitted by the 


tube upon the approach of his hand, were, like the others, : 


attended with a hiffing noife. 

He took notice, that the light which appeared on alee end 
next the tube, when it was held oblique to the axis of the 
rod, had its rays tending towards it; and that;, all the time 


he was rubbing the tube, thofe flathes.of light appeared upon __ 


* Phil, Tranf. abridged, Vol. 8. p. 398. 
every 


Periop V. o3OF) Mra. GREY. | 57 


every motion of his hand. up or down the tube, but that the 
largeft flafhes were oo by the motion of his’hand down« 
wards. * Paper ilectt -E-3 

. Wen he ufed two or hake rods, laying them, eithabi ina 
right line, or fo.as.to make any angle with each other, and 
applied the tube, to/any one of their ends; he obferved,’ that 
the fartheft.end.of the fartheft rod exhibited the fame phino 
menaas.one fingle rod. 4) 

UsinG a rod pointed only at one andy he ‘obferved, that 
the other end gave but one fingle fnap, but that it was much 
louder than the greateft of thofe which were given by the point 
of the rod;.alfo that the pain, refembling pricking or burn- 
ing, was more: ftrongly felt, and that the light was brighter 


-and more contracted... 


, ConNECTING a pewter plate with the iron rod, and filling 
the)plate-with: water, lie obferved the fame light, the fame 
pushing of the’ finger, ashe calls it;-and:the fame fnapping, 
as when the experiment was made with the empty plate. And 
when the experiment was'made with water, in the day light, 
it appeared to rife in a little hill, under the finger which was 
prefented to it; and, after, the,fnapping noife, fell down a- 
gain, putting the water into a) waving motion near the place 
where it had rifen. 

_ Turse effets were the fame which he had before obferved 
to proceed from the immediate a@ion of the tube, but by 
thefe experiments, he fays, that he found (what, no doubt, 
appeared) a real advance in the {cience.to him) that an actual 


*Phil. Tranf. abridged, Vol. 8. p. 399. + Ib. p. 400. 


I flame 


53 THE DISCOVERTES - Part. 


flame of fire; together with an explofion, and ebullition of 
eold water, might be produced by communicative electricity. 
What he adds is fo remarkable, that I fhall repeat his own 
words. And although thefe effe@ts are at prefent but iz 
«minimis, it is-probable, in time, there may be found out 
«a way to collect a greater quantity of the eleétric fire, and 
« confequently to increafe the force of that power; which, 
** by feveral of thefe experiments, —f /icet magniscomponere 
“« parva; feems to be of the fame nature with that of thunder 
and lightning.”"*) « 

» How exaétly has this: phy ders fulfilled in reddie difeo! 
veries! of the Leyden. electricians, and ‘Dr. Franklins: the 
former having difcovered the amazing ‘accumulation of the 
eleétric power, in what is called the Leyden phial; and the 
latter) having proved the matter of lightning to be the very 
fame »with that of »eleétricity; though Mr. 'Grey:might 
poflibly mention thunder) and ay nee oe wray of 
common comparifon. 

. Qn February the 18th. 1735; ‘Mr. rey) repeating the 
aacperinnnes of the iron rods with wooden ones, found all the 
effeéts to be fimilar, but much ‘weaker; ‘as it is now well 
known muft have been the cafe ; ‘wood being fo imperfect a 
conduétor, and only in proportion to the moifture it contains. 
> Ar the fame time, he relates, that repeating the ele@trifi- 
cation of water, he found, that the phenomena before men- 
tioned were produced, not only by holding the tube near the 
water, but when it was:removed, and the finger afterwards 
brought near it. + 
* Phil. Tranf, abridged, Vol. 8. p.4o1. + Ib. p. 402. 


ro i 


May 


Periop V, OF Mr. GREY. © 59 


_ May the 6th. of the fame year, he’ again fufpetided arboy 
on filk, and found that this boy was able to communicate the 
eleGtric fire, firft to one, and then to feveral perfons ‘ftanding 
upon electric bodies. e i ’ 
Mr. Grey feems: ftill: to have imagined, that ele&tricity 
depended, in fome meafure, upon colour. Theboy fufpend- 
ed on blue lines, he fays, retained his power of attraction 
; fifty minutes 5 on fcarlet lines, twenty five minutes ; and on 
orange coloured lines, twenty one minutes. By thefe experis 
ments, he fays, we fee the efficacy of electricity upon bodies 
- fafpended upon lines of the fame fubftance, but of different 
colours* tog’ Letazrie : 
_ Bur the greateft deception which this ingenious gentleman 
feems to:have lain under, was occafioned by the experiments 
which he made with. balls of iron, to obferve the revolution 
of light bodies about them. The. paragraph relating to thefe 
experiments, ‘being ‘the laft which Mr. Grey wrote, I thall 
give it at length, as a curiofity. 
_ © T have lately made, ” fays he, * feveral new experi- 
** ments upon the projectile and pendulous motion of fmall 
** bodies by electricity; by which {mall bodies may be made 
“to move about larger ones, either in circles, or in ellipfes ; 
“ and thofe either concentric, or eccentric to the center of 
* the larger body, about which they move, fo as to make 
** many revolutions about them. Aind this motion will cons 
“ ftantly be the fame way that the planets move about the 
“ fun; viz. from the right hand to the left, or from weit to 


* Phil. Tranf, abridged, Vol. 8. P+ 403. 


I2 **: eaft. 


60 THE DISCOVERIES - Part I. 


« eaft. But thefe little planets, if I may fo call them, move 
«* much fafter in their apogeon, than in the perigeon’ parts of 
*€ their orbits; which is directly contrary to the motion of 
«« the planets about the fun. * 

Tuese experiments Mr. Grey had thought’ of but.a very 
little while before his laft illnefs, and had not time to com- 
pleat them; but the progrefs he had made in them he 
revealed, on the day before his death, to Dr. Mortimer, then 
fecretary to the Royal Society. He faid they ftruck him with 
new furprife every time he repeated them, and hoped that, if 
God would {pare his life a little longer, he fhould, from 
what thefe phenomena pointed out, bring his electrical expe- 
riments to the greateft perfection. He did not doubt but, in a 
fhort time, he fhould be able to aitonifh the world with anew 
fort of planetarium, never before thought of;and that, from thefe 
experiments, might be eftablifhed a certain theory, to account 
for the motions of the grand planetarium of the univerfe. 
Thefe experiments, fallacious as they are, deferve to be 
briefly related, together with thofe which were made in con- 
_ fequence of them after Mr. Grey’s death. I fhall relate them 
in Mr. Grey’s own words,’ as they were delivered to Dr. 
Mortimer, on his death bed. 
~ Prace a {mall iron globe, faid he, of an inch or an inch 
and a half in diameter, on the middle of a circular cake of 
rofin, feven or eight inches in diameter, gently excited ; 3 and 
then a light body fufpended by a very fine thread, five or fix 
inches long, held in the hand over the center of the table, 


* Pbil. Tranf. abridged, Vol. 8. p. 404. 
; will, 


i 


Perrop V. OF Mr. GREY. 61 


will, of itfelf, begin to move in a circle round the iron globe, 
and conftantly from weft to eaft. If the globe be placed at 
any diftance from the center of the circular cake, it will de- 
{cribe an ellipfe, which will have the fame eccentricity, as 
the diftance of the globe from the center of the cake. 
~ Ir the cake of rofin be of an elliptical form, and the iron 
globe be placed in the center of it, the light body will de- 
feribe an elliptical orbit, of the fame eccentricity with the 
form of the cake. 
- Ir the iron globe be placed in, or near, one of the foci of 
the elliptical cake, the light body will move much {wifter in 
the apogee, than in the perigee of its orbit. 
_ Ir the iron globe be fixed on a pedeftal, an inch from the 
table, and a glafs hoop, or a portion of a hollow glafs cy- 
linder, excited, be placed round it; the light body will 
move as in the circumftances mentioned above, and with the 
fame varieties. 

He faid, moreover, that the light body would make the 
fame revolutions, only fmaller, round the iron globe placed 
on the bare table, without any ele¢trical body to fupport it; 
but he acknowledged he had not found the experiment fuc- 
ceed, if the thread was fupported by any thing but a human 
hand; though, he fancied, it would have fucceeded, if it 
had been fupported by any. animal fubftance, living or dead. * 

Mr. Grey went on to recite to Dr. Mortimer other ex- 
periments ftill more fallacious ; which, out of regard to his 


* Phil. Tranf. abridged, Vol. 8 p. 404, 405. 


memory, 


_ 62 THE DISCOVERIES . Parti, 


memory, I {hall forbear to quote. Let the chimeras of this 
great electrician teach his followers in the fame, and ftill but 
newly opened field of philofophy, a proper degree of caution 
in their reafonings from induction. Let not the example, 
however, difcourage any perfon from trying what may appear 
improbable ; but let it induce a man to delay the pub- 
lication of his difcoveries, till they have been perfectly afcer- 
tained, and performed in the prefence of others. In experi- 
ments of great delicacy, a ftrong imagination will have 
great influence even upon the external fenfes; of which we 
fhall have frequent inftances in the courfe of this hiftory. 
Dr. Mortimer himfelf feems to have been deceived by 
thefe experiments of Mr. Grey. He fays, that, in trying 
them after his death, he found, that the light body would 
make revolutions round bodies of various fhapes and fub- 
ftances, as well as round the iron globe; and that he had ac- 
tually tried the experiment, with a globe of black marble, 
afilver ftandith, a {mall chip box, and a large cork. * ~ 
Turse experiments of Mr. Grey’s were tried by Mr. 
Wheeler, and other gentlemen, at the Royal Society's houfe, 
and with a great variety of circumftances ; but no conclufion 
could be drawn from what they at that time obferved. Mr. 
Wheeler himfelf took a great deal of pains to verify them, 
with various fuccefs; and at laft he gave it as his opinion, 
that a defire to produce the motion from weft to eaft was the 
fecret caufe that determined the pendulous body to move in 


* phil. Tranf. abridged, Vol. 8. p- 405+ 
that 


‘ ost 


ora aegis 
“i Megas? of Tb. ‘dai te byte Wir shit 
Nidisc a Heo oft gathiarisitis baBiows bed 

pias q 
Ppewbeg: sun Chad sf sate ‘has? ‘soles 
jth Jk RCS EAS Lone. oye 
5 wil Slut ti GNA Msie: ry. yo! 
Hkbapidmow si: bluow hod ont 
enéan awyoids: 2 taste sil ah 482 


Peers teds | Sek BF wD iv 
went rss « eee hs ae ED 
Weees, f.G0- tars iG <enisr 1S} yis O35 sft 


bie Beir Hay yaa jarkt box igatnt 


64 EXPERIMENTS Part I. 


PERIOD VI. 
THE EXPERIMENTS oF Dr. DESAGULIERS. 


E are now come to the labours of that indefatigable 
experimental philofopher, Dr. Desacuriers, in 
this new field of fcience. The reafon which he gives why he 
had avoided entertaining the Royal Society upon this fubje@& 
before, and why he had not purfued it fo far as he might 
have done; confidering, as he fays, that he could excite as 
ftrong an eleétricity in glafs, by rubbing with his hand, as - 
any body could, is worth mentioning for its curiofity, and 
for the light that it throws upon the temper and manner-of 
Mr. Grey. He fays, that he was unwilling to interfere with 
the late Mr. Stephen Grey, who had wholly turned his 
thoughts to electricity; but was of a temper to give it entirely 
over, if he imagined that any thing was done in oppofition 
to him. * 
Dr. Desacuriers begins with obferving very fenfibly 
(and the obfervation is ftill true) that the phenomena of 


electricity are fo odd, that, though we have a great many 


experiments upon that fubjeé, we have not yet been able, 
from their comparifon, to fettle fuch a theory as will lead us 


* Philof, Tranf. abridged, Vol. 8. p. 419. 


to 


Perrop V. OF Dr. DESAGULIERS. 65 


to the caufe of that property in bodies, or even to judge of 
all its effects, or find out what ufeful influence ele€tricity has 


in nature; though certainly, from what we have feen of it, 


we may conjecture that it muft be of great ufe, becaute it is 
fo extenfive; 2 ; 
His firft experiments, of which an account is given in the 
Philofophical Tranfanétions, dated July, 1739, were made 
with a hempen. ftring, extended upon cat gut. To the end 


__ of the hempen ftring, he fufpended various fubftances ; and 


fays, that all thofe which he tried, amongft which were fe- 
veral electrics per fe, as falphur, glafs, &c. without exception, 
received electricity. * 

He changed one of the cat gut ftrings, on which his 
hempen line of communication was extended, and put 
various other fubftances in its place, to. try what bodies would 
tranfmit electricity to the fufpended body, and what would 
not; and from the refult of his experiments, partly conclud- 
ed, that bodies in which eleétricity could not be excited -in- 
tercepted the eleétric-effluvia ; and that thofe in which elec- 
tricity could be excited, did not intercept it, but permitted 
it to go on to the extremity of the hempen ftring. But ftill he 
had no juft idea, that, except metals, it was the moifture in 


‘the bodies he tried which intercepted the electric effluvia, 


and his ideas of the mariner. in which they were intercepted 


were very imperfect. 


To Dr. Defaguliers we are indebted for fome technical 
terms which have been extremely ufeful to all electricians to 


* Phil. Tranf. abridged, Vol. 8. p. 420. 
i K this 


6 EXPERIMENTS Pay. 


this day, and which will probably remain in ufe as long as 
the fubjeét is ftudied. He firft applied the term conduéfor to 
that body to which the excited tube conveys its electricity ; 
which term has fince been extended to all bodies which are 
capable of receiving that virtue. And he calls thofe bodies 
in which eleétricity. may be excited by heating or rubbing 
eleftrics per fe. 

In the writings of this author we find many axioms re- 
lating to electric experiments, fome of which are exprefled 
in amore clear, and diftin@ manner than they had been be- 
fore, but the real improvements which he made, were very 
few and immaterial. 

On feveral occafions, and particularly in a paper delivered 

to the Royal Society, in the month of January 1741, he lays 
down, among others, the following general rules, which 
feem to be more accurate than any which had been delivered 
before upon the fubject. * " 
- «© An eledtric per fe will not receive electricity from another 
« electric per fe, in which it has been excited, fo as to run a- 
*¢ Jong its whole length: but will only receive it alittle way; 
«« being, as it were, faturated with it. 

“« An eleétric per fe will not lofe all its eleétricity at 
« once, but only the electricity of thofe parts near which 
«« anoneledtric has been brought. It, confequently, lofes its 
«* electricity the fooner, the more of thofe bodies are near it. 
«Thus, in moift weather, the excited tube holds its yirtue but 
‘* alittle while, becaufe it ats upon the moift vapours which - 


* Phil. Tranf. abridged, Vol. 8. p. 430. 
ly oer * float 


Pertop VI. OF Dr. DESAGULIERS. 67 


« float in theair. And if the excited tube be applied to leaf 
* gold laid upon a ftand, it will a& upon it much longer, and 
« more ftrongly, than if the fame quantity of leaf gold be laid 
*« upon a table, which has more non eledtric furface than the 
«¢ ftand.” * This, however, feems not te be the whole reafon ; 
for if the léaf gold were laid upon a broad furface of glafs, it 
would not be ated upon fo powerfully ; as if it were placed 
upon a narrow ftand of any kind of matter. 

« A yon-ELECTRIC, when it has received electricity, lofes 
* it all at once, upon the approach of another non electric.” 
This however could only be the cafe when the approaching 
electric was not infulated, but had a communication with the 
earth. It muft alfo be brought into contact with the elec- 
trified body. 

« Animar fubftances are non eleatrics by reafon of the 
* fluids they contain. + 
 « Excirep eledtricity exerts itfelf in a {phere round the 


_* eledtric per fe, or rather in a cylinder, if the body be cy- 


* Jindrical.” $ 

Few of the many experiments which were made by Dr. 
Defaguliers (accounts of which were publithed in the Philo- 
fophical Tranfactions) had, as I obferved before, any thing 
new in them. Thofe which were the moft fo are the fol- 
lowing. 

ENDEAvouRING to communicate electricity to a burning 
tallow candle, he obferved, that the candle attracted the 
thread of trial, but not within two or three inches of the 


* Phil. Tranf, abridged, Vol. 8. p. 427. + Ib. p.429. } Ib. p. 431. 


K 2 flame ; 


68 EXPERIMENTS Parr I. 


flame; but that, as foon as the candle was blown out, the 
thread was attracted by every part of it, and even by the 
wick, when the fire was quite extinguithed. He eleétrified 
a wax candle in the fame manner, and the experiment fuc- 
ceeded as well, only the electricity came. not fo near the 
flame in the wax, as in the tallow candle. 

_ He fays, that only warming a glafs receiver, without any 
rubbing, would caufe the threads of a down feather, tied to 
an upright fkewer to extend themfelves, as foon as it was 
put over the feather; and that fometimes rofin and wax 
would exert their electricity by being only expofed to the 
open air. 

He obferved that if a hollow glafs tube, fupporting the line 
of communication, were moiftened by blowing through it, it 
would intercept the electricity. 

He fays, that when an excited tube has repelled a feather, 
it will attraét it again, after being fuddenly dipped into wa- 
ter, but in fair weather it will not attraét it unlefs it hath 
been dipt pretty deep into the water, a foot of its length at 
leaft ; whereas, in moift weather, an inch or two will _ 
fuffice. * : 

He fhewed the attraction of water by an excited tube in a 
better manner than it had been’thewn before, viz. by bring- — 
ing the tube to a ftream iffuing from a condenfing fountain, 
which, thereupon, was evidently bent towards it. 

Dr. Desacutiers feems to have been the firft who ex- 
prefily faid, that pure air might be ranked amongft electrics 


* Phil. Tranf. abridged, Vol. 8. p. 429- 
per 


 Pertop VI. OF Dr. DESAGULIERS. 69 


"per fe, and that cold air in frofty weather, when vapours 
"rife leaft of all, is preferable, for eletrical purpofes, to warm 
iene fummer, when the heat raifes. the vapours. * He alfo — 
fuppofed that the eledtricity of the air was of the vitreous 
“kind and he accounted for the eleétricity appearing on the 
of an exhaufted glafs veflel, by its going where it 
ome ith the ‘leaft refiftance from . eleétrieal a mys as the 
Se aed , : 
He endeavoured to account for Ay fixing of air by the | 
*fteams of fulphur, according to the experiment of Dr. Hales; 
- byfuppofing that the particles of fulphur, and thofe of air, being 
' poffefied of different kinds of electricity, attracted one ano- 
- ther, whereby their repulfive power was deftroyed. He alfo 
 propofed the following conjeéture concerning the rife of ya- 
‘pour. The air at the furface of water being eleétrical, par- 
: ticles of water, he thought, jumped to it, then, becoming 
-.them(elves eleétrical, they repelled both the air and one ano- 
ther, and confequently afcended into the higher regions of 
the atmofphere. t 
Tue laft paper of Dr. Defaguliers in the Philofophical 
Tranfactions, upon the fubjec of electricity is dated, June 
24th. 1742, in which year he publithed a differtation on 
ele&tricity, by which he gained the prize medal of the aca- 
demy at Bourdeaux. The differtation is excellently drawn 
Ups and comprizes all that was known of the fubject till that 
nat ac 


* Phil. Tranf. (.abetdged, Vol. 8 p. 437. + Ib. p. 438. Ib. p. 437% 


PERIOD 


‘ 


70 . THE DISCOVERIES Parr I. 


rPenritoD. vu. 


Experiments or THEGERMANS, anv or Dr.WATSON, 
BEFORE THE DISCOVERY OF THE LEYDEN PHIAL IN 
THE YEAR 1746. 


BOUT the time that Dr. Defaguliers had concluded 
his experiments in England, 1742, feveral ingenious 
Germans began to apply themfelves to the fame ftudies with 
preat sftiasity and their labours were crowned with confider» 
able fuccefs. 
To the Germans we are indebted for many dapieaksi improve~ 


‘ments in our electrical apparatus within this period, without 


which the bufinefs would have gone on. very flowly and 
heavily ; but, ‘by the help of their contrivances, we hall fee 
aftonithing effects were foon produced.‘ 

Mr. Boze, a profeffor of philofophy at Wittemburgh, 
fubftituted the g/ode for the tube, which had been ufed ever 
fince the time Hawkefbee. He likewife added a prime con- 
duétor, which confifted of a tube of iron or tin, at firft fup- 
ported by a man ftanding upon cakes of rofin, and afterwards 
fufpended on filk horizontally before the globe. * 


* Hifloire de Veledtricité, p. 27. a 
oO 


— FS ee ey 


| Pensos VIL OF THE GERMANS. 71 


, prevent the tube from doing any harm to the globe, he 
‘oe thread into the end that was next to it, and 
which was left open for that purpofe. This expedient, 
- befides occafioning various pleafant phenomena, was obferved 
_ toumakesthe: force of the conductor much ftronger. * 
_- Tue-ufe of the globe was immediately adopted in the uni-~ 
¢) where Mr. Winkler, the profeffor of lan- 
guages, fabttituted a cufhion inftead of the hand, which had 
_ before been employed to excite the globe. . But the beft rub- 
ber for ‘the globe, as wellias the tube, was, long after this, 
- ftill thought, by all electricians, to be the human hand, 
_ dry, and free from moifture. +» noweod 2 
© Mr. P. Gorpon, a Scotch Benediétine past and pro- - 
feffor of philofophy at Erford, was the firft who ufed a cylin- 


Wali der inftead of aglobe. | His cylinders were eight inches long, 


and four inches | indiameter. ‘They were made to turn with a 
bow; and: the whole inftrument was portable. _ Inftead of a 
cake of rofin, he infulated by means of a frame- eitenioed 
ar net work of filk.t 

; Tue apparatus likewife of many of the Gotemity electricians 
" was) very various, and expenfive.. Mr. Winkler, in a paper 
read at the Royal Society; March arft 1745, || defcribes 
a machine for rubbing tubes, and another for rubbing 
globes,, and compares the effects of them both. He 
obferves, that. the {parks which are producedfrom glafs 
vefiels drawn to iand fro. were larger, .and more ve- 
hemently pungent,| provided that thofe veflels were of the 

e Phil, Tranf, abridged, Vol. ro. p. 271. + Ib. p. 272.  Hiftoire, p. 31. 

Hee || Phil. Tranf. abridged, Vol. 10, Pp 273. 


fame 


72 -THE*DISCOVERIBES  {\\Paan ly 


fame magnitude with the globes ;, but, that:the flux of efflu-. 
‘via was:not fo conftant as from the.globes. | Mr. Winkler al-: 
fo, invented ,a, machine,» which, he; defcribes.,at, large 
in, his works, by, means. of. which he,could give his globe. 
fix hundred and eighty turns in.a minutes*iueo i os) 4 wow 

Tue :German electricians: generally.ufed smore globes\than 
one ata time, and imagined they found the effects proportiona=| 
_ ble, though this faé& was called in queftion by Dr. Watfon, and: 
others; and» Mr. .Nollet: preferred globes made blue with, 
zaffre, which were carefully ee and, rejetied by Dre Wats, 
fon: afterwards: + ody n08: (eee vile SAS: SR Li 
- Suc a prodigious power of. electricity. eosile they excite, 
from thefe globes, :whirled by a large wheel, and rubbed with 
woollen. cloth; ora dry hand (tor we find both thefe methods 
were in ufe among them about this time) ) that, if. we may. 
credit their own accounts, the blood could be drawn from 
the finger by-.an eleétric fpark; the fkin would burft, anda . 
wound appear, as if made bya cauftic. © They, fay,| that if 
feveral globes or tubes were ufed, the motion of the heart and 
arteries of the ele@trified perfon would be very. fenfibly .in- 
creafed ; and that, if a vein were opened:under the operation, 
the blood, iffuing fromit, would appear like lucid phofphorus, 
and run out fafter than when the man was. not ‘electrified. 
Analogous to this laft experiment, they obferved, that. water, 
running from anmartificial fountain electrified, was fcattered in 
luminous drops, ‘and that a larger quantity ‘of water was 
thrown out in a given time than when the fountain was not 


“)) @ Hiftoire, p. 32. # Phil. Tranf. adridged, Vol. 10. ps 277. | 
electrified. 


Pertop VII. OF THE GERMANS. 73 


-eleétrified. * Partiof this account we know might be true, 


but fome part muft have been exaggerated. It is certain that 
Mr. Gordon increafed the electric fparks to fuch a degree, that 
they were felt from a man’s head to his foot, and fmall birds 
were killed by them. + 

> Tue thing that ftrikes us moft in their expcrineiuts, per- 
formed by thefe machines, is their fetting fire to inflammable 
fubftances. This they were, probably, led to attempt, from 
obferving the vivid appearance of eleétrical light, the burning 
pain that was felt by a fmart ftroke from the conductor, and 
the many analogies the pire fluid revenge bore to spas 
phorus-and common fire. 

- Tue firft perfon who fueceeded i in this attempt was Dr. 
Ludolf of Berlin, towards the beginning of the year 1744; 
who kindled, with fparks excited by the friGtion of a glafs 
tube} the etherial fpirits of Frobenius. This he did at the 
opening of the Royal Academy, and in the prefence of fome 


_ hundreds of perfons. He performed the experiment by elec- 


trical fpatks proceeding from an iron conduétor. John Henry 
Winkler, Greek and Latin profeffor at Leipfick, did the 


fame in the May following, by a {park from his own finger ; 


and kindled, not only the highly re¢tified fpirit abovemen- 
tioned, but French brandy, corn fpirits, and other fpirits 
ftill weaker, by previoufly heating them. He alfo fays, that 
oil, pitch, and fealing wax might be lighted by eleétric 
fparks, provided thofe fubftances were firft heated to a degree 
next to kindling. { 


* Phil. Tranf, abridged, Vol. 10. p. 27 + Nollet’s aetna 172. 
1?P Pel Trent acd Vol. 10. p..271 sis 


Tue 


74 THE’ DISCOVERIES IT? Paraik 


Tue German cleétricians likewife conftruéted a machine, by 
which, they could give friction to a’ glafs' cylinder in vacuo! 
By thefe means they contrived to electrify a. wire which ter- 
minated in the open. air, and there fhewed a.confiderable elec 
tric power. They alfo electrified that end which was in the 
open air, and made the other end which was)in vacuo exert 
its electricity. * 

Tue fame Germans allo. mention an pxperiinest, chia “if 
purfued, would have led them to difcover, that the friction of 
the glafs globe did not produce, but only collec. the electric 
matter., But that was a difcovery referved, as we fhall find, 
for Dr. Watfon. It feems that both Mr.-Bozeand Mr. Alla~ 
mand had fufpended the machine, and the man who worked 
it, upon filk ; and obferved, that, not only the conductor, 
but alfo the man, and the machine gave figns of electricity ; 
though they didinot attend accurately to.all the circumftances 
‘of that curious fact,» which. did.not.at all anfwer their expec- 
tations. For, imagining that part of the electric power was 
continually going off to the ground by the machine, they fup- 

pofed that the effec of infulating it, would have been a 
pk elegtricity. tes! 

In this:period it was that Ludolf the. younger Phooey 
that the luminous barometer is made perfectly clegtrical by. 
the motion of the quickfilver s firft attracting, and then re- 
.pelling bits of paper, &c. fufpended by the fide of the tube, 
Before this; experiment, thofe effects, ued Pes abe to 
_other catifes. $ 


* Phil. Tranf. abridged, ‘Vol. 10. 5+ ‘i Wilfon's Bite preface, p. 14. Watfon’s 
Bsa P- 346 Hihoe. p. 5 neal 


Periof VII. OF ‘THE (GERMANS. 95 
» Asour the fame time alfo,-Mr. Boze took ww gteat deal of 
pains'to'determine, whether the: weight of enn Heth 
'  affected’by electricity, but he could-not find that it was. “| 
_. Tue electrical lar, made by turning {wiftly round an’ a 
trified piece of tin, -cut with points equidiftant from the cen 
alo the ¢/eéfrical bells, which will-be'deferibed hore+ 
after among the furprifing and diverting experiments: perform- 
ed) by the help ‘of electricity, »were of ‘German invention, * 
Laftly,»to thefe it may be) added, that Mr. Winkler con 
trived a wheel to move by electricity); that’ Mr. Boze 'con+ 
veyed electricity from one man to another by a jet of .water, 
_ when they were both placed upon cakes of rofin, at the dif- 
tance of ve and that Mr. Gordon even! pape 
by.a jet of water. = 
Lue firing. of the efflavia of bodies, vehicle avon ick chide 
was foon after repeated in England, and: among 
pho Dr.-Miles ; who, as appears by a paper of his, read 
‘at the Royal Society, March the 7th 1745, kindled phofpho- 
rus by the application of the excited tube itfelf to it, without 
the intervention of any conduétor. ¢ * 

. Tuts gentleman’s. tube happening to be in excellent-order 
upon. this occafion, he obferved, and was perhaps the firft 
who obferved, pencils: of rays, »which+ he calls corufcations, 
darting from thé tube, without the aid of any conductor ap- 
proaching it, Of thefe corufcations, he gave a drawing, 
which anfwers pretty exactly tothe appearance of fuch pencils 
as are now very common, particularly fince Mr. Canton has 


) *Nollet’s Recherches, p-187. + Phil. Tranf. abridged, Vol. 10. p.276. Ib. p. 272. 
f L2 taught 


76 VI-HE -DESCOWBERIES UV Pare. 


taught us-the ufe.of the amalgama, by which a 'tube’may° be 
excited much more ftrongly than it could have been’ béfore:* 

Bur the moft diftinguithed name in this’ period of the hif- 
tory of eleétricity, is. that of Dr. Watson. He was one'éf 


the firft among the Englifh who took up, and improved up- 
‘on, the difcoveries made by the Germans; and’ to his ingent- 
ity, and intenfe application, we owe many curious improve- 
ments and difcoveries in electricity.» His firft letters to’ the 


Royal Society on this fubject are dated between March 28th. 

and Oétober 24th. 1745. eentok 

_. Dr. Warson’s attention to the fubjeét of eleatricity feems 
firft, or principally, to have been engaged by the accounts of 
the Germans having fired fpirit of wine by it.’ In this expe- 
riment he fucceeded; and, moreover, found ‘that’ he was 
able to fire, not only the phlogifton of Frobenius, and reéti- 
fied {pirit of wine, but even common proof fpirit. “He alfo 
fired air made inflammable by a chymical procefs.+- He even 
fired both. {pirit of wine, and inflammable air, by a drop of 
cold water, thickened with a mucilage made with the feed 
of flea wort, and even with ice. { He alfo fired thefe fub- 
ftances with a hot poker electrified, when it would not fire 
them in any other ftate.|| He fired gun powder, and dif= 
chargeda mufket by the power of electricity, when the gun- 
powder had been ground with a little camphor, or a few drops 
of fome inflammable chymical oil. § -Laftly, it was'a dif= 
covery of Dr. Watfon’s, that thefe fubftances' eee Moa pe 


*Phit- at? sis 38 beg? eg 'p. 272. +Ib. p- 286, 1 P oe A. p song 
aa 


- being 


yout 


Pesto VII. *S\0OF Dk. WATSON. a9 


: being fied by what he: calls the repulfive power of eletricity ; 
by ‘the ‘electrified perfon holding” thie 
eo eRe fabftance to be fired; ‘and ano- 
; ot electrified, bringing his finger ‘to it. *' Béfote 
: ‘shishemes ‘the fubftance to be fired’ “a — anes held’ by 
a perfon not electrified: 9 ? 
syn, his: attempts: to fire eleétrics per fe, as eepedin, ‘and 
balfam of eapivi, -by this repulfive power, he thought he 
gonfuted an opinion which had prevailed amongft many per- 
fons, that electricity only -floated on the furfaces of bodiés, 
for he found that’ the fume of thefe fubftances could not be 
fired but by a fpark fetched from the fpoon which contained 
them.., This fpark'muft therefore pafs through the ele@tic, 
fromthe furface ‘of the fpoon below, which was in conta& 
with the electrified conductor.’ But it muft’be obferved, that 
no fubftance in a ftate of fluidity is electric; except air. 
}) Evectriryine a number of pieces of fine {pun glafs, and 
other pieces of wire, of the fame length and thicknefs, ‘he 
was agreeably amufed by obferving, that the threads of glafs 
jumped to the eleGtrified body, and adhered to it without any 
napping; whereas the wires jumped up and down very faft, 
giving a {nap, anda {mall flame, every time.-+ 
In a paper read at the Royal Society, February 6th 1746; 
he obferved, that eleétric {parks appeared different in’ colout 
and form, according ‘to the fubftances from which they pro- 
ceeded; that the fire appeared much redder from rough bo- 
dies, a as ei natty iron, &c. than from polithed bodies, though 


ile Phil Tranf. abridged, Vol. 10. p. 281. + Ib. p- 286. 
Ait: they 


78 THE! DISCOVERIES  .1\VParrlh 


they’ were’ ever fo fharp, as from polithed {ciffars, gc.» He 
judged that the different appearance was owing, rather to 
the different reflection of the eleCtric light from the furface of 
the bodies from which it was sree than to ya aiticoeinte 
in the fire itfelf.* ety paid te 

He alfo obferved, that eleStricity fuffered no sefteGiowin 
pervading glafs; having found, by exact obfervations, that 
its direction was always in right lines, even through glafles 
of different forms, included one within another,, and,large 
fpaces left between each glafs; + that if books or other non 
eleétrics were. laid upon glafs and interpofed between the 
excited ele@tric and light bodies, the direction of the virtue 
was ftill in right lines, and {eemed inftantly to pafs through 
both the books and the glafs. In thefe experiments he con- 
ftantly obferved, that the electric attraction. through glafs 
was much more powerful, when the glafs was made warm, 
than when it was cold. { He fometimes found eleétricity to 
pervade, though in finall quantities, electrics of above four 
inches thick. || 
. He fays, that in electrifying fubftances of great extent, 
the attractive power was firft obferved, at that part of it which 
wwas moft remote from the excited electric. 

He made fome experiments which fhowed, that the fire of 
eledtricity was affected, neither by the prefence, nor the 
abfence of other fire. One of his experiments was made 
with a chymical mixture, thirty degrees below the freezing 


* Phil. Tranf. abridged, Vol. 10. p. 290. + Ibsp. 291. ft Ib. p. 292. 
II Ib. p. 295. 


point 


Pertop'VII. © OF Dr. WATSON. 79 


point.of Fahrenheit’s thermometer; from which, when elec- 
trified, ee ecngewediel and the ftrokes as fmart, 
as from red hot iron. * haga? sy 
sn a fequel: to the above laced ect chogoth of 
Oéober 1746, Dr. Watfon mentions his having lined a glafs 
globe toa confiderable thicknefs with a mixture of wax and - 
ce 1 a eamaNpen no ay gamer between that and. paladins 
are salbaa various * experiments seit a dates of 
makes ‘whirled at the fame time, and having one common 
eonduétor ; and concluded from them, that the power of elec- 
tricity ‘was increafed by the number and fize of the globes, to 
dcertain degree, but by no means in proportion to their 
number and fize. Yet the Do¢tor allows a very great increafe, 
in an inference he makes from thefe very experiments. 
As bodies to be electrified, ‘he fays, will only contain a cer- 
tain quantity of electricity; when that quantity is acquired, 
which is fooneft done by a number of globes, the furcharge is dif- 
fipated as faft as.it isexcited. So that, it is plain, more fire 
was collected by the number of globes, though the form of 
the conduétor he made ufe of was fuch as could not retain it. 
The great power of his four globes united is manifeft from 
_ his own account of them. For, he fays, that when two pew- 
ter plates were held, one in the hand of an eleétrified perfon, 
and the other in the hand of 6ne who ftood upon the floor; 
ithe flathes of pure and bright flame were fo large, and fucceed- 
€d each other fo faft, that, when the room was darkened, he 


* Phil. Tranf. abridged, Vol. 10. p. 293. + Ib. p. 295. 


° could 


Bo +. "RHE, DISCOVERIES yyPartl. 


could diftin@tly fee the faces of thirteen perfons who ftood 
round the room. * 

Lastry, the Doétor found, that the fmoke of original 
eleGtrics was a conductor of electricity, and alfo that flame 
would condué the whole of it undiminithed; by obferving 
that two perfons, ftanding upon electrics, could communi- 
cate the virtue.to each other, with nothing interpofed but the 
fmoke in the one cafe, and flame in the other. + 
~ Ir was in this period that Mr. Du Tour difcovered, that 
flame. would deftroy electricity; as he informed the Abbé 
Nollet, in a letter dated 21ft Auguft 1745. The fame was 
alfo difcovered by Mr. Waitz, and an account of it was pub- 
lithed in a differtation, which was honoured with a prize the 
fame year at the academy in Berlin. 


* Phil, Tranf, abridged, Vol. 10. p. 295. + Ib. p. 296. 


PERIOD 


, 


Pex,VIML. Sec. 1. Prisha 9 pei Ber. br 


Pet a Gastauds 36 ont ry (talib bliroa 
TO) AL DUbO} 


“PERIOD Vil. | 


Tue HISTORY oF ELECTRICITY, FROM THE DISCOVERY OF 
faire; LEYDEN PHIAL IN. THE YEAR 1746, TILL Dr, 
de _ FRANKLIN's DISCOVERIES. 


- fi ve oe 
) 
‘ 


SECTFrON’™ t 


‘THE HISTORY OF THE LEYDEN PHIAL rrTsetr, TILL 
Dr. FRANKLIN’s piscoverigs RELATING To IT. 


aaa year 1746 was famous for the moft furprifing dif- 
covery that’ has yet been made in the whole bufinefs 
of eleétricity, which was the wonderful accumulation of its 

power in glafs, called at firft the LeypEN PHIAL; becaufe 

firft.made by.Mr. Cuneus a native of Leyden, as he was re- 

peating fome experiments which he had feen with Mefirs. 
Mufchenbroeck, and Allamand, profeffors in the univerfity 
| M of 


880.) ) THE HISTORY OF! | Parr 


of that city. * But according to other accounts, it was Mr. 


Mufchenbroeck himfelf who firft felt the fhock, as he was. 
ufing an iron cannon, fufpended on filk lines, for a 


conductor. + It 

Tue views which led to this difcovery were, as I have 
been informed, as follows. Profeffor Mufchenbroeck and 
his friends, obferving that electrified bodies, expofed to the 
common atmofphere, which is always replete with conduc- 
ting particles of various kinds, foon loft their eledtricity, and 
were capable of retaining but'a {mall quantity of it, imagined, 
that, were the electrified bodies terminated on all fides by 
original eleétrics, they might be capable of receiving a 
ftronger power, and retaining it a longer time. Glafs being 
the moft convenient electric for this purpofe, and water the 
moft convenient non electric, they firft made thefe experi- 
ments with water, in glafs bottles: but no confiderable dif- 


covery was made, till the profeffor, or Mr. Cuneus, happen- ~ 


ing to shold; his’ glafs veffel in one hand, ‘containing water, 
which: had a communication with the prime conductor, by 
means of a wire; and, with the other hand, difengaging it 
from the conductor (when he imagined the water had receiv- 
ed as much eleétricity as the machine could give it) was far- 
prifed: by a fudden> fhock in his' arms and breaft, which he 
had not in the leaft expected from the experiment. 

‘Tr is extremely curious, to obferve, the, |defcriptions which 
philofophers, ,who. firft felt the eletrical, thock, give.of- it; 
efpecially as, we are fure, we can give ourfelves the fame fen- 


* Dalibard’s Hiltoire abrigée. p. 33. + Hiltoire de l’eledctricité, p. 29. 


- fation, 


Pex. VIII. Sec. I. ‘THE LEYDEN PHIAL. 83 

ation, and thereby compare their defcriptions with the rea-_ 
+ lity. Terror and furprifecertainly contributed not a little to 
‘the exaggerated accounts they gave of it; and, could we not 
have repeated the experiment, we fhould have formed a very 
different idea of it from what it really is, even when given in 

' er firength than thofe who firft felt this electrical fhock - 
were able to” give it: It will amufe: nas readers if I give 

an example or two. 

“Mr. Muscuewsroscx, who tried ‘sie experiment with a 
a) glats’ bowl, fays, in‘a letter to Mr. Reaumur, 

which “he | wrote’ foon’ after the experiment; that he felt 
 himfelf ftruck in his arms, fhoulders and breaft, fo that he 
loft his breath, and was two. days before he recovered from 
the effects of the blow and the terror. He adds, that he 
would not take a fecond fhock for the kingdom of France. * 
"Tue firft time Mr. Allamand made this experiment (which 
was ¢ was only, with a common beer glafs) he fays, that he loft the 
‘fe c of ra breath for fome moments ; and then felt fo intenfe 
a pain all along his right arm, that he at firft apprehended 
ill confequences from it, though it foon after went off with-- 
out any j inconvenience. + But the moft remarkable account 
is : that of Mr. Winkler of Leipfick. He fays, that the firft 
esa ‘tried the Leyden experiment, he found great convul- 
fions by it in his body ; and that it put his blood into great 
- agitation; fo that he was afraid of an ardent fever, and was 
obliged to ufe refrigerating medicines. He alfo felt an heavi- 
‘ nef i in ‘his head, as if a ftone lay upon it, Twice, he fays, 


* Hiffoire, de l’electricité, p. 30. + Phil. Tranf. abridged, Vol. to. P- 32h. 
MP2 it 


84 THE HISTORY” OF. Parr I. 


it gave him a bleeding at his nofe, to which he was not in- 
clined; and that his wife (whofe curiofity, it feems, was 
ftronger than her fears) received the fhock only twice, and 
found herfelf fo weak, that the could hardly walk ; and that, 
a week after, upon recovering courage to receive another 
fhock, fhe bled at the nofe after taking it only once. * 

WE are not, ‘however, to infer from thefe inftances, that 
all the electricians were ftruck with this panic. Few, I be- 
lieve, would have joined with the cowardly profeffor, who 
firft felt this fhock, in faying that he would not takea fecond 
for the kingdom of France. Far different from thefe were 
the fentiments of the magnanimous Mr. Boze, who with a 
truly philofophic heroifm, worthy of the renowned Empe- 
docles, faid he wifhed he might die by the eleétric fhock, 
that the account of his death might furnifh an article for the 
memoirs of the French academy of fciences. + But it is not 
given to every electrician to die the death of the juftly envied 
Richman. 

Ir was this aftonifhing experiment that gave eclat to sss 
tricity. From this time it became the fubject of general con- 
verfation. Every body was eager to fee, and, notwithftanding 
the terrible account that was reported of it, to /ee/ the expe- 
riment; and in the fame year in which it was difcovered, 
numbers of perfons, i in almoft every country in PaO. got 
a livelihood by going about and thowing it. 

-Wuite the vulgar of every age, fex, and rank were 
viewing this prodigy of nature and philofophy with wonder 
and amazement; we are not furprized to find all the ele@tri- 


cians of Europe immediately employed in repeating this 


* Phil. Tranf, abridged, Vol. 10. p. 327. +. Hiltoire, p. 164. 
great 


‘Per? VIII. Sec... TME LEYDEN PHIAL. 85. 


great experiment, and attending to the circumftances of - 
it. Mr. Allamand remarked, that, when he firft tried it, 
he ftood fimply upon the floor, and not upon cakes of rofin. 
He faid, that it did not fucceed with all kinds of glafs; for 
‘that, though he had tried feveral, he had had perfeét fuccefs 
with’ none: but thofe of Bohemia, and that he had tried 
glaffes without any effect at all.* Profeffor Mufchen- 
‘wad at that time only obferved, that the glafs muft not be 
all wet on the outfide. 
_ Ir is no wonder that fo few of ne properties of glafs charg- 
ed with eletrical fire were known at firft, notwithftanding the 
attention that was immediately given to the fubject by all the 
electricians in Europe. The experiment is, to this day, juft- 
ly viewed with aftonifhment by the moft profound eleétrici- 
‘ans’: for, though fome remarkable phenomena of it have been 
‘excellently accounted for by Dr. Franklin, and others, {till 
_ much remains to be done; and, in many refpects, the cir- 
cumftances attending it are ftill inexplicable. What will re- 
fult from more attention being given to it time only can 
ifhiow. foeilt wai 
_ Dr. Watson, who gives an account of this famous ex- 
periment in the Philofophical Tranfactions, obferves, that it 
fucceeded beft when the phial, which contained the water, 
was of the thinneft glafs, and the water warmer than the 
ambient air. He fays he tried the effe& of increafing the 
quantity of water in. glafs veffels of different fizes, as far as 
‘four gallons, without in the leaft increafing the ftroke. He 


* Phil. Tranf. abridged, Vol. 10. p. 321. 
alfo 


86 . THE “HISTORY OF Part I. 


‘alfo obferved, that the force of the ftroke did not increafe in 
proportion to the fize of the globe, or the number of globes 
employed upon the occafion ; for that he had been as forcibly 
ftruck with a phial charged by means of a globe of fevén 
inches in diameter, as from one of fixteen, or from three of 
ten; and that, at Hamburgh, a {phere had been employed 
of a Flemith ell in diameter, without the expected increafe 
of power. He found, that if mercury was ufed, - inftead of 
water, the ftroke was by no means increafed in proportion to 
its {pecific gravity. He alfo firft obferved, that feveral men, 
touching each other, and ftanding upon electrics, were all 
fhocked, though only one touched the gun barrel; but that 
no more fire was vifible from them. all, than if one only had 
difcharged it. 


Severat of thefe obfervations fhow how imperfeétly this 


great experiment was underftood, for fome time after it was 
firft made. Dr. Watfon, however, obferved a circumftance 
attending the charging of the phial, which, if purfued, 
would have led him to the difcovery, which was afterwards 
made by Dr. Franklin. He fays, that when the phial is 
well electrified, and you apply your hand thereto, you fee 
the fire flath from the outfide of the slats, wherever oe 
touch it, and it crackles in your hand. * 

He alfo obferved, that when a fingle wire lit yk was faften+ 
ed round a phial, properly filled with warm water, and charg- 
ed; upon the inftant of its explofion, the electrical corrufca+ 
tions were feen to dart from the wire, and to illuminate the 
water contained in the phial. 

* Phil. Tranf. abridged, Vol. 10. p. 298. 
SEVERAL 


se 


Pin. Vit Sec. I. THE LEYDEN PHIAL. 87 


| Severan other very important circumftances, relating to’ 
see Saar the phial, were obferved by Dr. Watfon.: | 
fe found that the ftroke was, ceteris paribus, as the points of 
of the non ele¢trics on the outfide of the glafs. And 
owing Dr. Bevis the experiments which proved: 
ion, “A more clear and fatisfac- — 
th pam: ‘proving it, and which has been the means of 
lating and increafing the force of charged glafs far 
what Was: expected from the firft difcovery of it. 
1 was coating the outfide of the phial, very near 
oot with theet lead, or tinfoil. When a bottle 
chen: in this manner, and nearly filled with water; 
ose ‘that a_perfon who only held in his hand a 
communicating with that coating, felt as itrong a 
fhock vas he would have felt, if his hand had been in aétual 
& with every part of the phial touched by the coating.* 
~ Dr . Watson “alfo difcovered, that the ele@trical power, 
in the: difcharge of the phial, darts reétifimo curfu, as he 
ftyles it, between the gun barrel and the phial; and, though 
it is not ftrily true, that the fhock goes the neareft way, 
yet i it does fo ceteris paribus, which alone was a confiderable 
wery for that time. He obferved, that, in a company 
joining hands, a perfon touching two other perfons in the 
: circle, who | did themfelves touch one another, felt nothing 
of the fhock, his body making no neceffary part of the circle ; 
“and al 0, if a man, holding a wire, which communicated 
with the outfide of the phial, as it hung upon the conductor, 


* Phil. Tranf. abridged, Vol. 10. p. 299. 
fhould 


88 THE HISTORY OF Parr. 


fhould- touch the conductor with it; the explofion was 
made, but the man felt nothing.* 

In a paper read at the Royal Society, January arft. 1748, 
Dr. Watfon mentions another difcovery relating to the Ley- 
den phial, which Dr. Bevis fuggefted, and he compleated. 
Having been before fullyfatisfied, that the fhock from the 
phial was not in proportion to the quantity of matter contained 
in the glafs, but was increafed by it, and likewife by the 
number of points of non electric contact on the outfide of the 
glafs; he procured three jars, into which he put round leaden 
thot, and, joining their wires and coating, difcharged them 
all as one jar. Upon this he obferved, that the electrical ex- 
plofion from two or three of thofe jars was not double or 
treble to that from one of them; but that the explofion from 
three was much louder than that from two, and the explofion 
from two much louder than that from one. + 

Tuis experiment had induced him to imagine, that the 
explofion from thofe jars was owing to the great quantity of 
non eleétric matter contained in them. And whilft he was 
confidering of fome certain method of afluring himfelf whe- 
ther the fact was fo, Dr. Bevis informed him, that he had 
found the electric explofion to be as great from covering the 
fides of a pane of glafs, within about an inch of the edge, 
(which was a curious improvement of Mr. Smeaton’s) as it 
could have been from an half pint phial of water. Upon 
this Dr. Watfon coated large jars with leaf filver, both infide 
and outfide, within an inch of the top, and from the great 


* Phil. Tranf. abridged, Vol. 10. p. 301. + Ib. p. 374. 
explofion 


‘bin VIL. Sec. L THE LEYDEN 'PHIAL. "89 
“explofion he produced from them, when f little non electric 
was contained in them, he was of opinion, that the 

effect of the Leyden bottle was greatly increafed by, if it was 
not principally owing to, not fo much the quantity of non 
eleétric matter contained in the glafs, as the number of points 


_ of non elegtric contact within the’glafs, and the denfity of the 
_ matter of which thofe points confifted; provided the matter 
_ was, in its own nature, a feady conductor of electricity. He 
_ alfo obferved, that the explofion was greater from hot water 
_ inelofed in glaffes, than from cold ; and from his coated jars 


warmed, than when cold. * 
_ Tuer Doétor obferved, that when the circle for the dif- 


_ charge was not through perfeéct conduétors, the explofion was 


made flowly, and not all at once. This law, he fays, was 
invariable, but he was not able to account for it. But to 
prove that the electricity paffed with its whole force through 
the circle of non electrics, he made a circuit confifting of iron 
bars, and fpoons filled with {pirits between each bar, (but at 
fome fmall diftance from them) and, upon the explofion, all 


_ the fpoons were on fire at once. This was the firft time, as 


_ he obferves, that fpirits were ever fired without either the 


. fpirits, or the non eleGric on which they were placed, being 
inflated, or put upon original ele@trics. And yet, he fays, 


‘ though we know, from its effects, that the electricity goes 
_ through the whole circuit of non electrics, with all its vigour; 


its progrefs is fo quick, as not to affect, by attracting or 
otherwife, any light bodies difpofed very near the non elec- 
trics, through which it muft neceffarily pafs. + 


* Phil Tranf. abridged, Vol. 10. p. 377. + Ib. p. 378. 
N Ir 


go THE HISTORY” OF Part I. 


Ir is curious to obferve in what manner Dr. Watfon ex- 
plained the fhock of the Leyden phial; about the time that 
he firft made the experiment with it. | He had-then been 
led (by a courfe of experiments which will be mentioned here- 
after) to the notion both of the affux, and efflux of elec- 
tric matter in all electrical experiments. To apply this 
principle to the cafe in hand, he fuppofed, that the man who 
felt the thock parted with as much of the fire from his body, 
as was accumulated in the water and the gun barrel; and 
that he felt the effet in both arms, from the fire which was 
in his body, rufhing through one arm to the gun ‘barrel, and 
through the other to the phial. He imagined alfo, that as 
much fire as the man parted with was inftantly replaced frotn 

the floor of the room, and that with’a violence equal to the 


of the electric matter pervaded the glafs (as he thought, was 
feen upon prefenting a non electric body to it, when it ftood 
upon the glafs ftand, and without which. it could not: be 
charged at all). yet,: that-the lofs of the electric matter this 
way was not equal to what came in by the wire; the thin- 
nefs of the glafs perinisting it not iuegie: but partially to Aes 
the electricity. * 

_ Arperwarps, when (froma courfe of ckpérimdnedgwhich 
will alfo, be recited in their proper» place) -Dr. :Watfon 
changed his opinion about this afflux and’ _— oagnend 


= Phil. Tranf. abridged, Vol. to. p. 348. 


matter, 


Pe. VI. Sec. ** THE LEYDEN PHIAL. oF 


oe steam and franknefs becoming every in- 
» he retraéted this hypothefis; and, in refu-; 
periment further adds, that the charged’ phial would’ 
explode with equal violence, if the hoop of the wire was bent, 
foras to.come near the coating of the phial, without any other 
_ nonjele&tric body being near, from which fuch a quantity? 
could be fupplied.. He had alfo obferved, that if aman ftood: 
upon glafs, and difcharged the phial, he felt the fame thock 
as if heshad ftood upon'the floor. I thall fubjoin a remark- 
able paragraph ot the Doétor himfelf upon. this occafion, as 
[think it very:applicable even to us in this more. advanced 
' ftate-of the fcience. : 
of I TAKE notice of thefe,” fays the Doér, ‘© in as 
“much as, notwithftanding the very great progrefs which 
«has been made in our improvements i in this part of natural’ 
“* philofophy, within thefe few years; pofterity will regard. 
““usias onlyin our noviciate; and therefore it behoves us, 
“« as far as we can be juftified therein by experiment, to cor- 
«« ret any conclufions we may have drawn, if others yet more 
«« probable prefent.themifelves.” * The Dodtor has lived to 
fee, not only that pofterity would confider him and his affif- 
tants at that time, as in their noviciate; but he Lim/é/f, already 
. in the courfe of a few years, looks upon both himfelf and them 
in the fame light. And, confidering the quick advances {till 
making in this fcience, it is to be hoped he may ftill live to 
fee, even the electricians of the prefent year, to have been 
only in their noviciate. 


* Phil. Tranf. abridged, Vol. 10. p. 373. 
N 2 ALL 


92 THE HISTORY OF | Part li 


Havine feen what was done by Dr. Watfon towards ex-- 
plaining the eletric thock, before it was undertaken by Dr. 
Franklin; let us fee what obligation we are under to other 
Englifh eleCtricians, and particularly Mr. Wilfon. “4 

»Mr. Witson fays that, «as early as the year 1746, he 
difcovered a method of giving the fhock to any particular part 
of the body. without affecting the reft.* He increaféed the, 
ftrength of the fhock by plunging the phial in water, thereby 
giving it a coating of water on the outfide, as high as it was 
filled on the infide. + 

In a letter to Mr. Smeaton, dated Dublin O&ober 6th. 1746, 
he mentions his having made fome experiments, in order to 
difcover the law of accumulation of the eleétric matter in the 
Leyden bottle; and found, that it was always in proportion 
to the thinnefs of the glafs, the furface of the glafs, and that 
of the non eleétrics in contact with the infide and outfide 
thereof. The experiments, he fays, were made with water 
alittle warmed, which was poured into the bottle, while the 
outfide was immerged in a veflel filled with water, but a little 
colder; leaving three inches, or thereabouts, uncovered, which 
was preferved dry and free from duft. Am account of this 
experiment he wrote to Mr. Folkes, and it was read before 
the Royal Society, October 23d. 1746, as appears by their 
minutes of that day, though the original was loft or miflaid. 

- ANOTHER curious experiment Mr. Wilfon made, in order 
to prove an hypothefis, which he conceived very early, of 
the influence of a fubtle medium furrounding all bodies, and 


* Wilfon’s Effay, p. 88. _ + Ib. p. 71. 
refitting 


Pex VIL. Sec. 1.) THE LEYDEN’ PHIAL. 93 


refifting the éntrance © or exit of the ele&tric fluid. To deter- 
mine this, he made the Leyden. experiment with a chain,:and 
confidered each link of it as having two furfaces, at leaft; fo 
“that lengthening of fhortening the'chain, in each experiment, 
would occafion different refiftances ; and the event, he fays, 
proved according ly.” “When he made the difcharge with one 
wire only, he found the ‘refiftance to be lefs than when 
d@ chain’ was ufed. But to: leave no room for’ doubt,: he 
caufed the chain to be ftretched with a weight, that the 
links might be brought nearer into contaét, and the event 
was'the fame as. when a fingle wire had been ufed. *_ 
“Two circuits being made, one confifting of the arms of a 
man, and the other of the links of a chain; he found, that 
the fire would take the arms of the man; but that if the 
chain were ‘ftretched, it would take the chain. . No perfon, 
he fays, who has not made the experiment, would imagine, 
with how much force the chain muft be ftretched before the 


Se experiment will anfwer, and the electric fluid pafs through i it 


without producing a fpark at any of the links; that is, be- 
fore the links can be brought into abfolute conta& with one 
another, their own weight being by no means fufficient. + 

Mr. Witson obferved, that if one part of the Leyden 
phial was ground very thin, and covered with fealing wax 
till it was charged, and then had the fealing wax taken off, 
and a conduétor communicating with the earth touched the 
_ thin part, the charge would be diffipated in nearly half 
the time that it otherwife would have been. ¢ 


* Letter to Hoadley. + Wilfon and Hoadley, p.65. 4 Wilfon’s Effay, p. 74. 
He 


94 9) RHE, HISTORY OF, > Paar. 


_ He, obferved. that, bodies, placed without the electric cir-, 


euit, would. be affected with, the thock,. if they were only ia, 
contact | with any part of it, or very near it. To thew this.to, 
the moft advantage, he fet a.charged phial upon a glafs ftand,, 
and placed, feveral pieces. of brafs. upon the ftand, one of 
them) in contact Nas the chain, that fotmed the circuit, and 
others a, twentieth, of an_inch from it, or from. one another 5 * 
and, upon making the difcharge, . where was a. ‘park vifibla 
between each of them. *.. » . 

“Ayatocous, in fome relpacts, to ry was. “Mr.  Wilfon’ 8 
obfervation,), that, if, the; c circuit y uit not made of ‘metals, or 


other yery good conductors, the perfon who laid hold of them, ' 


in order to perform the experiment, felt a confiderable fhock _ 
in that arm which was in contact with the circuit. 
He alfo, obferyed, that when the phial was coated, within 


and without, with metals, the firft explofion bore the greatelt 


proportion, to the fubfequent ones, the whole charge, Deing 
diffipated almott at once ; whereas, when water was ufed, 

the fubfequent explofions ‘were more in number, and. more 
confiderable ;. and that when the phial was charged with no- 
thing but a wire inferted in it, the. firft explofion and, the 
fabfequent ones were ftill more nearly equal. 

Mr. Wizson once happening. to break a finall wire by, the 
convulfive fhock given to his arms by the Leyden phial, he 
faftened. to his hands, well guarded with leather, a larger 
wire, of the thicknefs of a flender knitting needle, and placed 
himfelf in fuch a manner, that it would neceffarily be ftretch- 
ed, if his arm fhould. be convulfed again. He accordingly 


* Wilfon’s Effay, p. 90. 
difcharged 


z& 


Pex. VIL Sec. THE LEYDEN PHIAL. 9; 


othe. ered “and this! Beomiintirnen Tike = 
Prin a Bil te idtts Ritsy ; sein rots 
~Mr.'Grorcr Granam fhewed how mien idea ag 
7 of the Leyden phial might be made at the fame 
yon tn made to‘ pals thtough them all. He 
made a number lof perfons take hold of a plate of metal, com- 
sting with the outfide’iof the phials and all together, 
jay hold of a brafs rod with which the difcharge 
‘was made; when ‘they were all thocked’ at the fame’ time, and 
in the. fame degree. + ; 
ty Mr. Canton found; that if a charged’ phial Hy 
pladédiponieleérics;. tte wire land the ‘coating eit give’ a 
{park or two alternately ; and that, by continuing this ope- 
sation, the phial would be difcharged. t This. difeovery, 
which isthe firtt that ‘I find recorded of this excellent ‘philo- 
fopher, to whom ‘the {cience’ of ‘electricity owes fo much, 
has a near affinity to the great difcovery of Dr!’ Franklin; 
bat he did not then obferve, that thofe alternate {parks pro- 
ceeded from’ the two contrary elettricities. This hiftory will 
furnith” many-more. inftances: of perfons being on the’eve of 
great difcoveries, without actually making them. © : 
Jo Was have feeni what lobfervations the Englith philofophers 
. had made'upon the Leyden: experiment before the time of 
Dr. Franklin’; let us now take a view of what was done by 
gleGricians i in "eee faced of the world, within the fame = 
riod. eit 
As Mr. Mufchenbroeck’s letter to Mr. Reaumur,. concern- 
ing the experiment of the phial, came at a time when many 


wi 


* Wilfon’s Efflay, p.84. + Ib.p.128. f Ib. p. 64. 
learned 


96 .1 7 THE HISTORY OF Parr i. 


learned men were employed about electricity, the Abbé Nol- 
let, and Mr. De Monnier, gentlemen of the academy, zealous 
to fearch into fo an extraordinary a phenomenon, : divefting 
themfelves of the fear with which the profeffor’s letter might 
juftly have infpired them, made the experiment upon them- 
felves, and, in like manner, | faid they found the commotion 
very terrible, ..The report of it inftantly fpread through the 
court and the city, from whence all ranks of men crouded to 
fee this new kind of thunder, and to experience the effet of 
- it. # 

Tur Abbé Nollet was the firft who made experiments up- 
on the phial in France, and the refult of many of them 
was the fame with what Dr. Watfon had difcovered, for 
which reafon I fhall not recite them here. They may all be 
feen' at one view in his Legons de phyfique, p. 481. The 
cicumftances which the Englith palohiphess had not attend- 
ed to, are the following. 

Tue Abbé received a fhock from a bottle out of which the 
air had been exhaufted, and into which the end of his con- 
duétor had been inferted.. This was an accidental difcovery ; 
for he receiyed the fhock.as he was holding one hand to the 
glafs veffel, in order to obferve the beautiful irradiations of 
the electric light towards it in vacuo, and putting his other . 
hand to the conduétor, in order to adjuft fomething about it. 
The blow he received was greater, he fays, than he ever felt 
from the Leyden experiment in any other form. ++ 


* Nollet’s Lecons de Phyfique, p. 452 | + Recherches, p. ia 
In 


agi Sec. I. -THE LEYDEN PHIAL. 97 


Ay Iw the fame place he obferves, that he never confidered ‘the 
water in the phial as of any ufe,. but. to convey. the electric 
. ‘matter into the infde of ¢ the glafs ;. and that he afcribed the 
force of the glafs i in giving a fhock, to that property of it, 
smoreiagt retained it more ftrongly than conductors do, and 
ARB se eafily diyefted of it as they are. 
in. M NIER is faid, by Mr. Buffon, to have been, the 
di covered that the Leyden phial would retain its 
ity a confiderable time after it. was charged, rand» to 
nave | ound it todo fo for thirty fix hours, in time of frofts 
Hf frequently electrified his phial at home, and brought it 
hand, ‘through many ftreets, from the college of Har- 
ourt to his apartments in the King’s garden, without” sd 
-confiderable diminution of i its efficacy. * 
_ Ir feems that in France experiments were firft made to try 
To many perfons might feel the fhock of the fame phial. The 
- Abbé Nollet, whofe name is famous in electricity, gave it to 
_one hundred and eighty of the guards, in the King’ s prefence; 
_and at the grand convent of the Carthufians in Paris, the 
“whole community formed a line of nine hundred toifes, by 
“means of iron wires between every two perfons (which far 
exceeded the line of one hundred, and eighty of the guards) 
and the whole company, upon the difcharge of the phial, 
gave a fudden fpring, at the fame inftant of time, and all felt 
the thock equally. + 
Mk. Notter alfo tried the effe& of the eleGtric thock 
ata two birds, one of which was a {parrow, and the other 


* Phil. Tranf. abridged; Vol. 10. p. 333. + Ib. p. 335. 
0) a 


Bayerische 
Staatsbibjiothek 
Unchen 


98 THE HISTORY OF Parr Ii 


a chaffinch, which, as far as I can find, -were the firft brute 
animals of any kind that ever received it. The confequence 
was, that upon the firft fhock, they were both inftantaneoufly 
ftruck motionlefs, and, as it were, lifelefs, though for a time 
only; for they recovered fome few minutes after. . Upon the 
fecond fhock, the {parrow was ftruck dead, and, upon exami- 
nation, was found livid without, as if it had been killed with 
a flath of lightning ; moft of the blood veffels in the body 
being burft by the thock. The chaffinch revived as before. * 
Fifhes were alfo killed with the electric thock, by the Abbé, 
and others. 

- Tue circumftance of the blood veffels of the fparrow being 
burft is, I imagine, a miftake. I have feen no fuch effec, 
when fmaller animals have been killed by a fhock fifty 
times as great as, it is probable, the Abbé ufed upon this 
occafion. 

Tur Abbé Nollet was the firft eleétrician who mentioned 
the burfting of glafs veflels by the eleétric explofion. They 
were pierced, he fays, with round holes, three or four lines 
in diameter. + 

Ir feems that the French philofophers, as well as the 
Englith, had obferved, that, if the phial ftood upon glafs, it 
could not be charged, except a perfon’s hand, or fome other 
non electric fubftance were brought near toit. Upon this they 
imagined the fire ftreamed out of the hand, and paffed through 
the fubftance of the phial into the water.{ This fact fur- 
prifed them very much, as it well might. They alfo aya 


* Phil. Tranf. abridged, Vol. 10. p. 336. + Nollet’s Lettres, Vol. 3. p. 42. 
t Bail. Tranf, abridged, Vol. 10. p. 334+ 
ed, 


Rex. VII. Sec... THE LEYDEN PHIAL. og 


ed, that a light body would be attra&ted by a charged phial, 
as it ftood upon the table, if any perfon touched the wire ; 
but they fay that, if the phial itfelf were touched, the light 
body would be repelled with .a force equal ‘to its attraction in 
the former cafe.* They likewife found, that when the 
charged phial ftood upon glafs, it might be handled with all 
fafety. Thefe experiments feem not to have been made 
with: proper circum{pedtion: for by an attention to thefe very 
circumftances, Dr. Franklin was afterwards led to the great 
difcovery of the different quality of the eleétricity, on dif-. 
ferent fides of the glafs. 


* Phil. Tranf. abridged, Vol. 10. p. 335. = + ‘Ib. p. 337. 


Oz SECTION 


100 Dre. WATSON’S. . Partly 


SECTION IL. 


THE METHODS USED BY THE FRENCH AND ENGLISH PHI-= 
LOSOPHERS, TO MEASURE THE DISTANCE TO WHICH THE 
ELECTRIC SHOCK CAN BE CARRIED, AND THE VEOLCITY 
WITH WHICH IT PASSES. _ 


E are now come to an ampler field of electrical expe- 
riments, in which we fhall be {pectators, not of 
what might be exhibited in a private room, and by a few 
operators; but where we fhall find an amazing apparatus ne- 
ceffary, and a great number of affiftants in the management 
of it; as well as the greateft judgement, and the moft un- 
wearied patience in the condué of it. 
Tue French philofophers were the firft to appear in this 
field, but they did little more than excite the Englith to go 
far beyond them in thefe great undertakings. It has been 
faid already, that a circuit was made of nine hundred toifes, 
confifting of men holding iron wires betwixt each two, 
through which the electric fhock was fenfibly felt. At ano- 
ther time, they made the fhock pafs Pact a wire two 
thoufand 


«Per. VIII. Sec. 1. ELECTRIC CIRCUITS. tor 


thoufand toifes in length, that is near a Paris league, or a- 
_ bout two Englith miles and a half; though part of the wires 
dragged upon wet grafs, went over charmil hedges, or pali- 
fades, and over ground newly ploughed up. Into another 
chain they took the water of the-bafon in the Thuilleries, the 
furface of which was about an acre, and the phial was dif- 
Bice through it..* 

_ Mr. Monnter the younger, alfo endeavoured to determine 
ibe velocity of the electric matter; and, for this purpofe, 
made the fhock pafs through an iron wire of nine hundred 
i and fifty toifes in length, but he could not obferve, that it 
{pent a quarter of a fecond in paffing it. He alfo found, 
that when a wire of one thoufand three hundred and nineteen 
” feet, with its extremities brought near together, was electri- 
fied; that the electricity ceafed at one end, the moment it 
was taken off at the other. This fad refuted the opinion of 
- thofe who, maintained, that it was the force of the electrical 
Jbock,, which threw the eleétric matter with fo great velocity. 

_ Bur all thefe attempts of the French would fcarce de- 
ferve to have been mentioned, but that they preceded the 
greater, the more accurate, and the more numerous expeti- 
ments of the Englith. The names of the Englith gentlemen, 
animated with a truly philofophical fpirit, and who were in- 
defatigable in this bufinefs, deferve to be tranfmitted to pof- 
terity in every work of this nature. 

» Tue principal. agent in this great {cene was Dr. Watfon. 

He planned and directed all the operations, and never failed 


* Phil. Tranf. abridged, Vol. 10. p. 336. 


to 


102 Dr. WATSON’S Parrl. 


to be prefent at every experiment. ‘His chief affiftants were 
Martin Folkes Efq. prefident of the Royal Society, Lord 
Charles Cavendith, Dr. Bevis, Mr. Graham, Dr. Birch, Mr. 
Peter Daval, Mr. Trembley, Mr. Ellicott, Mr. Robins, and 
Mr. Short.. Many other perfons, and fome of diftinction, 
gave their attendance occafionally. 

‘Dr. Watson, who wrote the hiftory of their proceedings, 
in order to lay them before. the Royal Society, begins with 
obferving (what was verified in all their experiments) that 
the electric fhock is not, ftrictly fpeaking, conduéted in the 
fhorteft manner poffible, unlefs the bodies through which it 
pafies conduct equally well; for that, if they conduét un- 
equally, the circuit is always formed through the beft con- 
duétors, though the length of it be ever fo great. 

Tue firft attempt thefe gentlemen made, was to convey 
_the ele&tric thock acrofs the river Thames, making ufe of 
the water of the river for one part of the chain of communi- 
cation. This.they accomplifhed on the 14th. and 18th. of 
July 1747, by faftening a wire all along Weftminfter bridge, 
at a confiderable height above the water. One end of this 
wire communicated with the coating of a charged phial, the 
other being held by an obferver, who, in his other hand, held 
an iron rod, which he dipped into the river. On the oppo- 
fite fide of the river, ftood a gentleman, who, likewife, 
dipped an iron rod in the river, with one hand; and in the 
= other, held a wire, the extremity of which might be brought 

into contact with the wire of the phial. 
Upon making the difcharge, the fhock was felt by the ob- 
fervers on both fides the river, but more fenfibly by thofe 
who 


»~< 


Per. VII. Sec. I. ELECTRIC CIRCUITS. 103 


_ who» were ftationed on the fame fide with the machine ; part 
- of the electric fire having gone from the wire down the 
moift ftones of the bridge, thereby making feveral fhorter 
- circuits to. the phial; but {till all paffing through the gentle- 
men who were ftationed on the fame fide with the machine. 
This was, in a manner, demonftrated by fome perfons feeling 
vad fenfible fhock in their arms and feet, who only happened 

~ to touch the wire, at the time of one of the difcharges, when 
they. were ftanding upon wet fteps which led to the river. 

In one of the difcharges made upon this occafion, acca 
were kindled by the fire which had gone through the river. 

23 ‘Upon this, and the fubfequent occafions, the gentlemen © 
made ufe of wires, in preference to chains, for this, among 
other reafons, that the electricity which was conduéted by 
chains was not fo ftrong, as that which was condutted by 
wires, | This, as they well obferved, was occafioned by the 
jundtures of the links not being fufficiently clofe, as appeared * 
by the {napping and flafhing at every jun@ure, where there 
was the leaft feparation. Thefe leffer fnappings, being nu- 
merous in the whole length of a chain, very fenfibly lef- 
fened the great difcharge at the gun barrel. 

_ Terr next attempt was to force the electrical thock to 
make a circuit of two miles, at the new river at Stoke New- 
ington. This they performed on the 24th. of July 1747, at 
two places; at one of which the diftancé by land was eight 
hundred feet, and by water two thoufand: in the other, the 
‘diftance by land was two thoufand eight hundred feet, and by 


* Phil. Tranf. abridged, Vol. 10. p. 349, &c. 


water 


104 Dr. WATSON’S Part I. 


water eight thoufand. The difpofition of the apparatus was 
fimilar to what they before ufed at Weftminfter bridge, and 
the effect anfwered their utmoft expefations. But, as in 
both cafes, the obfervers at both extremities of the chain, 
which terminated in the water, felt the fhock, as well when 

‘they ftood with their rods fixed into the earth twenty feet 
from the water, as when they were put into the river; it oc- 
cafioned a doubt, whether the eleétric circuit was formed 
through the windings of the river, or a much fhorter way, 
by the ground of the meadow: for the experiment plainly 
fhewed, that the meadow ground, with the grafs on it, con- 
duéted the electricity very well. 

By fubfequent experiments, they were fully convinced, 
that the electricity had not, in this cafe, been conveyed by 
the water of the river, which was two miles in length, but 
by land, where the diftance was only one mile; in which 
fpace, however, the electric matter muft neceffarily have 
paffed over the new river twice, have gone through feveral 
tr and a large ftubble field. * 

Jury 28th. they repeated the experiment, at the fame 
place, with the following variation of circumftances. The 
iron wire was, in its whole length, {upported by dry fticks, 
and the obfervers ftood upon original electrics; the effect of 
which was, that they felt the fhock much more fenfibly, 
than when the condu@ing wire had lain upon the ground, 
and when the obfervers had likewife ftood upon the tare 
as in the former experiment. 


* Phil. Tranf. abridged, Vol. 10. p. 360. 
AFT™®.WARDS, 


Per. VIII. See. I. ELECTRIC CIRCUITS 105 


diese. every thing elfe remaining as before, the 
bite were direéted, inftead of dipping their rods into 
Pic to put them into the ground, each one hundred, 
and “tity | Tock from the water. They were both {martly 
; ip fence sioe they were diftant from each other above five 
hundred feet. * 

_ Tue fame gentlemen, pleafed. with she, fuccefs oe theic 
former experiments, undertook another, the object of which 
ee whether the electric virtue could be con- 


through dry ground; and, at the fame time, to carry 
rough water to a greater diftance than they had done 
before. For this purpofe, they pitched upon Highbury barn 
_ beyond Iflington, where they carried it into execution on the 
sth. of Auguft 1747-, They chofe a ftation for their machine, 
Bee equally diftant from two other ftations for obfervers 
raed new river; which were fomewhat more than a mile 
‘under by] land, and two miles by water. They had found 
the ftreets 0 of London, when dry, to conduct very ftrongly, 
for about forty yards; and the dry road at Newington about 
— diftance. The event of this trial anfwered their ex- 
|The eleatric fire made the circuit of the water, 

w en ip the wires and the obfervers were fupported upon 
original | eleétrics, and the rods dipped into the river. They 
alfo bot felt the fthock, when one of the obfervers was placed 
in a. dry gravelly pit, about three hundred yards nearer the 
chine than the former ftation, and one hundred yards dif- 
tant from the river: from which the gentlemen were fatif- 


* Phil. Tranf. abridged, Vol. 10. p. 357. 
ji fied, 


106 oDr. WATSON’S ~ Parr I. 
fied, that the dry gravelly ground had’ conducted the eledtri- 
city as ftrongly as water. ’ tly 
From the thocks which the obfervers received in their 
bodies, when the eleétric power was conducted upon dry 
fticks, they were of opinion; that, from the difference of 
diftance fimply confidered, the force.of the fhock,. as. far as 
they had yet experienced, was very little, if at all impaired. 
When the obfervers ftood upor eleétrics, and touched the 
water, or the ground, with the iron rods, the fhock was 
always felt in their arms or wrifts 5 when they ftood upon 
the ground with their iron rods, they felt the fhock in their 
elbows, wrifts, and ancles; and when they ftood upon the 
ground without rods, the fhock was always felt in the elbow 
and wrift of that hand which held: the conducting wire, and 
in both ancles.* PRO ROTTER, bol hogan; 
Tue laft attempt ‘of this kind which the(@ gentlemen 
made, and which required all their fagacity and addtefs 
in the conduct of it, was to try whether the electric thock 
was perceptible at twice the diftance to which they had be-- 
fore carried it, in ground perfeétly dry, and where ‘no water 
was near; and alfo to diftinguith, if poffible, the refpective 
yelocity of ele@tricity and found. § SG! at ROP ws 
For this purpofe, they fixed upon Shooter’s hill, and made 
their firft experiment on the 14th. of Auguft 1747, a time, 
when, as it happened, but one fhower of rain had’ fallen du~ 
ring five preceding weeks. ‘The wire ‘Communicating with: 
the iron rod, which made the difcharge, was fix thoufand. 


[++ 


* Phil Tranf.. abridged, Vol. 10. p. 360- 
4 feven. 


Per. VII. Sec. I. ELECTRIC CIRCUITS. 107 


feven hundred and thirty two feet in length, and was fupport-~ 
ed all the way upon baked fticks ; as was alfo the wire which 
communicated with the coating of the phial, which was 
three thoufand eight hundred and fixty eight feet long, and the 
obfervers were diftant from each other two miles. The refult 
of the explofion demonftrated, to the fatisfaction of the gen- 
tlemen prefent, that the circuit performed by the: electric 
matter was four miles, viz. two miles of wire, and two of 
dry. ground, the {pace between the extremities of the wires. 
A diftance which, without trial, as they juftly obferved, was 
too great to be credited. A gun was difcharged at the in- 
ftant of the explofion, and the obfervers had ftop watches in 
their hands, to note the moment when they felt the fhock : 
but, as far as they could diftinguith, the time in which the 
eleétric matter performed that vaft circuit might have been 
inftantaneous. * 

- In all the explofions where the circuit was made of any 
dhsididetable length, it was obferved, that though the phial 
was very well charged, yet that the fnap at the gun barrel, 
made by the explofion, was not near fo loud as when the cir- 
éuit was formed in aroom; fo that a by-ftander, fays Dr. 
Watton, though verfed in thofe operations, would not imagine, 
from feeing the flath, and hearing the report, that the ftroke, 
at the extremity of the conducting wire, could have been 
confiderable ; the contrary whereof, when the wires were 
_ properly managed, he fays, always happened. 

Sritt the gentlemen, unwearied in thefe purfuits, were 
ee if poflible, to afcertain the abfolute velocity of elec- 


® Phil. Tranf. abridged, Vol. 10. p. 363. 
P2 tricity 


108 Dr. WATSON’S - -UPArr adi 


tricity at a’certain diftance; becaufe though, in the. laft ex- 
periment, the time of it’s-progrefs was certainly very {mall, 
if any; they were defirous of knowing, {mall as that time 
might be, whether it was meafurable, and Dr. Watfon had, 
contrived an excellent method for that purpofe. 

AccorDINGLY, on the sth. of Auguft 1748, the gentle-. 
men met once more, and the laft time, at Shooter's hill; 
when it was agreed to make an electric circuit of two miles, 
by feveral turnings of the wire, in the fame field. The 
middle of this circuit, they contrived to be in the fame room 
with the machine, where an obferver took in each hand one 
of the extremities of the wires, each of which was a mile in 
length. In this excellent difpofition of the apparatus, in 
which the time between the explofion and the thock might 
have been obferved to the greateft exactnefs, the phial was 
difcharged feveral times; but the obferver always. felt him- 
felf fhocked at.the very inftant of making the explofion. — 
Upon this the gentlemen where fully fatisfied, that, through 
the whole length of this wire, which was 12276 feet in 
length, the velocity of the electric matter was inftantancous. * 

Tuese experiments excited the admiration of all foreign 
eleétricians. Profeffor Mufchenbroeck,, who was greatly fa- 
tisfied with the extent and fuccefs of them, faid, in a letter 
to Dr. Watfon, upon the occafion, Magnificentiffimis tuis ex-~ 
perimentis Superafti conatus omnium. 

Ir is faid by fome, that, the laf $e thefe experiments 
go upon a wrong fuppofition, and therefore can be of no ule; 
it: being fuppofed that the very fame particles of the electric, 


* Phil. Tranf. abridged, Vol. 10. p- 368.” 
fluid 


‘Pers VOI. See. Il. “ELECTRIC CIRCUITS. 109 


fluid; which were thrown: von one fide of the charged glafs, _ 
_ adtually made the: whole circuit ef the intervening con- 
duétors, and atrived at the oppofite fide: whereas Dr. Frank- 
slin’s theory: only requires that the deficiency on one fide of — 


- the glafs be fupplied from the neighbouring. conductors; 
' which may, in return, receive as much as they parted with, 


from the fide of the glafs that was overcharged. «J So:thaty to | 
be a little more particular, the redundancy of electric matter. 
on the charged fide of a pane of glafs, only paffes into the | 
bodies which form that part of the circuit which is contigu- 

ous to it, driving forward that part of the fluid which was 
natural to them 3 till, at length, the fluid which refided in - 

thofe conductors which formed the laft part of the oo 
oi ns the exhaufted fide of the glafs. ’ 

‘Bur fhould this be cafe (though in great diteharges it se 

fes the natural quantity of cleétricity in bodies to be very 
ee aiopdia:aoe Dr. Watfon, and other philofophers 
at that time, have conceived otherwife; it does not fol- 
low, that the experiments. could poffibly determine nothing: 
for there ftill remains fomething to be meafured, viz. the: 
time required for the fucceffive diflodging the eleétric fluid in: 
the whole length of the circuit. 

Were the whole mafs of the electric matter contained im 
all the intervening conductors abfolutely folid, no. motion 
could be made at one extremity, without producing an inftan-. 
taneous motion at the other; juft as if one end of a rod. be: 
~ firuck, the motion is inftantly communicated to the other end. 

; But this cannot be the cafe in an elaftic medium, the parts of 
which yield to one another. In this. cafe, the motion is 


communicated. 


110 DISCOVERIES ; Part I. 


communicated in areal fucceffion, like a vibration, running 
the whole length of the circuit; » which muft therefore take 
up time, and be meafurable.. The motion of found may be 
meafured, though no particle of the vibrating air be finally. 
difplaced. Thefe great experiments of Dr. Watfon, there+ 
fore, had a real object, only it appeared'to be too {mall to be 
afcertained by them. 


SECTION 


Por, VII. Sec. UI. =OF Dr. WATSON. 1It 


ni Walsitfe: PRES? Joho Su nsiley serek cords “apy “Tadvo aT 


eas sneer ar! bee ticde oe) Ye ao? esas taniarit aslican 
HSh Teele ' +g? BO Tr bee bie ae ,.On? Bis fonder 
sit semaes ade 2 Snide SAP bstsnay th ; 
ceo fi ‘ase at) Rs Hi i if PIOMVORNOY Li hogu hoinsgds 
“lena On OR Sorlt itivr, noifesiac ido yng stor! 


MisceLLANeous DISCOVERIES OF Dr. WATSON, ann 
" oners, Tice THe. Tre oF # Dr: FRANKLIN. a 


Secure ateigetoo/ orl) lino 1u{103 
Pye ylitosers  bowialdo fe 2923803, 211 sl9 ocki- Yo inois 
i ci beisielaved? 03 basdia2id. moitovhi bluow 10 


a oe of the Aiftoveries in’ ibd tse “and iid 
ortance fecond to ‘none (exeept that of the fhock 
rp Franklin’s difcovery of the different ele€trici- 
era oppofite fides of the charged glafs) was that ‘of Dr: 
wae a ‘that the igelaitoa and gldbes did ‘not ‘con- 
tain the Aah in themfelves, but only’ ferved ab firft 
movers, and. determiners, as he calls it, of that power. 
‘He was firlt'led to this difcovery by obferving, that, upon 
Hubbing’ the ‘gla(s thbe, ‘while he was ftanding upon’cakes of 
wax (in order, “a8 he © expected, to'prevent any of the electric 
power from. difcharging itfelf through his body ‘tipon the 
eric) ‘the power was, contrary ‘to: his expetation, fo much 
leffened, that no° fnapping could be obferved upon another: 
perfon’ s touching any part of his body; bat that if aperfon- 
not eleGtrified held his: hand’ near the tube; repeal it was 
tubbed, the {napping was very fenfible. * 


* Phil. Tranf abridged, Vol. 10. p.. 303-- 


4 


Tue 


112 ; - DISCOVERIES Part kh 


Tue event was the fame when the globe was whirled in 
fimilar circumftances. For if the man who turned the 
wheel, and who, together with the machine was fufpended 
upon filk, touched the floor with one foot, the eleétric fire 
appeared upon the conduétor; but if he kept himéelf free 
from any communication with the floor, no fire was pro- 
duced.” 

Dr. Watson by this, and the Sillowing eehierimoerize in 

conjunction, difcovered, what he calls, the complete circula- 
tion of the electric matter. He obferved, that only a {park 
or two would iffue from his hand to the infulated machine, 
unlefs he, at the fame time, formed. a communication.be- 
tween the conductor and the floor; but that then there was 
a conftant and, copious flux of. the flatts matter to the 
machine. |, 
_ OBSERVING, that while his hac, was in contact ns Aa the 
conduar,..: the man. who turned this infulated machine 
gave {parks, which would fire inflammable fubftances, and 
perform, other electrical experiments which were ufually per- 
formed. at the conduétor ; he naturally. imagined, that. the 
fire iflued from the man, for the very fame reafon that all 
eleétricians had before imagined that it came from the con- 
duétor ; and feeing that the man gave no fire unlefs there 
was a communication between the floor and the conduétor, 
he concluded that,. in this cafe, the fire was fupplied by that 
communication, fo that the courfe of the eleGtricity was in- 
verted, as he exprefies it. * $ 


* Phil. Tranf. abridged, Vol..10. p. 305+ 


oma Sec. Il. OF Dr, WATSON. 113 


not then fulpested, that the eye could not diftin . 
: what dire@tion an ele@tric {park proceeded. . Elece . 
s natu: “bineche that all eleétric powers, and con- 
atly th ic fluid, which they fappofed to be the 
e of thef - powers, “exifted in the excited cleric, what- 
it was; and that whatever powers were exerted by clec- 
| bodies proceeded from a real communication of elec- 
to them. | Accordingly, when Dr. Watfon found 
hat, by cutting off the communication of the eleétric with 
flo< all eleétrical operations were ftopped, he concluded, 
hat the electric fluid was collected from the floor to the rub- 
‘thence conveyed to the globe. For the fame reafon, 
— feeing 1 he rubber, or the man who had a communication 
er it, give no {parks but when the conduétor was conneét- 
ed wi th the floor, he would as naturally conclude that the 
globe was fupplied from the conduétor, as he had’ ‘before con- 
‘=, d that it was fapplied from the rubber., 
a Bay _Conasate bath thefe experiments together Dr. Watfon. 
ip oem in all eleétrical operations, there was 
of electric matter to the ee and. the con- 


 Frnpine that a piece of leaf filver was falpended between a 
"plate eleéttified by the conduétor, and another communicating 
F pte aie floor, he ‘reafons from it in the following manner. 

_ # No body can be’ fufpended in equilibrio but by the joint 
# ation of two different directions of power: : fo here, the 


* Phil. Tranf. abridged, Vol. 10, p. 311. . 
Q “ blatt 


> 


114 " DISCOVERIES Parr I. 


t blaft of eleétric ether from the excited plate blows the 


* filver towards the plate unexcited, and this laft, in its turn, 
*« by the blaft of electric ether from the floor fetting through 
*< it, drives the filver towards the plate electrified. We find: 
*¢ from hence, likewife, that the draught of electric ethet- 
*« from the floot is always in proportion to the quantity thrown 
** by the globe over the gun barrel, or the equilibrium by. 
«« which the filver is fufpended could not be maintained.” * 
Dr. Watson obferves, that the Abbé Nollet, two years: 
before he made this communication, had given it as his opi+ 
nion (though without any experiment which proved it) that 
the electric matter did not only proceed from the electrified. 
bodies, but from all others about them, to a certain diftance.--- 
- Sometime after this, Dr. Watfon obferves, in a paper 
read at the Royal Society, January 21ft. 1748, that Dr. Bevis. 
had carried his experiment, to prove that rubbing the tube. 


or the globe only conveyed, and did not produce the ele@tric — 


matter, further than he had done. For he had obferved, a-. 
bove a year before, that placing one man upon eleétrics, to. 
rub the tube: or globe, and another alfo upon eleétrics to 
touch them, as the conductor; both the man who rubs. 
bed, and the man who touched the excited glafs would give- 
a fpark; and further, that if they touched one another, the 
{napping was much greater than if either of them touched a. 
perfon ftanding upon.the floor. Upon this the Doctor feems. 
to have corrected his former opinion of the afflux and efflux. 
of electric matter : for he accounts for this fact by fuppofing,, 


* Phil. Tranf. abridged, Vol: 10. p. 310. + Ib. p. 315. 
that 


Per. VIII. Sec. I. OF Dr. WATSON. — 115 


“that as much electricity as was taken from the perfon rubbing 
_ was given to him who touched the conduétor, being convey- 
ed by the globe. By this means the ele@tricity of the former 
of thefe perfons, he obferves, was more rare than it naturally 
_was, and that of the latter more denfe; fo that the denfity of 
eleétricity between thefe two perfons differed more than that 
between either of them, and another perfon ftanding upon the 
floor. In this manner did Dr. Watfon difcover, what Dr. 
Franklin obferved, about the fame time, in America, and 
called the plus and minus in eleétricity.* - 

F Dr. ‘Warson obferved that the flame at the end of an 
electrified wire was fenfible to the hand, as a cool blaft of 
wind, and that when light fubftances were attraéted and re+ 
pelled between an electrified plate and one communicating 
with the floor, the fucceffion of thefe alternate attractions 
_ and repulfions was extremely quick, fo that fometimes the 

-eye could ‘hardly keep pace with it; and that when a glafs 
globe, of about an inch in diameter, very light and finely 
blown, was put into a plate of metal, and another plate hung 
on the conduétor over it, the ftrokes from the alternate at- 
traGtions and repulfions were almoft too quick for the ear. 
From this laft experiment he likewife deduced an argument’ 
to prove the extreme velocity with which they were 
attraéted and repelled. He fays, that if they were let fall 
from the height of fix feet or more upon a wooden floor, 
or even a plate of métal, they were rarely broken; but that 
by the attraction and repulfion of them between thefe plates, 
- though at the diftance of ne more than one fixth of an inch, 
they were frequently beaten to pieces. + 


* Phil. Tranf: abridged, Vol. 10. p. 369. — ¢_‘Ib. p. 309. 
Q2 Tue 


116 DISCOVERIES | *. Parr I. - 


Tue Doétor alfo proved, that the electric matter paffed 
through the fubftance of the metal of communication, and 
not over the furface of it, by covering a wire with a mixture 
of wax and rofin, and difcharging a phial through it. 


Mr. Monnier the younger difcovered, that elettricity is- 


not communicated. to homogeneous bodies in proportion to 
their maffes or quantity of matter, but rather in’ proportion 
to their furfaces; and yet that all equal furfaces do not res 
ceive equal quantities of electricity, but that thofe receive 
the moft which are moft extended in length ; that a {quare 
fheet of lead, for inftance, received a much lefs quantity of 
eletricity than a fmall ftrip of the fame metal with a tanks 
equal to that of the fquare theet.*. : 

Mr. Wi son, whofe curious obfervations on the Liens 
phial have been mentioned in a former fection, claims no 


{mall fhare of honour in this. As early as the latter end of 


the year 1746, he made the fame difcovery that Dr. Watfon 
had done, that the electric fluid did not come from the globe, 
but from the earth itfelf, and from all other non eleétric 
bodies about the apparatus. He fuggefted a method of prov- 
ing this in aletter to Mr. Ellicott from Chefter; and mentions 
his having completed the experiment himfelf foon after, ina 
letter to Mr. Smeaton, from Dublin. 

Havinc conceived that the difference between electric and 
non eleétric bodies was owing to the different refiftance, 
which a fubtle medium, as he calls it, on the furfaces of all 
bodies gave to the paflage of the electric fluid ; and canceiving 


* Phil. Tranf. abridged, Vol. 10. p. 338 
that 


m ; 
Per. VIII. Sec. I. OF: Mru WILSON. 117 


- that heat would rarify this medium, and thereby convert elec- 
ic into,non electrics, he made fome experiments: which 
1 in) that: fuppofition. . He found that one per- 
_ fon might communicate electricity to another, notwithftand- 
ing the intervention of a confiderable quantity of red hot glafs, 
_ He alfo made other. experiments of a fimilar nature, .as dif- 
charging phials by means of hot glafs, hot amber, and variz 
_ tis other heated eleétrics. Thefe, however,'as Mr. Canton 
. afterwards obferved, might be owing to the hot air upon the 
. farfaces of thofe bodies, which he found to tranfmit electri- 
‘ city very well. But another experiment, which Mr. Wilfon 
smelted rofin, does not feem liable to that objecs 
- ation. He poured the melted rofin into:a phial, and found 
. that he could give thocks with it; but he obferved, that thefe 
_ fhocks .diminifhed as the rofin grew cold, and that mien it 
‘was quite cold, they entirely ceafed. * 
» Mr. Witrson mentions a curious experiment (of which, 
_ Jhowever, he does not fay that he was the inventor) which 
_ he made with paper vanes ftuck in a cork, and fufpended by 
. @ magnet. Thefe, he fays, if they were brought near the 
_ point of any body proceeding from the prime conduétor, 
would turn round very fwiftly, but would not turn at all in 
vacuo. This blaft he thought was occafioned by the iffuing 
_ of the eleétric matter out of the point, which caufed a cur- 
_ rent in the air; but he did not try what would be the confe- 
_ quence of prefenting the vanes to a point which received the 
electric fluid. + 


* Wilfon’s Effay, p.143. + Ib. p. 141. 
nee 


LasTty, 


118 \ EXPERIMENTS - Parrt. 


Lastry, Mr. Wilfon obferved, that ifa needle were pre+ 
fented to a piece of down hanging to the conduétor, it would 
cling clofe to it; but that, upon prefenting any thing that 
was blunt, it would’ be repelled again; and fays that Mr. 
Canton made feveral curious experiments of the fame kind. * 

Mr. Smeaton, within this period, obferved, that if a 
man who was infulated prefied againft the globe with the 
flat part of his hand, while another perfon, ftanding on the 
floor, did the fame, in order to excite it, the perfon who 
was infulated would hardly be eleGrified at all; but that, if 
he only. laid his fingers lightly on the globe, he would be 
eleétrified very ftrongly.-+ The fame ingenious perfon alfo 
obferved, that upon heating the middle‘of a large bar of iron 
to a glowing heat, and electrifying it, the electric power of 
the part that was heated was as {trong as that of the cold 

art. £ ; ; ’ 
5 For feveral curious difcoveries relating to electricity, made 
within this period, we are indebted to the ingenious Dr. 
Miles. In a paper read at the Royal Society January 25th, 


1746, ‘he fays that having excited a ftick of black fealing . 


wax with white and brown. paper, or clean dried flannel, 
he was able to kindle common Jamp fpirits with it. Com- 
paring the ftick of wax with the glafs tube, he obferved 
a remarkable difference between the appearance of fire from 
both, though he didnot underftand the reafon of it. He fays 
dhe found the luminous ¢ffluvia to. proceed in a much greater 


* Wilfon’s Effay, p. 153. + Ib, p.24..° ¢ Ib. p. 129. 
quantity 


oy 


fl. Sec. Wl. 9 OF DRO MILES. 219 


a the top-of his’ finger: to the ftick of wax, 
d to ‘the: glafs. He feveral. times obferved a 
pot of fire to-appear firft on his finger, from 
gular ftreams.towards the wax, in the form of 
ane how: ‘well-known to be the conftant 
ic fire between an, uneleétrified body 
daidgesindhy ty tok Sher taNe 1K . 
D Mawndnta: ftick.of fulphur to perform very well; 
hen-he had put an iron rammer in the’ center: 
to ftrengthen it. | Ivis remarkable,. that after fetting: 
‘tick uptight in a cupboard, it loft all its electric virtue, 
ver afterwards be’ excited-in the leaft degree. 
eels dl its, on ward nual’ 


ft sid 


- i 
2.9.20 


he. could aerdve ‘excite be: with great seat 
ut 10 a {mall degree. 4+ af 
s gentleman. fome time ate: saint: 
‘periment: upon pieces of leaf brafs in a bottle ‘her=- 
fe lu: _ To thefe he found he could give motion by 
ptoach of the excited tube, in the fame manner’ as if’ 
had been in the: open air.;. but one appearance ftruck him 
ch he by no means gives a faticfactory account. He: 
at when he removed the tube from the exhaufted ‘ 
‘ald doby, no commotion was feen inthe leaf brafs, but a: 
: brifk one upon removing the tube fuddenly. Indeed this - 
be could not have — underftood but by comparing it with: 


ht “ge it © Wilfon’s Effay, p p 3175 - + Phil. Tranf. abridged, Vol. 10. p. 320. 
i tinredeiy- 


aro 


iF ‘eile other: 


120 ‘DISCOVERIES © Parr,” 


other facts depending upon the fame principle, and which 
swere not difcovered till fome years after. * iy 

From England, to which, as an Englifhman, I would 
give the preference only in matters of abfolute indifference, 
I pafs over to France, where, next to thofe made in England, 
the moft important difcoveries, and the’ greateft number of 
them were made in’ the period: of which I am treating. . And, 
without all difpute, the greateft name in France, in this or 
any other period, except that of Mr. Du Faye, his friend and 
affociate, is that of the Abbé Nollet. 


. Tue favourite obfervation of Mr. Nollet, on which tin : 


built his darling theory of affluences and effluences was, that 
bodies not infulated, plunged in eleétric atmofpheres, fhewed 
figns of electricity. He obferved a fenfible blaft from the 
hand of a perfon not eledtrified, in the abovementioned cir- 
cumftances, alfo the attraction and repulfion of light. bodies 
by them, the appearance of flame, the diminution of their 
weight: by increafed evaporation and perfpiration, and almoft 
every. other appearance and effect of electricity. More- 
over obferving that this globe contracted a foulnefs while it 
-was whirling, even when rubbed with a clean hand, he had 
the: curiofity to collect a quantity of the matter which formed 
that foulnefs; and finding that, when it was put into the 


fire, ithad the {mell of burnt hair, he concluded that it was | 


an animal fubftance ; and that it had been carried by the af- 
fluent electricity from his own body to the globe. + 
‘Tue only miftake of this ingenious philofopher in thefe 
* Phil. Tranf. abridged, Vol. 10, p,. 326. + Nollet’s Recherches, p. 142. 
experiments, 


I. Src. I. OF THE FRENCH. tat 


its, and which was the fource of many others, which, 
, greatly bewildered and perplexed him was, that 
icity of the body, which was plunged in the atmof- 
1 eleétrified body was of the fame nature with that 
_ of the éleétrified body. Had he but preferved the diftin¢tion, 
ich Mr. Du Faye had difcovered, between the two elec- 
tricities, and imagined that the body electrified, and that 
which: was plunged in its atmofphere were pofleffed of thefe 
‘ two different and oppofite electricities, he might have been 
ed to the great difcoveries made’ by Mr. Canton, Dr. Frank- 
lin, and Mr. Wilke ; which, we fhall find, arofe from that 
fingle obfervation ; and he would have avoided a great deal of 
ha debate an contention, which has not ended to his advantage: 
Ad Tuts partial difcovery of Mr. Nollet is by no means the 
only one of his, that the hiftory of eleétricity prefents in this 
period. _ He made feveral experiments on pointed bodies, and_ 
obferved, that thofe which had the fmalleft points fooneft 
threw out bruthes of electric light, but. did not fhow other 
_ figns of eleétricity fo ftrong as bodies that were not pointed. * 
8 He took a great deal of pains in making experiments, in 
order to determine the degree in which different fubftances 
conduéted the eleétric fluid; and found that. the fmoke of 
gum lac, turpentine, karabé, and fulphur did not carry away 
the eleétricity of an excited tube fo foon as the fmoke of lin- 
at en, wood, and more efpecially the {team of water, and the 
effluvia of burning tallow, and of other fatty fubftances. In 
fhort, he found, that vapours which were not watery did 


* Recherches, p. 146. 
R - very 


122 DISCOVERIES Parr I. 


very little, or no injury to electrical’ experiments, provided 
the tube was not expofed to them near the fire which caufed 
them. A fmoky room did not prevent his performing expe- 
riments, at leaft in any great degree; nor were recnpipi 3 
effluvia at all prejudicial to them. * ; 

SEVERAL curious obfervations were made by the Abbé up- 
on heat, and heated bodies. He found, that a piece of iron 
glowing hot, fo as to throw off ignited particles, did not leave 
the fmalleft trace of eletricity in an excited tube, to which 
it had been brought within five or fix inches, and only held 
there two or three feconds; but it ceafed to affe& the tube at 
the fame diftance before it ceafed to be red, and had no in- 
fluence at all long before it was cold. The electricity of the 
tube, in this inftance, was probably conveyed through the air 
heated by the iron; as it can hardly be fuppofed, that the 
iron emitted any effluvia capable of producing that effe&t. +- | 

He found that the excited tube loft nothing of its electri- 
city in the focus of a burning mirror. That the flame of a 
candle, or the near approach of it, would deftroy electricity 
had been known before: he obferved, that the flame was 
fenfibly difturbed by the approach of the excited tube, and he 
mentions Mr. Du Tour, and the Abbé Needham’s having 
found, that the interpofition of the thinneft piece of glafs, or 
of any other fubftance, between the candle and the tube pre- 
vented the diffipation of the eleétricity. From this fact. it 
was inferred, that the diflipation was owing to’ fome effluvia 
proceeding from the candle. 


* Recherches, p. 194, &c. + Ib. p.216. f Ib. p. 219. 
ConTINUING 


at 


o¢ 


y 


“ 


a 


—— 


Per. VII. Sec. UT. OF THE FRENCH 123 


| Conrinutnc his obfervations on what increafed or im~ 
peded elettrical experiments, he found, that a light body, 
placed on a non electric ftand, moved more brifkly upon the 
approach of an electrified body, than when it was placed 
upon an cletric ftand. * Several electrical experiments, he 
obferved, fucceeded beft when there was. a number of fpecta- 
tors prefent, and when they drew near, and ftood clofe together 
to fee his experiments ; provided they did not occafion fo great 
a perfpiration as made his glafles moift. + This obfervation 
we fhall find accounted for hereafter by Mr. Wilke. 
_ Tue Abbé moiftened, with water or fpirit of wine, a 
flender and pointed bar of iron, and thought that the blaft 
from the point of it was more fenfible than when it was not 
moiftened ; which he attributed to the eleétric fluid carrying 
away with it fome of the particles of the water, and of the 
fpirit of wine. f° 
' Some few obfervations the Abbé made on the difference be- 
tween excited and communicated ele¢tricity, and between 
the electricity of glafs and that of fulphur. He obferved, 
that the electricity of an excited globe or tube, caufed an odd 
fenfation upon the face, as if afpider’s web were drawn over 
it;. whereas that effect was feldom produced by communicat- 
ed ele&ricity. Excited eleétricity, he alfo fays, might be 
perceived by the fmell, at more than a foot diftance, when 
“communicated eletricity could not. || 

He melted fulphur in a glafs globe, by turning it over a 
chafing difh of burning coals; when he obferved, that fmall 


* Recherches; p.12e. + Ib.p.123. fJb.p. 140. {| Ib. p. 136. 


R2 pieces 


i DISCOVERIES Parr I. 


pieces of fulphur, before they were melted, were attracted 
and repelled by the glafs within, at the fame time that the 
afhes of the coals were attracted without. * Holding a piece. 
of excited fulphur in one hand, with.a piece of down fticking 
to it, and ready to fly off, the down, he fays, would cling 
faft to the fulphur, upon prefenting to it an excited glafs 
tube, which he held in his other hand. + 

I sHALL, in the laft place, recite the Abbé Nollet’ $ experi- 
ments made in vacuo. He found that glafs, and other elec- 
trics, might be excited in vacuo, but not fo ftrongly as in the 
open air. He obferved that there was a remarkable differ- 
ence between the appearance of the ele¢tric light in vacuo, 
and in the open air; being much more diffufe, and un- 
broken in vacuo. || Inferting the extremity of his. conductor 
into an exhaufted glafs veffel, he obferved the vefiel to be 
full of light, whenever he brought his hand to it; that the 
light was confiderably increafed when he fpread his hand over 
it; and that when a fpark was taken from the conductor, 
the whole veffel feemed to be full of light. He alfo obferved, 
that {mall pieces of metal, inclofed in the veffel, adhered 
clofe to the glafs; but detached themfelves from it, on the 
approach of the finger, or of any conductor on the outfide. 

Tuere are a few other names of electricians in France; 
whofe experiments and obfervations, made within this period, 
deferve to be mentioned. Of thefe is Mr. Boulanger. He’ 
took great pains to determine the degree in which different 
fubftances are capable of being excited. The experiments, 


* Recherches, p. 184. + Ib. Pp 124. t Ib. p. 236. I) Ib. p. 243. 
-he 


Per. VIII. Sec. Il. 


OF THE FRENCH. _ 125 


he fays, were made with the greateft care: and though. the 
ftate of the fcience did not admit of this bufinefs being deter- 


accuracy, it may not be difagreeable to fee 


the refult of them; which he has comprifed in the following 
table, beginning with a that are leaft excitable'i “ae 


column. 


FIRST COLUMN, 


Ebony. 
Gaillac. 
Box wood. 
Sandal wood. 
Oak. f 
Elm. | 
Ath. 
Linden tree. 
Rofe. 
Willow. 
Ozier. 
Cork. 
_ Dry wood of all kinds. 
All dry plants. 


SECOND COLUMN. 


Shells of all kinds, 
Whalebone. 


aa ae 


Bones. 
Ivory. 
Horn. 
Scales. 
Parchment. 
Hair. 
Wool. 
Feathers. : 
Cotton. 
Silk. 


THIRD COLUMN, 


Allum. _ 
Sugar Candy. 
The Phofphorus of Berne, 
Yellow and white wax. 
Japan varnith. 
Sandarac. 

Mattic. 

Amber. 


Jet. 


126 7 DISCOVERIES’. Part FE 


oJet. brs: 9%n0. 4 Wordelutas, 
~» Pitch. j vit i 
Gum copal. FIFTH mer shit 
‘Gum lac. 
( Colophonia. 1 Si > Hyacinth. 
Sulphur. Opal. ° 
Sealing wax. Emerald. 
All falts which have fuffici- Amethyft. 
ent confiftence. -° Topaz. 
All refins. mi Ruby. 
, Sapphire. : 
FOURTH COLUMN. Cat's eye. : 4 
‘ Peridote. 
’ Loadftone. Granite. . 
Hand ftone. : Rock chryftal. 
Marble of all colours. - Venice and Mufcovy talk. 
Slate. ' Coloured diamonds, efpeci- 
Free ftone. : ally yellow: * 
Granite. White diamonds, efpecially 
Porphyry. 2 ‘the brilliant. 
Jafper. j All tranfparent. precious 
Varnifhed earth. ~ ‘ ftones. 
Cornelians. ~ Glafs, and all vitrifications, 
Agates. without excepting ’ thofe 


All opaque precious ftones. of metals. 


~~ : ' ; 


Tue inference which this author draws from this catalogue 
its, that the moft brittle, and the moft tranfparent fubftances, 
, are 


#x 


” 


eet? OF THE. GERMANS. aay 


:elegtries and he has|récoutfe | toldn:awhe 

‘account for the marcafites not being ex- 

otwithftanding they are both brittle anc trant 

which is known to.pfeveht excitation. * bo 
thor fays, that mineral waters are much more 

d with eleGtricity than common water 5 ‘that 

s are much fooner attracted than thofe of — 
next to them, the brown, and deep red. 

CAT; a phyfician at Rouen, who ‘has diftinguith- 

by feveral performances in the learned world, fuf- 

fev veral pieces of leaf gold at his. conductor, and ob- 

t they, hung at different diftancés, according to their 
fmaller pieces placing themfelves nearer the con+ 

the larger receding farther. from it. This he 

€s to the diftances at which the planets make their re- 

: | the fun, and he fuppofed the caufe to be the 
fame in both. The fame author very particularly compares 
Brenctncn aaa juft been difcovered, to thun- 

der. ¢ Ub Abs "BATES 

Bad ie GrrMANY rds but few: articles for the eledtrical hif- 

nny 1 5 period 5 one of them, however, is curious, and 

erves to be tranfmitted to pofterity. Mr. Gordon of 
xcited the eleétricity of a cat fo ftrongly, that, when 
ae it was communicated by iron chains, it fired {pirits of wine. || 
ae ie Ir has been mentioned before, that feveral gentlemen in 
Germany, aswell asin England, hadfound, that if the man 


who 


128 . DISCOVERIES. Part I. 


who rubbed the globe ftood upon eleétrics, {parks were per- 
ceived upon touching him ; ‘but Mefirs. Klingftierna and Stro- 
ema; two German profeflors, were the firft who properly e= 
leétrified by the rubber ; and their experiments were publith- 
ed in the acts of the Royal ie a of fciences at Stockholm 
for the year 1747. * 

» Mr. JALLABERT, prise f philofophy at Geneva, 
found that a coating of pitch did not prevent the conduétor 
from being electrified, which proved that the electric fluid 
enters the fubftance of metals. He alfo proved, that ice was 
a conductor of eleétricity, by making the Leyden experiment 
with a bottle in which water was frozen. + 

Tue amazing and extenfive effects of eleétricity now began 
to make philofophers look for it where it had not been fuf- 
pected before. Mr. Hawkefbee had been convinced that the 
glafs was principally concerned in’producing the light, which 
was vifible upon the fhaking of mercury in glafs veffels, ex- 
haufted or not exhaufted. Mr. Allimand, as we find in a pa- 
per read at the Royal Society February 13th. 1746, repeated 
fome of his experiments, and obferved, that an attractive 
power attended upon this electric light. _ He brought fome 
down of feathers near a glafs tube; through which mercury 
was made to run from one end to the other, and faw that the 
down was attracted as the mercury paffed by it. { An obfer- 
vation fimilar to this had been made by Ludolf the younger, 
as was mentioned before. 

Tue firft account that is given of woollen garments being 

"PAL, Roun ahidhcd yar se oe 


obferved 


Per. VIII. See. Ill.’ OF THE GERMANS. 129. 


abGavesits: exhibit figns of eletricity, when they were put 
off, after the flafhes of light they gave were known to be owing 

to electricity, was fent to the Royal Society by Mr. Coke of 
bee Ifle of Wight, who fays, that a lady of his acquaintance 
obferved it; and that it was alfo at laft found, that it was on- 
ly new flannel, and after fome time wearing, which'gave that 
appearance, and that this property was loft when it was 
wafhed. * - 
. Tue fame ; appearance, be obferves, upon another sila 
_was moft confpicuous in frofty weather; in which feafon he 

notice, that there is generally,’ not only agreater purity 

of the air, and abfence of moifture, but that all hairy and 
horny*fubftances (for hairs, as he fays, are only fmall horns) 
are more elaftic, and confequently fufceptible of, and more 
capable of exciting ftrong vibrations. He fays, that the flan- 
nel being rendered damp with fea water, and afterwards dry, — 
would heighten the eleétric appearances. + 

Bur though this was the firft appearance of the kind that 
was obferved, after it was*known to arife from electricity ; 
fimilar appearances had been feveral times noted before. 
Bartholin, who flourifhed in 1650, wrote a book De luce ani- 
malium, in which he fuppofes, that unctuous effluvia had a 
great thare in-thofe appearances. The fame writer fays, that 
Theodore Beza might be feen by a light proceeding from his 
eye brows; and that {parks would flath from the body of 
Charles Gonzaga, Duke of Mantua, upon being gently rub- 
bed. But he does not fay whether he had any particular hairy, 
or fealy fuperficies to his fkin. f 


* Phil. Tranf. abridged, Vol. 10. p. 343. + Ib. p.344. t Ib. p. 344. 
) ' Dr. 


ago. |) MISCELLANEOUS!» ° ) Parr. 


~ Dr. Simpson, who'publifhed aphilofophicab difgourfe on 
fermentation, dedicated to the Royal Society in’ 1675, alfo 
takes notice of the light proceeding from animals on frication, 
or peétation as he calls it, and inftances in the combing of a 
woman’s head, the curtying' of'a hort; and the ftroking of . 
cat’ 's back. * 
Mr. Crayton alfo, ina ‘etter? to Mr. ‘Boyle, dated Fuse 
23d. 1684, at James town in Virginia, gives him an account 
of a ftrange accident, as‘he calls it, which happened ‘to one 


Mrs. Sewall, whofe wearing apparel ‘emitted a flathing’ of, 


fparks, which were feen by feveral perfons. The like waiter 
ed to Lady Baltimore her mother in law. + 

I sHaxt conclude this fe@tion with what I can find, in this 
period, about poictuss3 5 the Lai of eledtricity, and meafar® 
ing its effects. 

Mr. Monnier the younger, whofe name has been fre- 


quently mentioned in the courfe of this hiftory, ufed glafs 


fpheroids inftead of globes, and endeavoured to increafe his 
ele&trical power by ufing feveral of thefe {pheroids” at a 
time; but he found, upon trial, that ‘they did. not. an- 
{wer his expectations ; and was thence difpofed to conclude, 
that there might be a ne p/us u/tra in the intenfity of electri- 
city, as well as in the heat communicated to boiling water.f 

Tue power of glafs in eleétrifying being found to be fo 
great, it is no’ wonder that philofophers fhould endeavour to 
find what kind of glafs was capable of being excited to the 
greateft degree. Among other propofals we find a very me- 


* Phil. Tranf. abridged, Vol. 10. p. 279. + Ib. p. 278. Ib. p. 330, 
morable 


Perr. VHI. Sec. Is) 9 DISCOVERIES. 131 


morable one communicated to the Royal Society, April 6th. 
1749s by Mr. George Mathias Bofé, of Wittemburgh. He 
fays, ‘that a’glafs' ball which has \oftén been émployed im vio~ 
lent diftillations, and other chymical operations ‘fends forth 
eleétricity incomparably more ftrong, than any glafs which 
had never been expofed to fo violent a fire. ‘This article is 
the more curious,: as it thew’ us how much philofophers at 
this ‘time piqued themfelvés upom difcoveries in eleétricity. 
He: afferts his being the firft perfon: who ever mentioned this 
notable circumftance, as he calls-it, and defires Dr. Watfon, — 


to whorn he communicated it, to.let him have the honour of 


that impravernent in the! Philofophical Tranfaétions * 


~~ Ir -was; within: this period that Dr. Watfon contrived té 


; ne ftrength of electricity by moiftening the’ rabbet 
of his globe, though he was not awate of all the reafons for 


~ it,, He obferved that the man who ftood on the’floory to x4 


¢ité ithe globe by his hand; did-it more ftrongly than a‘eufis 


_ ion,!. This, she days, be could not conceive tobe owing to 


any other difference, thaa.to his hand being more moift, and 
confequently more readily conducting the ¢letricity from the 
floor 5 wherefore he ordered, bis machine; and even-his euth- 
ion, to” be made, damp; and) then! found that the eledtricity 
was as\ ftrong as when -the) globe was: rubbed by ‘the 
handset oh: apc . : 

A GENTLEMAN at Chartres:in France, greatly increafed the 
effects of electricity by means of moifture; for aflerting which: 
he. is very;much ridiculed by the author of Hifoire de /’ Elec 
MlGkyisocact tad} cisvawes i 

Pat ®* Phil. Tranf. abridgedy Vol. 10.'p. 329. + Ibu p..g12, 
Habs mai es) . Mr. 


132. © MISCELLANEOUS! 00° "Piat'l 


. Mr. Wirson fays, ‘that if the cuthion (which he made of 
leather) was gilt with filver, brafs, or copper; it would do 
very well; and ‘that the filk’ line on which the conductor 
hung fhould be red or yellow. * ‘The table, he fays,' fhould 
ftand on moift ground, or a wire ‘pels Gury the ininchinié to 
the moift ground, ++ - 

Dr. Warson alfo found,’ ‘that dhoagh 1 no’ elettricity could 
be produced by rubbing: the globe with original: electrics 


perfeatly dry, yet that they anfwered’ very well when they © 


had been made moift; the water imbibed by thofe fubftances 
ferving as a canal of communication to the electricity between 
the hand, or the cufhion, and the globe ;' in the fame man- 
mer as the air, replete with vapours in damp weather, ‘pre- 
vents the accumulation of the electric matter in any confiders 
able degree, by condutting it as faft as excited to the neareft 
non electrics. He obferved, on the contrary, that moft ve-= 
getable fubftances, though made as dry as poffible, furnithed 
elericity, though in {mall quantities. He excited elegtricity 


not only from linen, cotton, &c. but even’ seer theet lead; - 


and a deal board. 

Tue Abbé Nollet fays, that he found oil of eee pli up- 
on a piece of woollen cloth excited glafs very powerfully, but 
that the leaft water mixed with it prevented the excitation.|| 

Mr. Bovrancér fays, that if two cylinders be made of 
the fame kind of glafs, and of the fame fathion, one of them 
tranfparent, and the other tinged with any colour, the tranf- 
parent cylinder will be excited more eafily than‘the colour- 
ed one.§ He acknowledges, however, that fometimes the 


® Wilfon’s Effay, p. 5,6. + Ib. p. 8, + + Tb. p. 380, |] Recherches, p. 186, 
stioig § Boulanger, p. 64. a - 
mof 


pene VOL: Sec. II. DISCOVERIES. 33 


_ moft tranfparent, and the moft brittle glafs is capable of ac- 
quiring” but little eleGricity.* In anothér place he fays, 
4 pri hl ‘of three or four lines in thicknefs will acquire 
, and a more lafting eletricity than a ‘eylinder of one 
2 thick. 4 He alfo fays, that one ge two hands, ‘or 
one cuthion is better than more. t 
tide Asour the fame time that Dr. Watfon biade his fife expe- 
_ timents upon the Leyden phial, Mr. Canton difcovered a 
_ method by which the quantity of cleétricity accumulated in 
_ the phial ‘might be meafured to a good degree of exaétnefs. 
_ He took the charged phial in his hand, and made it give a 
“fark to an infulated conduétor, which {park he took off with 
_ his other hand. This operation he repeated till the whole 
_ was ‘difcharged, and he eftimated the height of the charge by 
the number of the {parks. This is a pretty certain and exact 
_ method of knowing how high a phial das deen charged: but 
_ what eleétricians chiefly want is a method of afcertaining how 
high a phial is charged, or the exaét force of the charge 
while it is contained in the glafs. 

SomeTuine of this kind was done by Mr. Ellicott, in the 
fame year 1746. He propofed to eftimate the ftrength of 
common electrification, by its power to raife a weight in one 

cale of a balance, while the other fhould be held over the 
cleGtrified body, and pulled to it by its attractive power. || 

_ Tue Abbé Nollet applied the threads that Mr. Grey and 
and Du F aye, had ufed in electrical experiments, to fhow the 


aA 


a pale P: 64. ¢ Ibe p.rz5. «=f Ib. p. 136, ff Ib. p. 324. 
degree 


134 » DISCOVERIES OF... 1Partk 


degree of electricity: He hung two of them together, and 
obferved the angle of their divergence, by means.of the rays, 
of the fun, or the light of a candle, and their thadow upon.a 
board placed behind them. Mr. Waitz alfo thought of the 
fame kind of eleGtrometer, with this improvement, that he 
loaded the ends of the threads with fmall weights. *; 


Hiei, ps8. 


SECTION 


Pex. VIII. Sec. IV. “THE ABBE NOLLET. 135 
iy 2 pagent e if . <3 
Pits ck BCE LON IV, 


EXPERIMENTS ON ANIMAL AND OTHER ORGANIZED BODIES: 
_ IN THIS PERIOD, AND OTHER EXPERIMENTS CONNECTED 
" WITH THEM, MADE CHIEFLY By THE ABBE NOLLET. 


¥).0F 9 » 


1D ; : ‘ . ‘ 


ea, the effect of electricity upon human bodies? 
. LL had riot been attended to, farther than the mere thock’ 
of the Leyden phial. But we thall now fee.a curious. fet of » 
experiments’ on this fubje& exhibited by the Abbé Nollet. 
The Englith philofophers, who led the way in almoft every’ 
other application of electricity, were among the laft to try its 
effects upon animals, and other organized bodies. The only’ 
article that I’can find communicated by any Englifhman’ 
upon this fubjeét, before the difcoveries of the Abbé Nollet, 
is one of Mr. Trembley’s; who fays, that feveral perfons 
liad obferved, that while they were eleétrified, their pulfe 
beat a little fafter than before. He fays, that he him- 
felf, after having been cleétrified a long time together, had 
felt 


136... DISCOVERIES ©). /Parrl. 


felt an odd fenfation all over his body, and that yak perfons 
had felt very fharp pains after being eleétrified. ig 

Tue ingenious Abbé Nollet begins his experiments with 
the evaporation of fluids by eleétricity. They were made 
with the greateft attention, and the following obfervations 
were the refult of them. 

«« 1, ErecTricitTy augments the natural evaporation of 

** fluids; fince, excepting mercury, which is tooheavy ; and 

* the oil of olives, which is too vifcous, all the others which 

«¢ were tried fuffered a diminution which could not be afcrib- 

« ed to any other caufe than electricity. 

«2, ExecTriciTy augments the Srapscilin: of thofe 
-¢© fluids the moft, which are moft fubje& to evaporate of 

*« themfelves. For the volatile {pirit of fal ammoniac fuffer- 

« eda greater lofs than fpirit of wine, or turpentine; thefe 

*€ two more than common water; and water more than vine- 

« gar, or the folution of nitre. 

«3, Execrricity, has a greater effet. upon fluids 
when the veflels which contain them are non eleétrics ; 
*¢ the effects always feeming to be alittle greater when 
*¢ the veflels were of metal, than when ary were of 
«¢ glafs. 

_¢¢ 4, Tus increafed evaporation was more confiderable 
«¢ when the veffel which contained the liquor was more open, 
*¢ but the effects did not increafe in proportion to their aper- 
«¢ tures. For when thefe liquors were electrified in vefiels 
«¢ whofe aperture twas four inches in diameter, though they 


“ 
. 


* Phil. Tranf. abridged, Vol. 10. p. 321. 
«« prefented 


Per. VIII. Sec.IV.. THE ABBE NOLLET, 137, 


« prefented to” the air .a, furface fixteen times larger than 
« when: they- were contained’in veflels whofe aperture was 
one inch in diameter, they ‘were, neverthelefs, far from 
Sf © faffering a diminution proportioned to that difference. 

1g, 2 ExecrriricaTion does not make any liquors eva- 
9 node dinalighe thie res, ‘either of metal, or of glafs ; fince,” 
“ after experiments which were, continued ten hours, ‘there’ 
" « was found no-diminution of their weight, when the vef- 
« {els in which they were contained were well ftopped.” *- 

_Arrer having made experiments on fluids, he began ano-’ 
ther courfe on folids of various kinds, the refult of which’ 
was, that they loft weight only in proportion to the moifture| 
they contained, and the opennefs of their pores. + , 

Tur Abbé alfo extended his experiments to other fenfible’ 
qualities of bodies, as their fimell, their tafte, and chymical’ - 
properties; but found no change in any of them, after a’ 
ftrong and continued electrification of a variety of fubftances. 
EleGtrification did not affect the power of the magnet, ‘and’ 
neither Pagiare nor: accelerated the heating or coming of 
bodies. + _ , 

He then. dow Bn to the eleétrification of copies tubes,” 
fall of ‘water; it having »been obferyed| by Mr. Boze, who 
communicated ‘the obfervation ito. Mr. Nollet,|} that» the: 
water would iflue in a conftant ftream when they were elec- 
trified; whereas it would only drop very flowly without that 
Operation. Every body, at firft ight, would judge that the: 
fiream was accelerated, and that the eleétrified: veflel: would 


* Nollet’sRecherches, \p. 327, Sig + Ib. p. 335. t Ib. p. 341. ff Ib. p. 343- 
é 3 foon 


138 DISCOVERIES OF Parr I. 


foon; be empty: but this aceurate philofopher was unwilling 


to rely on firft appearances, and therefore refolved to afcertain. 


the fag, by meafuring the, time, and the quantity of liquor 


running out. And, in order to know if the acceleration, 


fuppofing there were any, was uniform, during the whole 


time of the running out, ,he made ufe of yefiels of different: 
capacities, terminating in pipes of different bores, from three: 


lines in diameter, 'to.the fmalleft capillaries... « 

As’the Abbé did not find it fo eafy a matter to draw a fafe 
conclufion in this cafe as might at firft be imagined, he-gives 
us in. ‘profs the following refult of aboye an Latest ex- 
periments, *. 


«1, Tue electrified ftream, though it dividers: and car-) 


** ries the liquid farther, is neither fenfibly accelerated nor 
*¢ retarded, when the pipe through which it iffues is not lefs 
‘© than a line in diameter. » 

. «© 2. Unper this diameter, if the tube is wide enough to 
“¢ Jet the liquid run ina continued ftream, electricity accele- 
rates it a little; but lefs than a.perfon would imagine, if he 
«* judged by the number of jets which are formed, and by 
‘© the diftance to which they go. ; 

“<-3. Ip the tube be a capillary one, from which the wa- 
“« ter only drops naturally, the eleétrified: jet not.only be- 

«* comes a continued ftream, and even divided into feveral 
«« ftreams, but is alfo confiderably accelerated; and the 
fmaller the capillary tube is, the greater, in proportion, is 
this acceleration. 2 


* Recherches, p. 327. Phil, ‘Tranf, abridged, Vol. 10. p. +382. 


4s So 


ond 


- Per.VIII. Sec.IV.) THE) ABBE NOLLET. 139 


(of gu So great, vis the effec of ‘the elefttic- virtue, that it 
anenre ‘water ina conftant {tream out:ofiavery final — 
< capillary tube, out of which it had not re, been able 


red 


‘Tuer ft Tiuhgrisiaualilorsf cheferéciprintdnte, 1as) thie i in- 
genious Abbé acknowledges, are»thofe which fuppofé a re- 
tardation of the eledtrified current, and:he long doubted the 
, abt 5 but a great number of experiments, carefully noted in 
, ournal, obliged him to admit it, though till with hefita- 
tion, and to account for it in the. beft manner he'could 
‘which, indeed, was not very fatisfactory. *) Aoi 
‘Tue beautiful appearance of thefe: deeitsk ofl elettified 


we water, when ‘the experiment was: exhibited ‘in the dark, ‘is 


qeaicalasiy! deferibed: by this ‘author, after’ Melicey agi and 
‘Gordon, who firft obferved it. ++ 710 ) 
Purse laft-experiments ferved as'a bafis to the Abbé's Se 
- ture enquiries. He confidered all organized bodies as affem- 
_ blages of capillary tubes, filled with a fluid that'tends to run 
_ through ‘them, ‘and often to iffue out of them. In confe- 
quence of this idea, he imagined, that the ele&tic virtue 
tmhight poflibly communicate fome motion to the fap of vege- 
tables, and alfo augment the infenfible perfpiration of ani- 
mals. He ‘began with the following experiments, the re= 
ibs of which confirmed his fuppofition. ‘t 
He eleétrified, for four or five hours together, ifs, green 
hin; and {punges, dipped in water which he had carefully 
Weighed; and found that, after the experiment, all thofe bo- 


“Recherches, p. 351, + Ib. p. 354. ¢ Ib. p. 355- 
a2 dies 


ayo . 2c iDISCOVERIES OF Part I. 


dies were’ remarkably lighter‘ than others of the fame kind, 
‘weighed with them, both before and: after. the re 
-and kept in the fame place and temper.* . _ 

Tue electrification of growing vegetables was firtt begun 
in Britain, Mr. Maimbray at) Edinburgh | electrified two 
myrtle trees, during the: whole month of October 17465 
when they put forth {mall branches and bloffoms fooner than 
other fhrubs of the fame kind, which had: not been cleétrifi- 
ed... Mr. Nollet; hearing of this Ga ea ccaua ~_ incou- 
raged to try it himfelf. +. it int 

He took two garden peas filled a the ena ee a 
and fowed with the fame feeds. He kept them conftantly in the 
fame place, and took the fame care of them; except that 
one of the two was electrified fifteen days together, for two 
or three, and fometimes four hours a day. The confeqience 
-was, that the electrified pot always thewed the {prouts of its 
feeds two or three days fooner than the other. It alfo 
threw out a greater number of fhoots, and thofe longer in a 
given time; which made him believe, that the electric vir- 
tue helped to open and difplay the germs, and thereby to 
facilitate the growth of plants. This, however, our cautious 
philofopher only calls a conjecture, which required further 
confirmation. The feafon, he fays, was then too far ad- 
vanced to allow him to make as many experiments as he 
could have wifhed, , but he fays the next courfe of experi- 
ments had greater certainty, and they are. not lefs intereft- 
ing. } 

* Phil Tranf. abridged, t, Vo. 104 ‘abrdiged, ree er: p- 356: t Db. p. 358, &e. 
THE 


“Per. VIII. Sec. IV. THE ABBE NOLLET. 141 


©) Tue fame’ experiments were carrying on about the fame 
‘time ‘by Mrv Jallabert; Mr. Boze, and the Abbé Menon, 
"principal of the college of Bueil at Angers, who all drew the 
* fame conclufions from them.'* © 
. "Pe Abbé chofe feveral pairs of animals of different kinds, 
“eats, pigeons, chaffinches, {parrows, &c. All thefe he put 
into feparate wooden cages, and weighed them. One of 
‘each pair he eleétrified for five or fix hours together, and 
‘then weighed them again. The refult-was, that the electri- 
‘fied cat was’ commonly fixty five or feventy grains lighter 
‘ghan the other, the pigeon from thirty five to thirty cight 
_ grains, the chaffinch or {parrow fix or feven grains. In or- 
ger to have nothing to charge upon the difference that might 
_ -arife from the temperament of the individuals he happened 
to pitch upon; he repeated the fame experiments, by elec- 
trifying that animal of each pair which had not been electri- 
fied before ; and, notwithftanding fome fmall varieties which 
happened, the ele@trified animal was conftantly lighter than 
the other in proportion. ++ 
‘Arter thefe experiments, he had no-doubt but that elec- 
tricity increafed the infenfible perfpiration of animals, but it 
was not certain whether this increafe was in the ratio of their 
bulks, or in that of their furfaces. The Abbé’s opinion was, 
“hat it was neither im the one, nor the other, ftrictly fpeak— 
ing, but in a ratio much more nearly approaching the latter 
‘than the’ former; fo that he imagined, there was no room 
“to apprehend, that a human perfon electrified would lofe 


© Recherches, p. 357 t Ib: p. 366, &e. 


near 


142...) |) (DISCOVERIES OF ~ - Parrt'l. 


near a fiftieth part of his weight, as it appeared to him that it 
had happened to one fort of bird; nor the r4oth. part, as 'to 
the pigeon, &c. All that he had then obferved upon that 
head was, that a young man or woman, between the ages of 
twenty and thirty, from being electrified five hours together, 
had loft feveral ounces of their weight, more than they were 
wont to lofe when they were not electrified. * 

Tue Abbé obferves, that no inconvenience whatever was 
felt by the perfons who fubmitted to be eleétrified in this 
manner. They only found themfelves a little exhaufted, and 
had got a better appetite. He adds, that none of thein found 


themfelves fenfibly warmer, and that he could not eH ; 


that their pulfe was increafed. ¢ 

Tuese laft experiments on human bodies,: ‘he juftly ob- 
ferves, are difficult to purfue with exaétnefs, becaufe the 
cloathing, which cannot ftri€ly be compared to the-hairs or 
feathers of animals, retains a confiderable fhare of the per- 
fpired matter, and prevents our forming a good judgment of 
the whole effect of the electric virtue. 

Tue foregoing experiments, he fays, convinced him of 
the reality of the effuent matter, carrying away with it the 
perfpirable parts of bodies, and what could be evaporated 
from their furfaces. And he was convinced of the affuent 
matter, by obferving all thofe effects produced, if, inftead of 
electrifying bodies themfelves, they were only brought near 
a large body which was eleétrified. Hemoifteneda thick fpunge 
in water, and cut it into two pieces, and then weighed the 


* Phil. Tranf. abridged, Vol. 10. p. 384. Recherches, p. 382. ¢ Ib. p. 389. 
; parts 


| Per.VIII. Sec. IV. THE ABBE NOLLET. 143 


parts feparately, and placing the whole near a large eleétrified 
body ;. he found that, after an: eleétrification of five or fix | 
hours, that part of the fpunge which was nearer to the elec- 
had loft more weight than the other. From this 
fa@ he: concluded, that. if any part of an animal body was 
prefented to a large elettrified fubftance,. it would perfpire 
more than the other, and that perhaps obftructions might by 
a means be removed from the pores of i it. * ; 
Tur experiments above recited of Mr. Nollet by no means 
sepa theEnglith philofophers, and particularly Mr. Ellicott, 
experiments. to refute. the theory which the au- 
thor had deduced from them. He obferved that the fyphon, 
though elettrified,. would only. deliver the water by drops, if 
bafon in which the water was contained was eleétrified 
: “too. But. this does not invalidate Mr. Nollet’s curious expe- 
riments upon the fubjec of evaporation and perfpiration. 
For when an animal body is. eleétrified, there is always-non. 
cleric matter enough in the atmofphere, to anfwer the pur- 
pofe of the unele@trified bafon, in the experiment of the ca- 
pillary tube; thereby to caufe a continual exhalation of the 
perfpirable matter from the’pores of the fkin. Befides, the 
capillary tube will, in fact, unite the water in a conftant 
ftream, when it has only the open air to throw it into. In 
all debates upon fubjeéts in natural philofophy, facts ought 
only to be oppofed to faéts. The veracity of the Abbé Nol- 
let is not to be called in queftion; though it muft be ac- 
knowledged, that, in his later writings, at a time when his 


s 
* Phil. Tranf. abridged, Vol. 10. p. 385. 
favourite 


ae a DISCOVERIES OF _ Parrl,. 


favourite fyftem was in danger, he makes many miftakes with 
refpeét to the faéts that nearly affect it. 

To account for the appearance of light, which ice in 
fome cafes, to iffue from a non eleétric body prefented to an 


excited eletric, and which Mr. Nollet thought to be the: 


affluent matter,’ Mr. Ellicott fappofes that it was the light 
which had come from the eleétric. In accounting. for 
the fufpenfion of leaf gold between an electrified and an un- 
electrified plate, Mr. Ellicott’s theory made it neceflary to fup- 
pofe (what Dr. Franklin afterwards found not to be fact) that 
the leaf gold will always be fufpended nearer the unclectrified 
than the eledtrified plate. 

In his anfwer to Mr. Nollet, Mr. Ellicott alfo endeavours 
to account for the electric matter iffuing from a point at the 
extremity of the conductor, more fenfibly than if it had ter- 
minated round or flat. He fays that the effluvia, in rufhing 
from the globe along the conductor, as they approached the 
point, were brought .nearer together, and therefore: were 
denfer there than in any other part of the rod. Confequently,’ 
he fays, if the light be owing to the denfity and velocity of 
the effluvia, it will be vifible at the point, and no where 
elfe. This, as far as I can find, was the firft attempt to ac- 
count for this phenomenon; but, it by no means accounts 


for the whole virtue of the conductor being diffipated from - 
fuch points. Indeed, it is no wonder that the influence of - 


points, which are but imperfectly underftood even at this day, 
furnifhed too difficult a problem fo many years ago. * 


* Phil. Tranf, abridged, Vol. 10. ps 393+ 


Pex. VII. Sec.IV.. THE ABBE NOLLET. 145 


Ir will, now, be univerfally acknowledged, that there was 
very great merit in thefe experiments of the Abbé Nollet, 
made upon animal and other organized bodies. He opened 
a new and noble field of electrical difcoveries, and he purfued 
them with great attention, perfeverance, andexpence. This 
laft circumftance, I fuppofe, may have been the reafon why 
his experiments have not, as far as I can find, been refumed 
and purfued by any electrician fince his time, though there 
‘feems to be great room to improve upon what he began. 
The only method in which they can be conduéted to any 
purpofe, would be by the help of a machine for perpetual 
ele&trification, to go by wind or water ; which would, like- 
wife, ferve for many other capital experiments in ele¢tricity. 
This application of electricity, in particular, may perhaps be 
of more ufe in medicine, than any igalter mode in’ ae 
dee dashesto: been adminiftered. 


U SECTION 


146 Tur HISTORY or tue Parrl. 


S EoCiT.L.0 Noas¥. 


THE HISTORY OF THE MEDICATED TUBES, AND OTHER 
COMMUNICATIONS OF MEDICINAL VIRTUES BY ELECTRI- 
CITY, WITH THEIR VARIOUS RERU TATIONS 


N the courfe of this hiftory we have feen frequent inftances 
of felf deception, for want of attending to all the effen- 
tial circumftances of faéts; but nothing we have yet feen 
equals what was exhibited in the years 1747 and 1748. Mr. 
Grey’s deceptions were chiefly owing to his miftaking the 
caufe of real appearances ; but in this cafe we can hardly help 
thinking; that, not only the imagination and judgment, but 
even all the external fenfes of philofophers muft have been 
impofed upon. It was afferted by Signior Pivati at Venice 
(who has all the merit of thefe extraordinary difcoveries) and, 
after him, by Mr. Verati at Bologna, Mr. Bianchi at Turin, 
and Mr. Winkler at Leipfick, that if odorous fubftances were 
confined in glafs veffels, and the veffels excited, the odours 
and other medicinal virtues would tranfpire through the glafs, 
infec 


- per.VIll. See.V. MEDICATED TUBES. 147 


infe€&t the atmofphere of the conduétor, ‘and’communicate the 
virtae to all perfons in contaét with it; alfo that thofe fubftan- 
ces, held in the hands of perfons electrified, would commu- 
nicate their virtues to them; fo that ‘medicines might be 


- made to opefate without being taken into the ftomach. They 


even pretended to have wrought many cures by the help of 
- @le@ricity applied this way. Some of the more curious of 
_ thefe pretended experiments deferve to be recorded, for the 
entertainment and inftruction of pofterity. 
" ‘Pur forementioned Signior Johannes Francifco Pivati, a 
serfon of eminence at Venice, fays, in an Italian ‘epiftle, 
| printed at Venice with all the ufual licences, in the year 1747; 
that a manifeft example of the virtue of electricity was fhown 
in the balfam of Peru, which was fo concealed in a glafs cy- 
linder, ‘that, before the excitation of it, not the leaft {mell 
could ee ook, be diftovered. A’ mah who, ‘having a 
pain in} is fide, had applied hyffop to it by the advice’ of 4 
phyfician, ‘approached the cylinder thus prepared, and was 
eleétrified by it. The confequence was, that when he went 
home and fell afleep, he fweated, and the power of the balfam 
was fo difperfed, that even his cloaths, the bed, and cham- 
ber, all fmelled of it. When he had tefrethed himfelf by 
‘this fleep, he combed his head, and found the balfam to have 
i netrated his hair; fo that the very comb was perfumed. * 


Tue next day, Signior Pivati fays, he electrified a man in 


“health in the fame manner, who knew nothing of what had 
_ een done before. On his going into company half an hour 


* Phil. Tranf. abridged, Vol. 10. p. 400. 
U2 afterwards, 


148 _ Tue HISTORY or rue. Parr h 


afterwards, he found a gradual warmth diffufing itfelf through 
his whole body, and he grew more lively and chearful than 
ufual. His companion was furprized at an odour, and could 
not imagine whence it proceeded, but he himfelf perceived 
that the fume arofe from his own body, at which he alfo was 
much furprized, not having the leaft fufpicion that it was 
owing to the operation which had been performed upon him 
by Signior Pivati. * ; 

Mr. Wink er of Leipfick, being ftruck with fo extraor- 
dinary a relation, fays, that he was defirous of trying the 
power of electricity on certain fubftances in the fame manner, 
and that he found the event to confirm whathad been related.-+ 

He put fome beaten fulphur into a glafs {phere, fo well 
covered and ftopped, that, on turning it aver the fire, there 
was not the leaft fmell of fulphur perceived. When the 
{phere was cold he electrified it; when, immediately, a ful- 
phureous vapour iffued from it, and, on continuing the elec- 
tricity, filled the air, fo as to be fmelled at the diftance of 
more than ten feet. He called in a friend well verfed in 
electricity, profeffor Haubold, and feveral others, as wit- 
neffes and judges of this fat; but they were prefently driven 
away by the ftench of the fulphur. He ftaid a little longer 
himfelf in this {ulphureous atmofphere, and was fo impregnated 
thereby, that his body, cloaths, and breath retained the o- 
dour, even the next day. On repeating this experiment in 
the prefence of a perfon who was converfant with the effects 


®* Phil. Tranf. abridged, Vol. 10. p. 401. + Ib. 
‘ of 


Pex. VIII. Sec.V. MEDICATED TUBES. 149 


of fulphur, the figns of an inflamed blood s were vifible i in his 
_ mouth on the third day. * 

Arter this he tried the effect of a more agreeable {mell, 
and filled the {phere with cinnamon. When he had heated 
this as before, the fmell of cinnamon was foon perceived by 
the company, and the whole room was in a fhort time fo 
perfumed by it, that it immediately affected the nofes of all 
who came in, and the odour remained the next day. 

- He tried the balfam of Peru with the like fuccefs, when 
his abovementioned friend (whofe teftimony, he fays, he did 
not care to be without) after he had. received the power of 
9 fmelled fo ftrong of it, that, going abroad to 

, he was often afked by the company what perfume he 
iy re him. The next day, when Mr.. Winkler was 
drinking tea, he fays, he found an unufual fweet tafte, ow- 
ing to the fumes of the balfam that ftill pnisen| in et 
mouth. + © 

In a few days, when the fphere had loft all the {cent of 
the balfam, they let a chain out of the chamber window, and 
extended it through the open air, into another room detached 
from the former. Here they fufpended the chain on filken 
lines, and gave it into the hand of a man, who alfo ftood on 
extended filken lines, and knew nothing of their purpofe. 
When the eleétricity had been excited for fome time, the 

. Man was afked whether he fmelled any thing; and, on 
+ fnuffing up his nofe, he faid he did. Being afked again what 
fmell it was, he fuid he did not know. When the eleétrifi- 


* Phil. Tranf. abridged, Vol. 10. p. 401. + Ib. 


cation 


150 Tur HISTORY or THe Part I. 


cation had been continued for about a quarter of anvhour, the 
room felled fo ftrong of it, that the man, who knew no- 
thing of the balfam, faid his nofe was filled with a fweet 
fell, like that of fome fort of balfam. After fleeping in a 
houfe, a confiderable diftance from the room where the ex- 
periment was tried, he rofe very chearful in the morning, 
and found a-more pleafant tafte than ordinary in his tea. * 

I sHALt only give an account of two inftances of the effe& 
of medicine applied in this manner. The affiftance of Signior 
Pivati, the celebrated inventor of this improvement in elec- 
tricity, was implored by a young gentleman, who was mi- 
ferably afflicted by a quantity of corrupted matter collected 
in his foot, that eluded all the attempts of the phy- 
ficians. Signior Pivati filled a glafs cylinder with proper 
materials; and, having electrified it, drew fparks from the 
part affected, and continued the operation for fome minutes. 
When the patient went to bed, he had a good night, anda 


‘mitigation of his pain. When he awaked in the morning, he 


found a fmall red tubercle on his foot, which only itched, as 
if a cold humour had flowed through the inner part of his foot. 
He f{weated every night for eight days together, and at the 
end of that time was perfeétly well. 

* Arter this, Signior Donadoni, bifhop of Sebenico, came 
to Signior Pivati, attended by his phyfician and fome friends. 


His Jordthip was at that time feventy five years old, and had . 


been affliéted with pains in his hands and feet for feveral 
years.” The gout had fo affeéted his fingers, ‘that he was not 


© Phil. Tranf. abridged, Vol. io. p. jor. 
able 


Per. VE. Sec.V.. MEDICATED TUBES. 151 


able to move them and his legs, fo that he could not bend 
his knees. In this deplorable fituation, the poor old bithop 
intreated Signior Pivati to try the effects of eleGtricity on him., 
bred aici undertook it, and’ proceeded after the follow- 
ry il He filled a glafs cylinder with difcutient medi- 
and managed it fo, that the electric virtue might en- 
er into the patient, who prefently felt fome unufual com- 
é) ae his fingers; and the aétion of electricity had been 
tinued but two minutes, when his lordthip opened and 
fhut both his hands, gave a hearty {queeze to one of his at- 
tend: nts, got up, walked, {mote his hands together, helped 
to a chair, and fat down, wondering at his own 
‘and hardly knowing whether it was not a dream. 
; At length he walked out of the chamber down ftairs, with- 
out any ‘afliftance, and. with all the alacrity of a young 
t » man. # PIO] Bs a 
A VARIETY of fats na this nature being publithed, and 
; y well attefted, engaged all the eleétricians of Eu- 
S0pC" to repeat thefe experiments; but none of them could 
facceed but thofe mentioned above. An excellent remark of 
Mr. Baker’s, who advifed'trying all thefe experiments, not~ 
withftanding their feeming very improbable, deferves to be 
. quoted here. «* Romantic as thefe things may feem, they 
« fhould Not be abfolutely condemned without a fair trial, 
* fince we all, I believe, remember the time, when thofe 
“ phenomena in elettricity, which are now the moft com- 
- “ mon and familiar tous, would have been thought deferying 


* Phil. Tranf. abridged, Vol. 10. p. 403- 
ae as 


152 . Toe HISTORY of rHe- ‘Part Ie 


«< as little credit as the cafes under confideration may feem to 
*s do, had accounts of them been fent to us from Rome?’ 
«« Venice, or Bologna, and had we never. experienced tenn 
«* ourfelves. * 
. To fee thefe wonders, and to be affured of their truth or 
fallacy, Mr. Nollet, who was deeply interefted in every thing 
that related to his favourite ftudy, and who fet no bounds to 
his labour or expences, in the purfuit of truth, even paffed 
the Alps, and travelled into Italy, where he vifited all the 
gentlemen who had publifhed any account of thefe experi- 
ments. . But though he engaged them to repeat theit expe- 
riments in his prefence, and upon himfelf; and. though he 
made it his bufinefs to get all the beft information he could 
concerning them, he returned, convinced that the accounts 
of cures had been much exaggerated ; that in no one inftance 
had odours been found to tranfpire through the pores of ex- 
cited glafs ; and that no drugs had ever communicated their 
virtues to perfons who only held them in their hands while 
electrified. 

He had no doubt, however, but that, by continued e- 
leGtrification, without drugs, feveral perfons had found con- 


fiderable relief in various diforders; particularly, that a pa~ 


ralytic perfon had been cured at Geneva, and that a perfon 
deaf of one ear, a footman. who had a violent pain in: his 
head, and a woman who had a. diforder in her eyes were 
cured at Bologna. + 

Tue Englith philofophers fhowed no lefs attention to this 


* Phil. Tranf. abridged, Vol. 10. p. 406, + Ibs p. 413, &c. 
fubje& 


so . 


Per: VII. Sec.V. MEDICATED TUBES. 153 


Sioaabesis Abbé Nolet. The. Royal Society had re~ 
unt from Mr. Winkler of his experiments, to 
pees the’ tranfudation of odoriferous matter through. the 
pores of excited glafs ; and none of them fucceeding here, the 
_ fecretary was defired to write to Mr. Winkler, in the name 
of the fociety, _defiring him to tranfmit to them, not only a 
account of his manner of making: the experi- 
ments, but likewife fome globes ond “rain fitted up by 
himfelf, for that purpofe, 
v9 Turse veflels, and directions seve to ufe them, Mr. Wink- 
ler ad ally fent, and the experiments were made with every 
precaution, at the houfe of Dr. Watfon (the moft in- 
- terefted: and active perfon in the kingdom jin every thing re+ 
tating to'electricity) on the 12th of June 1751. There were 
-prefent Martin Folkes prefident of the Royal Society, Nicho- 
_ Jas Mann Efq. vice »prefident, Dr. Mortimer, * and Peter 
- Daval Efq. fecretaries, Mr. Canton a fellow, and Mr. Shro- 
der, ‘a gentleman of -diftinétion, »well known to, and corref- 
ponding with Mr. Winkler. ‘But, notwithftanding all the 
pains thefe gentlemen took, purfuing, with the utmoft exact- 
nefs, the ditections of Mr. Winkler, and alfo ufing: methods 
of their own, which they thought ftill better adapted to force 
the effluvia, through: the glafs, they were unfaccefsful, They 
were not able to verify Mr. Winkler’s ree eR even in 
one fingle inftance. * 
;) Bur perhaps the moft fatiokattdey parapet both of this 
pretended tranfudation of odours; and the medicinal effedtsiof 


sone) * Phil. Tranf, abridged, Vol.47. p. 231. 


eithod D4 electricity 


154 “T"Maio BIOZIE’S v Parr I. 


electricity abovementioned,was made at Venice, the very place 
where this medical electricity took its rife. The experiments 
were made by Dr. Bianchini, profeffor of medicine; in the 
prefence of a great number of witneffes, many of them pre- 
judiced in favour of the pretended difcoveries ; but they were 
all forced tobe convinced of their futility, by the evidence 
of facts; and by experiments made with the greateft care and 
accuracy, * é sil i 
Arter the publication of thefe accounts properly attefted, 
every unprejudiced perfon was fatisfied, that the pretended 
difcoveries from Italy and Leipfick, which had raifed the ex- 
pectation of all:the electricians in: Europe, ‘had no foundation 
in fact ; and that no method had yet:been difcovered whereby 
the power of medicine could by eleGricity be made to infinu- 
ate itfelf into the human body. -- ~Dr. Franklin alfo fhowed 
by feveral experiments the impoflibility of mixing the efflu- 
via or virtue of medicines with the electric fluid. t 
- In fome refpects fimilar tothe experiments with the medicat- 
ed tubes (as thofe mentioned above were ufually called) was that 
of profeffor Boze of Wittemburgh, which he termed the dea> 
tification ; and which, for a long time, employed other elec- 
tricians to repeat after him, but to no:purpofe. His defcrip- 
tion of this famous experiment was, that: if, in eleGtrifying, 
large globes were employed, and the electrified perfon were 
placed upon large cakes of pitch, a lambent flame would by 
degrees arife from the pitch, and fpread itfelf round his feet ; 
and that from thence it would be propagated to his knees and 


* Phil. Tranf. abridged,’ Vol. 481 'p. 399: # Ib. p. 406. t'Franklin’s Letters, p. 82. 
; body, 


™ 


Par: VIII. Src. V2) BEATIFICATION. 1555 
"body, fill, at'laft,: it afeended to hishead;. that then, by 


reed gay rie a othe perfon’ 's head would be fur- 
ca glory, fuch a one, «in fome meafure, as is re~ 
prefented by ‘painters in» their pene the heads of 
faints.* 
- ‘Turs'experiment, as well as: thie of the sédicated sates, 
fet all the electricians in Europe to work, and put them toa 
_ great-deal of expence ; but none of them could fucceed, fo as 
Raa’ an appearance any ithing like’ that -defcribed by 
Mr. Boze. No perfon took mofe paifis in this bufinefs:than 
Dr. Watfon. | ‘He himfelf underwent ‘the operation feveral 
times," fupported by folid eleétrics three feet high.) Upon 
being eleétrified very ftrongly, he. found, as he fays, feveral 
other perfons alfo did, a tingling upon’ the {kin of his head, 
and inomany’ parts of his body,»or fuch a fenfation:as would 
be felt from @ vait number of infe&s crawling over him at the 
feet fame time and.he conftantly obferved the fenfation to be the 
ss Breateft in thofe parts of his body which were neareft to any 
aon cleétricy but fill no light appeared upon his head, though 
the experiment was feveral times. mabe in: ame ddtk, and with 
fome continwances-f 9 | 
* Ar'length the Doéor, eieaticls ne chile fruitlets at- 
‘tempts, wrote to the profeffor, and’ his ‘anfwer fhowed that 
the whole liad been a mere trick. | He candidly acknowledg- 
ed, thatthe had made ufe ofa fait of armour, which was 
‘decked with many bullions of fteel; fome pointed like nails, 


* Phil. Tranf abridged, Vol. 10. p. 411. + Tb. 


Ww Ga) fome 


156 MISCELLANEOUS ©? | Parr. 


fome like wedges, and fome pyramidal ; ‘and that when the 
eletrization was very vigorous, the edges of the helmet would’ 
dart forth rays, fomething like thofe which are painted on 
the heads of faints. And this was all his boafted beati- 
fication. * 

Turs fame Mr. Boze, who feemis to have had a fingular affec- 
tation of fomething myfterious and marvellous in -his experi- 
ments, in a letter to the Royal Society at London, faid that 
he had been able, by electricity only, to invert the poles ofa 
natural magnet, to'deftroy their virtue, and reftore it again, 
but he did not defcribe his method. + \' Confidering that no 
perfon in England could fucceed in this attempt, and that 
we are now able to do it but imperfectly, it is hardly proba- 
ble that he did it at all. 

Tuere feems to have been fome abdopetser i in an expéri- 
ment which the worthy and excellent Dr. Hales communicated 
to the Royal Society this year, when he fays, that he obferv- 
ed the eleétric fpark from warm iron to be of a bright light 
colour ; from warm copper, green; and from a warm egg, 
of a yellowifh flame colour. . Thefe experiments, he faid, 
feemed to argue, that fome particles of thofe different bodies 
were carried off in the eleétric flathes, whence thofe different 
colours were exhibited. ¢ 

I sax conclude this fe@tion, which might juftly be in- 
titled the marvellous, with mentioning the furprizing effec 
of an electric {park in fetting fire to a fuftian frock, on a fon 


* Phil Tranf. abridged, V Vol. 10. # Willon's Effay, p. 21 
Faria RL me Yo Pe 219 : 
° 


Per. VIII. Sec. V. EXPERIMENTS.- 157 


of Mr. Robert Roche, when he was electrified for fome difor- 
der. I do not queftion the fact. The experiment was re- 
peated, and it anfwered again as well as at the firft time, when 
it was merely accidental. The paper containing this account 
was read at the Royal Society on the 2gth of May 1748. * 


# Phil, Tranf. abridged, Vol, 10. p. 406. 


PERIOD 


158 Tue DISCOVERIES or... Parrl 


PERIOD . 3X. 


Tue EXPERIMENTS AND DISCOVERIES oF Dr. FRANKLIN. 


Sve 1 OCN aT. 


Dr. FRANKLIN’s piscovERIES CONCERNING THE LEYDEN 
PHIAL, AND OTHERS CONNECTED WITH THEM. 


E have hitherto feen what had been done in eleétri- 

city by the Englith philofophers, and thofe on the 
continent of Europe, till about the year 1750; but our at- 
tention is now ftrongly called to what was doing on the con- 
tinent of America; where Dr. Franklin and his friends were 
as afliduous in trying experiments, and as fuccefsful in mak- 
ing difcoveries, as any of their brethren in Europe. For this 
purpofe, we muft look back a few years. As Dr. Franklin’s 
difcoveries were made intirely independant of any in Europe, 
T was unwilling to interrupt the former general account, by 
or. aera introducing 


Per.IX. Sec. Da. FRANKLIN. 159 


introducing them in their proper year. For the fame reafon, 
- Bi imagine it will be generally more agreeable to fee, at one 
_ view; ‘what was done in America for fome confiderable {pace 
of time, without interrupting this account with what was 
doing, in the mean time, in Europe. I thall, therefore, di- 
geft, in the beft manner I can, the three firft publications of 
Dr. ‘Franklin, entitled New Experiments and Obfervations on 
Eleitricity, made at Philadelphia in America, communicated in 
feveral letters to Peter Collinfon Efq. of London, fellow of 
the Royal Society ; ‘the firft of which i is dated July a8th 1747» 
and the laft April 18th 1754. 

_ NoTHine was ever written upon the fabjea of electricity 
which: “was. more generally read, and admired in all parts of 
Europe than thefe letters. There is hardly any European 
Tanguage into which they have not been tranflated; and, as 
if this were not fufficient to make them properly known, a 
tranflation of them has lately been made into Latin. It is 
not eafy to fay, whether we are moft pleafed with the fimpli- 
city and perfpicuity with which thefe letters are written, the 
-modefty with which the author propofes every hypothefis of 
his. own, or the noble franknefs with which he relates his 
amiftakes, when they were corrected by ean experi- 
ments. 

Tuoucs the Englith have not. been tmihibéed in acknow- 
Jedging the great merit of this philofopher, he has had the 
fingular good fortune to be, perhaps, even more celebrated 
abroad than at home; fo that to form a juft idea of the great 
and deferved reputation of Dr. Franklin, we muft read the 
aoragh publications on the fubject of electricity ; in many of 


which 


160 THe DISCOVERIES of Part I. 


which the terms Franklinifm, Franklinift, and the Franklini- 
an fyftem occur in almoft every page. In confequence of this, 
Dr. Franklin’s principles bid fair to be handed down to pof- 
terity, as equally expreflive of the true principles of electrici- 
ty, as the Newtonian philofophy is of the true fyftem of na- 
ture in general. 

Tue zeal of Dr. Franklin’s friends, . and his reputation, 
were confiderably increafed by the oppofition which the Abbé 
Nollet made to his theory. The Abbé, however, never had 
any confiderable feconds in the controverfy, and thofe he 
had, I am informed, have all deferted him. ; 

Tue rife of Dr. Franklin’s fame in France was firft occa- 
fioned by a bad tranflation of his letters falling into the hands 


of Mr. Buffon, intendant of the French king’s gardens, and 


author of the Natural Hiftory for which he is famous. This 


gentleman, having fuccefsfully repeated Dr. Franklin’s expe- 


riments, engaged a friend of his, Mr. Dalibard, to revife 


the tranflation ; which was afterwards publithed, with a thort 
hiftory of electricity prefixed to it, and met with a very 


favourable reception from all ranks of people. What contri- 
buted not a little to the fuccefs of this publication, and to 
bring Dr. Franklin’s principles into vogue in France, was a 
friend of Mr. Dallibard’s exhibiting Dr. Franklin’s experiments 


for money. All the world, in a manner, flocked to fee thefe 
new experiments, and all returned full of sdmizstipn, for = 
inventor of them. * 


Dr. Franxuin had difcovered, as well as Dr. Waten, 


* Nollet’s Letters, Vol. 1. Pe 4 


. that 


| PersIX. Sec.) De. FRANKLIN. 16: 


that the eletric matter was not created, but colle&ed by 
friGtion, from the neighbouring non ele&tric bodies. He had 
obferved, that’ it was impoffible for a man to ele@trify him- 
: felf, though he ftood upon glafs or wax; for that the tube 
could communidate to himno more eleétricity than it had 
received from him in the a of excitation. He had obferved, 
that if two ‘perfons ftood upon wax, one of which rubbed the 
be, and the other took the fire from it, they would both 
‘appear to be elettrified; ‘that if they touched one another 
ter’ that operation, a ftronger {park would be perceived’ be- 
- tween”them, than when any other perfon touched either of 
them’; and that {uch a fpark: would take away the ele@ticity 
OF both! *!! Saf hin |; ste? orft Miv iV 
” 'Tuese experiments led the Dottor to think; that the clec- 
tric uid Was conveyed from the perfon who rubbed the tube 
to him’ who" touched it; “which ‘introduced fome terms in 
eledtricity that had not been ufed before, but! have continiied 
if wfe everfinee. The perfon' who-touched the tube was 
faid, by Dr. Franklin, ‘to be’ eleétrified poftively, or phi: 
being fuppofed to receive an additional quantity of eleétric 
de> Wea the perfon who rubbed thé tube wa’ faid to be 
CeGrified negatively,’ or minus; being fappoled to'have loft a 
patt of his natural quantity of the eleétric fluid. + 
“Tus Obfervation was heceflary to explain the capital difco- 
v which Dr. Franklin made with refpe@ to thé manner of 
‘charging the Leyden phial ;! which is,’ that when one fide of 
‘the glafs was cleCtrified pofitively or plus, the other fide was 
electrified negatively or minus; fo that whatever quantity of 


ning * Franklin’s Letters, p- 14. + Ib. p. 15. 
Y fire 


162 Dr. FRANKLIN. on THE-.> Paarl. 


fire is thtown ‘upon one fide of the glafs, thefamejis thrown — 
out of the other; and that there is really no more eletric fire 
in the phial after it is charged than before; all that cam be 
done by charging, being ‘to take from one fide, and convey 
to the other. Dr, Franklin alfo. obferved, that glafs was im- 
pervious to electricity, and that, therefore, fince the equili, 
brium could not be reftored to the charged phial by,any in- 
ternal communication, it muft be done by conductors exter- 
nally, joining the infide and the outfide. * 

Tuese capital difcoveries he made by obferying, that when 
a phial was charged, a cork ball fufpended on filk would be 
attracted by the outfide coating, when it was repelled bya 
wire communicating with the infide; and that it would-be 
repelled by the outfide, when it was attracted by the infide. +- 
But the truth of this maxim appeared more evident when he 
brought the knob of the wire communicating with, the: out; 
fide coating within a few inches of the wire communicating 
with the infide coating, and fafpended a cork ball between 
them ; for, in that cafe, the ball was attracted by them aleegr 
nately, till the phial was difcharged. + ; 

Tue European eleétricians had obferved, that a phial ta 
not be charged unlefs fome conductor, was in contact with 
the outfide ; but Dr. Franklin made the obfervation more ge- 
neral, and alfo was able,, by the principle abovementioned, 


~to give a better account of it. As no more eleétric fire, he 
_-fays, can be thrown into the infide of a phial when all is 


driven from the outfide; fo, in a phial not yet charged, none 
* Franklin’s Letters, p.3. + Ib.p.4.  f Ib p. 5. 
can 


PenIX. Sec. -LEYDEN PHTAL. 163 


ean be thrown into the infide when none can be got from the 
outfides «He alfo thowed, by a beautiful experiment, that, 
- when:the phial was charged, one fide loft exaétly as much as 
_the other gained, in reftoring the equilibrium, Hanging a 
fmall linen thread near the coating of an electrified phial, he 
_ obferved, that every. ‘time he brought his finger neat the wire, 
“the thread)was attracted by the coating. . For as the fire was 
taken ftom the infide by touching. the. wire, - the io 
_drewiin-an equal quantity, by the thread. * 
_» He proved that, in difcharging the phial, the givivg: san 
one fide was exactly equal to the receiving by the other, by 
-placing:a perfon upon. electrics, and making him difcharge 
through-his body ;, when he obferved, that no elec 
; aareranene in him after the difcharge. + . He alfo hung 
cork balls upon an infulated conductor. at thée.time of the dif- 
ofa phial -hanging to its ard obferved, that if they 
d not repel before the explofion, they did not:repel at the 
time, nor after. { But the experiment which moft compleat= 
ly proved, that the coating’on one ifide received juft as much as 
was emitted from the difcharge of the other, was the following: 
.o He infulated his rubber, then, hanging a phial to hisicon- 
- dugtor,, he found. it could;not be charged, even though his 
hand was held. conftantly to it; | becaufe, though the electric 
fire might leave the outfide of the phial, there was none col- 
dnp the rubber to be conveyed intorthe infide. » He then 
away his hand from the phial, and forming a communi- 
- ation, . bya wire from «thé; outfide coating to the infulated 


*; Pranklin's Letters,.p.g. 9) t Eb) ps Seco g Tb. ip. 84: * 
youd a2 rubber, 


164 Dro FRANKLIN: on rue *? Park 


rubber; heofound that it: was charged ‘with eafew:iIni this. 
cafe; it was plain, that the very fame fire which left the out-. 


fide coating was conveyed by the way off the rubber; the 
globe, the Serene and the: wire of a phial, into the 


infide. *) ; oR sort noel fora: - 
» Dr. FRANKLIn’s ‘new rise of aves the Leyden” 


phial led him to obferve agreater variety! of facts, relating 


both to charging and difcharging it, than other philofophers. 


had attended to. “He found’ that the phial would be eleétri+ 


fied as ftrongly if it were held by the hook; and the coating 


applied to the globe or tube, as if it were held by the coating, 
and the hook appliedy and, con ye that there would 
be the fame explofion, and fhock; if the eleétrified phial were 


held in one hand by the hook, and the coating touched with — 


the ‘other, as when held by the coating, and touched at! the 
hook. ‘To take the charged phial by the hook with fafety, 
and not diminith its force; he squares hee as mutt ‘Get be 
fet-down upon electrics per fe. + fit 
Dr. FRANKLIN obferved, that if a man held i in. his ‘tand 
two phials, the one fully eleétrified, and the other not at all, 
and brought their hooks together, -he would have but half a 
fhock: (for the» phials would both remain’ only halfi elec 


trified, the one being half charged, and the: other half we 


charged. ’ 
Ir two phials were loerged: both through’ their tobte 2a 
cork ball fufpended on filk, and hanging between them, 


would -firft be attracted, and then repelled by both; ./but if . 


* Franklin’s Letters, p. 83. = + Ib. pp. 1g tIb.p. 21. 
they 


" PpdKiSecley, LEYDEN; RMIALG — 165 


theywwerd)ieleGtrified, ;the pne through’ the, wits, and the on 
re coon pre? ios the bal, would play. .vigo 
~ between them ill they. were nearly, difcharged, *) -The 
~ Dogtersdid noty-at-that\time, take notice, that if the phials 
“both .charged, through their coatings (by which; both, 
diel dnntenn estar sino the, ball,, would 
be repelled by;them both, as when they, were clectrified plus. 
: Andswlsenthes afterwards, obferved that two bodies electrified 
minus:repelled one another, ..he feems to have been, furprifed, 
1e 2 .ce,, and-acknowledged that he could not {atil=_ 
fagtorily, account for it. fy elaqor -Ldev aielg e.caon deguord 
“slr ‘was dknown’to every eleétrician, that a globe on tube 
weton’the infide would afford little or no fire's, but no. good. 
reafon was’ given fot it, before Dr, Franklin attempted its 
explanation bythe help of his general maxim, He fays; that 
when a tube lined with any non eleétric »is|;rubbeds;, what? is 
t colleéted: from the hand by the downward ftroke enters the 
_ pores of the glafs, driving an equal quantity out of the inner 
futface, ’into the non clectric lining’; and that the hand, in 
affing up to take afecond ftroke, takes out -again what had — 
beech 'throwninto the outward: furface, ‘the inner furface at 
the famé (timereceiving back again’ what it-had given to » 
the ‘noi! elé@tric linings fo that the particles of the ele&tric 
fluid went invand out of their pores, upon. every ftroke given 
to'the tuben fo! asihigngr-olttud- views tad? ten tbotowngd el 
[ots in thefe ‘circumftances, a wire was putjinto/the tube, - 


. hewiobferved, that, 4f,one perfon touched the wire, while a- 


© Franklin's Letters, poate t Tb, p. 34s F Tbe p76 
‘sadman nother 


166 Dr. FRANKLIN on rue--o°Partl. 


nother was rubbing the tube, and took care to°withdraw'his! 
finger as foon as he had taken’ the {park, ‘which: omal been’ 
~ made to fly from the'infide, it'would be chafged)* 1 crs eid 
Ir the tube was exhautfted of air, he obferves, ihe: ‘a-noh 
eletric lining in contact with the wire was not neceflary p for 
that, in vacuo,’ the electric fire would fly freely’ from’ the in~' 
ner furface, without a no eleGtric condudtor. Ho be! age 01 
' Upon the fame principle he accounts ‘for’ the effects ’of an 
excited eleGtric being perceived through the glafs in the vacuum: 
beyond it. - The tube ‘and ‘its excited ‘atmofphere,” being 
brought near a glafs veffel, repels the- elestrie fluid ‘frony the 
inner furface of the glafss and this fluid; iffuing from the in- 
ner furface, acts upon light bodies in the vacuum, ‘both in its 
paflage from the glafs; and likewife in its return to it, when 
the excited eleGric on the outfide is withdrawny f )o)i)0- 
© Tuts maxim, ‘that whateverthe  phial takes im at one fur~ 
face it lofes at the other, led Dr. Franklin‘to think of charg- 
ing feveral phials together with the fame'trouble, by connect- 
ing the outfide of one with the’ infide of another; whereby 
the fluid’that was driven out by the firft would be received by 
the fecond, “and: what was driven out of the fecond would-be 
received) by*the third, &e/» By this means: he ofoimd,, that;a 
_great number of bottles might’ be charged with’the fame la- 
bour as one only; and that» they might ?be icharged: equally 
high, were it not that every bottle receives the hew/fire,/and 
lofes its old’ with fome reluétance; or lratherigivésome foiall 
refiftance to the-charging’ This circumftance, heofays; cin a 


© Franklin’s Lettets,"pi772 pbs) ged pagen 
JeRPOn number 


— Seed... «LEYDEN »PHIAL: 167 


battles, 'becomes more equal.to the charging pow- 
) repels the fire back agajn is ea fooner than 

Testis RMSwoUle ent Ysky BBN Hane ts 

Upon this principle Dr. Franklin sheeibiaed ‘an eleétrical 

battery; confifting of eleven. panes of large fath gals, coated 

otieach fides and fo -connested,| that charging one.of them 

- would charge them all. Then having a contaivance to bring 
the giving. fides in contat with one wire, and all the receiv- 
ing fides with another, he united the force ait alhithe Blttes 
and difebarged them all atonce. Hom blow tito onig 

oy Wukw Dr, Franklin frit. began, his experiments, upon, the 

Leyden, phial, he imagined that the elegtric fire was all crowd- 

edjinto the fubftance of the non, electric:in contact with the 

glafs; but he afterwards found, that its power of giving a 

thock:lay.in, the glafs.it(elf,|.and, not. in the coating, by the 
_ following ingenious analyfis of the bottle, |.) 

In order,tofind where the ftrength of the charged bottle 
Jay, he.placed it uponglafs.5, then firft took out the cork and 
the wire, and finding the virtue was not in them ; he touched 
the outfide coating with one hand, and put the finger of the 
other into the mouth of the bottle; when the thock was felt 
quite as, ftrong.as if the cork and wire had beenin it. He 
then charged the phial again, and pouring out the water into an 
-empty bottle infulated, expected that if the force refided in the 
‘water it would give the fhock, but he found it gave none. He 
then judged that the ele@tric fire muft either have been loft in 
‘decanting, or muft remain in the bottle;, and the latter he 


* Franklin’s Letters, p. 12. + Ib. p. 26. 
found 


168 Dr. FRANKLIN! 6n rut >-? Parr, 


found to be true ;’ for, ‘filling the charged bottle! with 'freth 
‘water,’ he found the ‘fhock, “and-was fatisfied! that ch'power 
of giving it refided in the glafs itfelf.*) Soy 20) al 
‘Tue Doétor made the fame experiment with panes of glafs, 
laying the coating’on lightly,’ and changing it'as he had'be- 
fore changed the water in the bottle, and the refult was the 
fame in’ both goived neat” ole tery gids binov 
~ Tua the cleric fire refided in the glafs was'alfo further 
evident from this confideration, that when glafs was gilt, the 
difcharging of it would make-a’round hole} tearing off @ part 
of the gilding, which, the ‘Dottor thought;" could only have 


‘been done by the fire coming out ‘of ‘the »glals through the — 


gilding. ‘He alfo' fays, that’ when the gilding was varnithed 
even with turpentine, this varnith, © ‘thou, ho dry and ‘hard, 
{would bé burnt “by the fpark driven’ through “it, yielding’ a 
ftrong fmell, and a” Vifible é fmoak. ‘Alo,’ that2when a'fpark 
Was’ dele i through pipet, it would be’ ‘blickéned by'the fmdke, 
‘which fometimes penetrated feveral of ‘the leaves, jand that 
Lim of the gilding ‘which had’ been torn off was found forci= 
driven’ into thé hole’ madé iin the paper by the ftroke. “He 
alfo obferved; ‘that'when a thin bottle'was' broken by a'charge, 
the glafs was broken inwards, “at’ the fame baer that the el 
ing was broken outwards: * u 
‘Lastty,' Dr. Franklin difcovered; that: aves ib tate 
‘which’ would condué ‘electricity in général, would not con- 
“du& the thotk of a chargéd phial. A wet packthread, ‘for in- 
ftance, though it tranfmitted ele€tricity very’well, fometimes 


* Franklin’s Letters, p. 24: ° $ Ib. p. 25. t Ib. p. 32. 
failed 


pie Meeks 
ft eRe 


SECTION 


Mees 


« ‘af 
4 tee ra 


‘ 
“ay 
~* 


ayo Dr. FRANKLIN on Part'l, | 


S.E C.T-10N.-I. 


Dr. FRANKLIN’s piscoveRIES CONCERNING THE SIMI- 
. LARITY OF LIGHTNING AND ELECTRICITY. 


HE greateft difcovery which Dr. Franklin made con- 
cerning electricity, and which has been of the greateft 
practical ufe to mankind, was that of the perfect fimilarity 
between electricity and lighthing. The analogy between 
thefe two powers had not been wholly unobferved by philo- 
fophers, and efpecially by eleétricians, before the publication 
of Dr. Franklin’s difcovery. It was fo obvious, that it had 
ftruck feveral perfons, but I fhall give only one inftance, in 
the fagacious Abbé Nollet. 

Tue Abbé fays, * <“ If any one fhould take upon 
«him to prove, from a well conneéted comparifon of phe- 
«© nomena, that thunder is, in the hands of nature, what elec- 
“< tricity is in ours, that the wonders which we now exhibit 
«at our pleafure are little imitations of thofe great effects 


* Legons de Phyfique, Vol. 4. p> 34- 
« which 


ty G ss ves i ea 
Pox. IX. Src. I. = LIGHTNING. 370 


« which frighten us, and that the whole depends upon the 
fame mechanifin; if it is to be demonftrated, that a 
© cloud, prepared by the action of the winds, ‘by heat, by a 
«* mixture of exhalations, &c. is oppofite to a terreftrial ob- 
«* je&; that this is the electrized body, and, at a certain 
«proximity from that which is not; I avow that this idea, 
if it was well fupported, would give me a great deal of 
«¢»pleafure ; and in-fupport of it, how many fpecious reafons 
« prefent themfelves to a:man who is well acquainted with 
« electricity. The:univerfality of the electric matter, the 
« yeadinefs of its action, its inflammability, and its aétivity 
«in giving fire to other bodies, its property of ftriking bo- 
* dies externally and internally, even to their fmalleft parts, 
« the remarkable example we have of this effect in the ex- 
<< periment of Leyden,. the idea which we might truly adopt 
“in| fappofing a greater degree of eleétric power, &e. all 
“ thefe points of nology, which I have ibeen fome ‘time 
<< meditating, begin to make me believe, that one might, by 
s taking eleCtricity for the model, form to ones’ felf, in 

‘* relation to thunder and lightning,» more. perfec and 
“« more _oopseonag ideas) than what have been offered hither- 
$$ t6, hee.” 

. Bur ibe the Abbé, and oitiens, had ses ftruck with 
the ‘obvious analogy between ‘lightning and .ele¢tricity, 
they went no farther than: thefe arguments a4 priori. + Tt was 

_ Dr. Franklin who firft propofed aymethod of verifying this 
hypothefis, entertaining the old thought, as the Abbé Nol- 
let expreffes it, of bringing lightning from the heavens, of 
ne that pointed iron rods, fixed in the air, when the 

Z 2 atmofphere 


172 Dr. FRANKLIN oni! > Parr ii 
atmofphere was loaded with lightning, might draw from it 
the matter of the thunderbolt, and difcharge it without-noife 


or danger into the immeénfe body of the earth, wnets it expan 
remain as it were abforbed. 


Moreover, though Dr. Franklin’s direétions were iit 


begun to be put in execution in France, he himfelf compleat+ 
ed the demonftration of his own problem, before he/heard of 
what had been done elfewhere : and he extended his experi+ 
ments fo far as aétually to imitate all the known. effects of 
lightning by- electricity, and to perio ord electrical ex 
periment by-lightning. 4 id 

Bur before I relate any of Dr. Franklin’s experiments 
concerning lightning, I muft take notice of what he obferved 
concerning the power of pointed bodies, by means of which 
he was enabled to carry his great defigns into execution. «He 
was properly the firft who obferved: the intire and wonderful 
effet of pointed bodies, ‘both in drawing, and are off 
the eletric fire. 

_ Mr. JALLABERT. was perhaps the firft who ebideyed that 
a body, pointed at one end, and round at another, produced 
different appearances upon the fame: body, according as ‘the 
pointed, or round end was prefented to it. But as Mr. Nol- 
let, in whofe prefence he made the experiment, fays, the 
effect was not conftant, and nothing was inferred from it. * 
And the Abbé acknowledges, that Dr. Franklin was the firft 
who fhowed the property of pointed bodies, in drawing off 
electricity more effectually, oe at Te ‘diftances than’ o- 
ther bodies could do it. + } 


* Lettres, Vol. 1. p. 130. + Recherches, p. 132. 
s He 


| b . 
Pres IX. Sec. I> “LIGHTNING. we 


trified an iron thot; three or four'inches in diame 
bfe: ved, that it would not attract. ‘a thread) wheit 
of a needle'was prefented to it; but that this was 
»unlefs the pointed body had a communication with 
tt ees nting the fame pointed body, ftuck on 
a | oP tein “wax, it had not that’effeét; though the 
‘moment the pointed ‘body was'touched with: his finger, ‘the 
leGtricity'of the ball to which it was fufpended was difcharg- 
ed. The converfe of this he proved,’ by finding it ‘impofible 
to electrify the iron-fhot when ‘@ tharp ‘needle | Jay upon it. * 
By obferving paitits ‘of different degrees of acutenefs, Dr. 
Franklin ¢orrected the obfervation. of Mri Ellicott; ' and:other 
Englith elettticians, that ‘a pointed body; as a piece of leaf 
gold, would always be fufpended nearer to the plate which was 
unele@trified than that which was eleétrified, if it were put: 
between'them. “)'For the Dr. obferved, that it always remov- 
ed fartheft from that plate to which its: tharpett cy was pre=. 
fented, whether it was electrified or not;- and if one of 
the points was’ yery blunt, and the’ other very fharp, it 
would be fufpended in the air by its blunt‘end)-near'the elec~ 
trified’ body, without any: oe Bee ZET iy held below 
itvati all: fy emo 
Drv FRANKLIN suideaedited to account for’ this effed of 
pointed bodies, by fuppofing that the bafe on which theelec- 
_ trie fluid at the point of ‘an electrified body refted, being {mall, 
the ‘attraétion by which the fluid’ was held to the body was 
‘flight; and that, for the fame’reafon, the refiftance to the en- 


* Franklin’s Letters, p. 56, &c; | + Ib. p. 67. 
trance 


174 Dri FRANKLIN ow - Part. 


trance of the fluid: was. proportionably, weaker-in:that place 
than where the-furface was flat. *., . But.,he -himfelf candidly 
owns; | that he was not quite, fatisfied...with, this hypothefis. 
Whatever we think. of Dr. Franklin’s theory of the influ- 
ance of pointed conductors in drawing and throwing off the 
_ eléétric fluid, ‘the world is greatly, indebted to him, for the 
practicalbufe he miade of this doétrine. + . 

- Dr. Franx.in begins his account of the Gmilarity ates 
cleaitic fluid and lightning by cautioning his. readers not to 
be-ftaggered at the great, , difference of the, effects in point of 
~ degrees. ince. that-was.no argument of any difparity.i in their 
nature. It is) no wonder, fays he, if the effects of, the one 
fhould be fo: much greater than thofe of the other. For if 
two gun barrels electrified will: ftrike at-two inches diftance, 
and make ailoud report;,at how great,a)diftance will 19,000 
acres of electrified, cloud. ihe, ab, give lits fire; and hove 
loud muft be that erack ! Jaley-te ti monr fiac 

bsuate digeftiall Dr. Franklin's obfervations concerning 
lightning under the feveral points of! refemblance which he 
obferved between it) and electricity, mentioning thefe points 
of fimilatity in the order in which he himfelf remarked’ them; 
only bringing into one place the obfervations which may. 
happen to lié in different parts’ of his lotters, when Her re- 
late tothe fame fubje&. oj in) « 

Jin. Frastescoflightiing,. he, begins, with, ae ian are 
generally feen crooked, andi waving inthe air... The fame, 
fays he, is the eledtric fparkialways, when. it is drawn from 


* Franklin’s Letters, p. 56: )-+ Ib. ps 62." j! $ Ib. p. 44. 


a setae _ 
PereIX. Sec. Iv» © LIGHTNING. 175 


cr raatoapcacts *  Heomight have added, 
| by an irregular body, or through: a fpace in 
deft conduétors are difpofed in an irregular mane 
cdo the. pres; ins aera sat: 
mofphere.of our globe. n bins sess fete 
(:tiyLiGHTNING ‘ftrikes the highest sand rmadhipsinted. ale 
jedts in: its) way preferably to others, as high hills, and trees, 
towers, fpires, mafts of thips, points’ of fpeats, ‘&c.. In like 
manner, ‘all pointed conduftors receive or throw off the elec- 
trie fluid more: readily than | thofe ores are. — ws 
flat farfaces. + | \étisris' nsowyod ‘si 
shealonlesicsib: lis sobferved to sides i didi wad Lett 
eonduétor. «So does electricity in the difcharge of the Leyden. 
 phial. For this reafon, the Doétor fuppofes that it would: be 
fafer,,during a thunder ftorm, to have ones cloaths wet than 
_ dry; asthe lightning might then, in a great meafure, be tranf- 
“mitted. to the \ground,; by: the water, on the outfide of the 
body. It is found, fays he, ‘that a wet rat cannot be killed 
by the explofion of apes eleatrical — but that a dry rat 
mst sepa pieattea satin 
4. LIGHTNING: Linsiea So alk: scellteicinps Dr. Franklin 
ta that he could kindle with it hard dry rofin, fpirits un- 
warmed, andeven wood. He fays, that he fired gunpowder, 
by only ramming it hard in a cartridge, into each end.of which 
pointed wires were introduced, and brought within half an 
inch of one another, and difcharging a thock through them. || 
5. Licurnine fometimes diffolves metals.| So does e- 


* Franklin’s Letters, p. 46. +, Ib..p. 47. t Ib. p. 47. {| Ib. p. 48, 92. 
lectricity, 


- * 
176 Dk. FRANKLIN owl! o-? Partai 


q 


leGtricity, though the Doftorwas miftaken when he imagined & : 


it' was by-a cold: fufion, ‘as’ will appear in’ its proper placey 
The method in which Dr. Franklin made eleétricity melt 
_ metals was by putting’ thin pieces of them between two panes 
of glafs bound faft together, and fending aneleétric thock 
through them. Sometimés the pieces of glafs, by which 


they were confined, would be thattered to. pieces by the dif- 


charge, and be’brokem into a kind of coarfé fand, which once 
happened with pieces of thick looking glafss but if they re- 
mained whole, the piece of metal would be miffing in feveral 
places where it had lain between them, and inftead of it, a 
metallic ftain would be feen on both the glaffes, the ftains on 
the under and upper lafs rected —— mens ony mi- 
nutett ftroke: * 

A prece of leaf gold ofédein ‘this manner’ surat not on- 
iy to have been melted, but,ias the Doctor thought, even vitri- 
fied, or otherwife fo driven into the pores of the! glafs,! .asito 
be protected by it from the aétion of the ftrongeft aqua regis. 
Sometimes he obferved that the metallic {tains would fpread 
a little wider than the breadth of the thin pieces of metal. 
True gold, he obferved, made a darker pyre‘ eatee red- 
dith, and filver a greenith ftain: +  gtyat 

Mr. Witson fuppofes that, in this opel: the gold 
was not driven into the pores of the glafs, but only into fo 
near a contact with the furface of the glafs, as'to be held there 
by an exceeding great force; fuch an one, he fays,\as is ex- 
erted at the furface of all bodies whatever. ¢ 


© Franklin’s Letters, p. 48, 65.. + Ib. p. 68. t Hoadley and Wilfon, p. 68. 
6. Licut- 


4 


“Peni Sro. IL _ )ILIGHTNING. 177 


a fome. bodies. The fame ree elec- 
" tricity.:# >The Dostor obferves, that the eledtric fpark would 
eet.’ quire of paper. When wood, bricks, 
ftone, &c. are rent by lightning, he takes notice, that 
will fly off on that fide where there is the leatt. 
nee In like manner, he fays, when ‘a hole i is ftrack 
- through a piece of pafteboard by an eleGtrified jar, if the fur- 
faces of the pafteboard are not confined and compreffed, there 
vill be a bur raifed all round the hole on both fides of the 
|; but that if one fide be confined, fo that the bur 
__gannot be raifed on that fide, it willall be raifed on, the other 
sere ser foever the fluid was directed, , For the bur 
d.the outfide of the hole is the effec of the explofion, 
; “which is made every way from the center of the electric ftream, 
a and not an-effeét of its dire@tion. + . 

sty Lacwrsine thas often been Save. to ftrike ails 
blind. And a pigeon, after a violent thock of electricity, by 
"which the Doétor intended to have killed it, was obferved to 

_ have been ftruck blind likewife.t 
= Be In a thunder ftorm at Stretham, Paci by Dr. 
Miles, |} the lightning ftripped off fore paint which had 
‘covered a gilded molding of a pannel of wainfcot, without 
‘hurting the reft of the paint. Dr. Franklin imitated this, by 
-pafting a flip of paper over the filleting of gold, on the cover 
of a book, and fending an eleétric flath through it. The 
‘paper was tora off from end to end, with fuch force, that it 
was broken in feveral places ; and in others there was brought 


* Franklin’s Letters, p. + Ib. p.1 t Ib. p. 63. 
| Phil. "Tranf. Vol. “ee oy. pre 


Aa away 


178 Dr. FRANKLIN ow > Parr it 


away part of the grain of the Turkey leather in which the 
book was bound. This convinced the Dottor,: that if.it had 
been paint, it would have been ftripped off in ‘the: sym ee 
ner with that on the wainfcot at Stretham. * ; f 
9. Licutntne deftroys animal life. Asismalolecst Tkhes 
wife been killed ‘by ‘the thock of ele@tricity.. The Jargeft 
animals which Dr. Franklin and his: friends:had: been able'to 
kill were a hen, and a ‘turkey which weighed eee 
pounds. + 
to. Macnerts have been obferved' ict dldoshini teeing 
to have ‘their poles reverfed by lightning. - The fame'did 
Dr. ‘Franklin by eleGtricity. By. electricity he! frequently 
gave ‘polarity’ to’ needles,° and reverfed:them/at pleafare.: A 
thock from four large jars, fent ‘through a’fine féwing intedle, 
he fays, gave it polarity, fo. that:it would traverfecwhen laid 
on water... What is moft: remarkable in thefe:eleGricalex- 
periments upon magnets:is, that if theneedle, when itawas 


ftruck, lay Eaft'and Weft, the end. which was entered by . 


the eleétric blaft pointed North; but that ifiitday North and 
South, the end-which lay towards: the North,: would conti- 
nue to ‘point North, whether the'fire:entéred at'that endior 
the contrary; though ‘he imagined, that a ftronger-ftroke 
would have reverfed the poles even in that fituation, an effec& 
‘which had been known to have been produced by lightning. 
‘He alfo obferved, that the polarity wasftrongeft whenthe needle 
‘was ftruck lying North.and South, and weakeft:whem itlay 
Eaft-and Weft. - He'takes notice that, ‘inthete’ experiments, 


the needle, in fome cafes, .would be fincly blued, like the — 
¥ 


© Phil. Tranf. Vol. 45. p. 64. . + Franklin’s Letters, p. 86, 153. 


{pring 


| Pere IK. Sec.) LIGHTNING. 179 


atch; “by the eleatric flame ; in which cafe the 

mn iby a lath” from two jars only might, be wiped . 

mu a flath from four jars fixed it, and frequently 
the needles. The jars which the Doctor ufed held 

or eight re ete ieee | erae: lenis spa lined with 


yt ane ceri — the heavens, by fijeans of an 
1 kites, which hes pritea when. a ftorm of thunder was 
ved.to be. coming on. ~ This kite had a pointed wire 
spon it, by which it mie the lightning from the clouds. 
ligh ning defended by the hempen ftring, and was re- 
d by akey tied to the extremity of it; that part of the 
ng bab Was glad ta the hand being of filk, that the. 
ie vstwe might ftop when it came to the key. He found 
would conduct electricity even when nearly 
ents . ibn it was wet, it would condué it quite 
tna! freely 5 fo that it would ftream out plentifully from the key, 
vi at the approach of a perfon’s finger. q- 
Ar this key he charged phials, and from electric fire thus 
obtained, he kindled fpirits, and performed all other eleatri- 
it cal experiments: which are ufually exhibited by an excited 
aplabeior: “tube. - 
» dAs-every circumftance seating to fo Sa sita a difcovery as 
this (the greatest, perhaps, that has been made in the whole 


‘ mi) a “ e Pranklin’s Letters, p. 90, &e. ‘Tb. p. 106. 


x R.2 compafs 


180 ~ Dr. FRANKLIN on Parr. 


compafs of philofophy, fince the time of Sir Iftac Newton) 
cannot but give pleafure to all my. “readers, I thall endeavour 
to gratify them with the communication of a few particulars 
which I have from the beft authority. 

Tur Dodtor, after having publithed his method of verify- 
ing his hypothefis concerning the famenefs of electricity with 
the matter of lightning, was waiting for the erection” of a 
fpire in Philadelphia to carry his views into execution ; not 
imagining that a pointed rod, of a moderate height, could 
anfwer the purpofe ; when it occurred to him, that, by means 
of a common kite, he could have a readier and better accefs 
to the regions of thunder than by any {pire whatever. “Pre- 
paring, therefore, a large filk handkerchief, and two crofs 
fticks, of a proper length, on which to extend it ; he took 
the opportunity of the firft approaching thunder ftorm to take 
a walk into a field, in which there was a thed convenient for 
his purpofe. But dreading the ridicule which too common 
ly attends unfuccefsful attempts in fcience, he communicated 
his intended experiment to no body but his fon, who affifted 
him in raifing the kite. 

Tue kite being raifed, a confiderable time elapfed before — 
_ there was any appearance of its being electrified. One very 
promifing cloud had paffed over it without any effe& ; when, 
at length, juft as he was beginning to defpair of his contri- 
vance, he obferved fome loofe threads of the hempen ftring 
to ftand erect, and to avoid one another, juft as if they had 
been fufpended on a common conduétor. Struck with this 
promifing appearance, he immediately prefented his knucle 

to 


Per. IX. Sec. Ty 1 LIGHTN ING. 18r 


- pon and (let thé: reader judge of the exquifite pleafure 
he mutt have felt at that moment), the difcovery was complete, 
erceive ‘a Vety evident eleétric: fpark. Others fucceed- 
Sow sore the firing was wet, fo as to put the matter 
pat all difpute, ‘and when-the rain had wet the ftring, he 
4 le&tric’fire very copioufly.. This happened in June 
1752, @ month after the electricians in France had verified 
the fame whe but beter be heard of pay thing tthey had 
Hones Paka 11513 
2 Baatbeathie! kite Dr. Franklin had afterwards an infulated 
‘iron rod to'draw the lightning into his houfe, in order to make 
“experiments: whenever ‘there: fhould’ be: a confiderable ’ quan. 
tity of it in the atmofphere ; and that he might not lofe any 
opportunity of that nature, he conneéted two bells with this 
apparatus, which gave him notice, v3 their ringing, When- 
wee rod was ele@trified.* 
wv ~ Tur Doétor béing able, in this manner, to draw the light- 
is ‘ning into his houfe, and make experiments with it at his 
f Jeifures. and being certain that i it was in all refpeéts of the fame 
‘nature with eleétricity, he was defirous to know if it was of 
the pofitive or negative kind. The firft time’he fucceeded in 
making 2 an experiment for this purpof was the 12th of April 
3753s when it appeared that the lightning was negative. 
“Having found that the clouds electrified negatively in eight 
fucceflive thunder gufts, he concluded they were always elec. 
‘trified negatively, and formed a theory to account'for it. But 
"he afterwards found he had- concluded too foot), For, onthe 


* Franklin’s Letters, p. 112. 
fixth 


i82 “Dri FRANKLIN oW oo2 Paroh 


fixth of June following, “he: met.avith/one!cloud which was 
cleétiified pofitively 3 i!upon (whiclosche: :correéted, vhis) former 
theory, ‘but did not lfeein able perfectly to fatisfy himfelf with 
any other, - The Dodtor fometimes found, the. clouds. would 
change from pofitive to negative cleAticity, feveral times in 
the courfe:of one thunder guft,,and he onge,obferved the air 
to be ftrongly: electrified: during - a fall.of Anos when there 
was no'thunderat all. ®: 0: » Deets 

Bur the grand practical ufe which, Dr.F i ade, of 
his difcovery ‘of the fanienefs of ele@tricity and lightning, was 
to fecure buildings from being damaged by lightning,’,a thing 
of vaft-confequence in all parts of the worldy) but»more.efpe- 
cially in feveral parts:of North America, where thunder ftorms 
are more frequent; ‘and-their effects, in -that + odry, air,.more 
dreadful; ‘than they are ever known. to-be with us. .,, 

Tuts great end Dr, Franklin iaccomplithed by, fo. ealy a 
anéthod, :and: by fo,cheap;. and -feemingly. trifling, apparatus, 
as’ fixing a pointed, metalline rod higher than any, part of the 
building, and.communicating with the ground, or rather, the 
‘neareft.water... This wire the lightning, was fare to feize, Up- 
on, -preferable|to any other part ;of ,the: building ; whereby 
this dangerous power would be fafely conducted to | the earth, 
and diffipated, without) doing any harm to the building. fu, 

| Dr. FRranxin was of opinion, that-a wire of a quarter 
pre inch of thicknef would be { fufficient to conduct a great- 

ser quantity, of lightning , than was, ever actually difcharged 
£rom, the clouds in one ftroke. He found, that. the gilding 


_ ®* Franklin's Letters, p. 112, &¢... + Ib. p. 62, 124. 
dizd of 


a 


“penslX, ‘seen RG BINDING. a 183 


ofia book-xtas finfficient to: conduct ithe charge, of. fixelarge 
_garsscand:thonght that; it would: probably have conducted the 
charge 6finiany mores <(:He-'alfe found.by .experiment,) .that 
if a wire was deftroyed by an Ueliaoa tt ibowas oye fiyfligient 
to condué that particular ftroke, though it was thereby 
rendered incapable of conduéting another. * 
! Nia Dosor alfo “fuppoied, that “pointed rods erected on 
' edifices: ‘might likewife often aient a ftroke of lightning in 
the following manner. He fays, that an eye fo fituated as 
to view horizontally the underfide of a thunder cloud, will 
pt very ragged, with a number of feparate fragments, or 
clouds, one under another, the loweft fometimes not 
the earth. “'Thefe, as fo many ftepping ftones, affift 
nducting a ftroke between a cloud and a building. To 
ret thefe by an experiment, he direéts us to 
“two or three locks of fine loofe cotton and conneé& 
Wid them with the prime conduétor, by a fine thread 
of tw two inches (which may be fpun out of the fame lock) a- 
nother to that, and a third to the fecond, by like threads. 
He then bids us to turn the globe, and fays we thall fee thefe 
locks extending themfelves towards the table (as the lower 
fmall clouds do towards the earth) but, that, on prefenting a 
fharp point, erect under the loweft, it will fhrink up to the 
fecond, the fecond to the firft, and all together to the prime 
conduétor, where they will continue as long as the point con- 
tinues under them. A moft ingenious and beautiful experi- 
ment! May not, he adds, in like manner, the {mall electri- 


* Franklin’s Letters, p. 124, 125. 


MOTTO a 2 fied 


that place. *°— aati sean bb-anvs ive a ti 
haa te aaW, i tty guor3. ‘sign iainoivise api: tigkaon ro 

e ait wtoriog eet 
no, ‘hoon or boae fae a gai 
itd: tadgil % © E-¢ ou a se neato lived 


2a > bagasssit a ako ak ded Genki 


Pei olen ads > wen noi 
me peat gain can vie 
opal aka 
Asli 3a dnanltqes “nde 
i hahha" Yo" 
Bee Ge H oF br : 
i Bo Go Tyo. ‘au 


le five si 


fn 4 51 


ant 


Peri IX. Sec. EXPERIMENTS. 185 


cheat ao (& B Cobol ON: 21k 
in 


Miscrttawzous | DISCOVERIES or Dr. FRANKLIN AND 
R HIS FRIENDS in AMERICA DURING THE SAME PERIOD. 


.R. FRANKLIN, retaining the common opinion, that 
eleétrified bodies have real atmofpheres of the electric 
fluid (confifting of particles at fome diftance from the furface 
of the body, but always going along with it) obferved that 
thefe atmofpheres and the air did not feem to exclude one a- 
_ nother; though, he fays, this be difficult to conceive, con- 
4 fidering that they are generally fuppofed to repel one 
another. 

An eleétric atmofphere, he fays, raifed round a thick wire, 
inferted into a phial, drives out none of the air it contained ; 
nor, on withdrawing that atmofphere, will any. air rufh’in, 
as he found by a very curious. experiment, accurately made; 
whence he alfo concluded, that the elafticity of the air was 
not affected by it,* 

} Tue experiment, as the Doctor informs me, was made 
* Franklin’s Letters, p. 98. 


Bb with 


386 Dr, FRANKLIN‘: ‘MISCELLANEOUS Piarl. 


with a {mall glafs fyphon, one leg pailing through the cork 
into the bottle. The other leg had in it a drop of red ink, 
which readily moved on the leaft change of heat or cold in 
the air contained in ithe phial} but not at all on the air’s be- 
ing eleétrified. 

He alfo made an experiment which would feem to prove 
the immobility, as we may fay, of thefe atmofpheres by an 
external! force, if “they ‘have any’ exiftence at’ all; ‘but others 
may think it'is father ai‘ argument “againf® thir 'éxiftence. 
He electrified a large cork ball faftened to the end of a filk 
ftring three feet long; and, taking the other end in his hand, 
he whirled it round, like a fling, a hundred times in the 
open air, with: the fwifteft smotionthe’ebuld pollibly. weet 
and obferved,) that ‘it till retained! its ‘eleetric! 
though .it; muft; have” pafied through. ‘ight hondred yards of 
aitds* bovistdo (ti diiw gacla gciog eyawie ive .ysod 203 

To ‘senile bodys: Kid different irciitanced of ai: 
latation and ovonttraétion) 218 « “capable of! receiv ine OF ree 
tainirig:more ér ‘lefe of ithe electric” Auld’ orf” furface, 
he made the following curious experiment. He cleétrified 
a. filer vican,) cin’ which owas About “three yards “OF “Vrats 
chain, sone end:oftwhichthe ‘could’ faite ‘to! what ‘heig! é Ke 
pleafed; by means!of a.puilly. anid’ ‘a flk cord.” ‘né Yfufperide 
a lock of cotton by'a filk ftring ‘front the 'céiling of the r room, 
making it'to hang near the cup ;’ and ‘obfery Pye every 
time he drew up the chain, the cotton ap prdack ed “neare: ‘g 
the cup, ‘andvas conftantly “receded frofti We whe ae chain. 


* Franklin’s*Dettets, p.'97. 


c 


x ae Ms ©BXPERIMENTS. a8, 


yan SU ie sect sas evident he fs, 
File Webs ofi2e6 abil iche dp Was ann Te 
entre ng its and that the atmof 
h chain muft Have been drawn from that. of “the 
it’ wad raifed,’ “and have”Feturiied to it 
51 letdown: © Yo teitiarrBels Yuet Ato2 ow? 2 eat 
Re clea Hi atop in foi asafe-VaGbts; the 
Dot fo'drop rofin.on hot iton plates held under bodies 
-. eleGtrifiéd ; “and, in a{till room, ‘the finioke would’ afcend, 
fay and ‘formn ished d the bodies, “naklivg "hi 
Wed Vety’ Be ‘gl 1 tryih i Whar’ sins, ‘the 
iy epellency be! 


ob s pisgeylaty ‘of Ee 


roe 
open hes nes 


bbe ‘that ‘filver ‘ex fed € to the eleatic 
coe a Blue: “ftain,” that ir gna wie i 
could t never perceive a any ea made 
ba. Phe foots on: the filver or iron were 
whether ht the received the fp spark from lead, 
ier ; and. th e fmell of the eléétric fire 1 Wags 

i WG Hie valk sine it’ was ‘conveyed. Ehcye 
ed Hg ih i ‘to what was’ done by Dr. Frank- 
at Phila delphi, v we ie by no meéans overlook what was 

¢ by Mr. Kinnerfley, the Doétor's riend while. at Bofton 
ngland. * Some. ‘of his: obfervation 85 ‘of which | an 

; aaauee is § given i in the Dogor’s letters, are very curious ; and 


id 
a D 
not det 


mb "© Franklin’s Letters, P. 121. “7 ‘Db. P-55- J Ib. p. 81, 98. 
Vundp | 
peewee Bba2 fome 


188 DISCOVERIES or | Part I. 


fome later accounts, which he himfelf has tranfmitted to 
England, feem to promife, that, if he continue his eleétri- 
cal inquiries, his name, after that of his friend, will be fe- 
cond to few in the hiftory of eleétricity. 

He firft diftinguifhed himfelf by re-difcovering Mr. Du 
Faye’s two contrary electricities of glafs and fulphur, with 
which both he and Dr. Franklin were at that time wholly 
unacquainted. But Mr. Kinnerfley had a great advantage 

_over Mr. Du Faye; for, making his experiments in a more — 
advanced ftate of the fcience, he faw immediately, that the 
two contrary eleétricities of glafs and fulphur were the very 
fame pofitive and negative ele¢tricities, which had juft been 
difcovered by Dr. Watfon and Dr. Franklin. 

He obferved, that a cork ball, electrified by a conductor 
from excited glafs, would be attraéted by excited amber and 
fulphur, and repelled by excited glafs and chinay that elec- 
trifying the ball with the wire of a charged phial, it would 
be repelled by excited glafs, but attracted by excited fulphur ; 
and that when he electrified it by fulphur or amber, till it 
became repelled by them, it would be attraéted by the wire 
of the phial, and repelled by its coating. Thefe experi-~ 
ments furprized him very much, but by analogy he was 
led to infer, a priori, the following paradoxes, as he calls 
them, which were afterwards verified by Dr. F aa at his 
requeft. * 

1. ‘ Ir a glafs globe be placed | at, one end of a prime 
“ conductor, and a fulphur one at the other, both being e- 


* Franklin’s Letters, p. 99- 
“ qually 


Per. IX. Sec. II. Mr. KINNERSLEY. 189 


ait qually in good order, and in equal motion, not a {park of 
¢ fire can be obtained from the conductor, but ‘one globe 
«will draw out as faft as the other gives in. 
2. “Ir a phial be fufpended on the conductor with a 
_« chain from its coating to the table, and only one of the 
globes be made ufe of at a time, twenty turns of the 
_« wheel, for inftance, will charge it; after which, as many 
“turns: of the other wheel will difcharge it; and as many 
att ‘more will charge it again. 
intent « THE globes being both in motion, each having 2 
& feparate conductor, ‘with a phial fufpended on one of them, 
“« and the chain faftened to the other; the phial will become 
« charged, one globe charging pofitively, and the other 
© negatively. | ‘ag 
4. “ Tur phial being thus charged, hang it in like 
_« manner, on the other conductor. Set both wheels a going 
« again, and the fame number of turns that charged it be- 
« fore will now difcharge it, and the fame number repeated 
« will charge it again. 

5. * Wuen each globe communicates with the fame 
« prime conduétor, having a chain hanging from it to. the 
« table, one of them, when in motion (but which I cannot 
« fay) will draw fire up through the cufhion, and difcharge 
«it through the chain; and the other will draw it up 
“« through the chain, and difcharge it through the cufh- 
« jon? * | 

Wuen Mr. Kinnerfley was advifing his friend to try the ex- 


* Franklin’s Letters, p. 100. 
periments 


ago. ASADISCOVERIES ofj 0:0 Parrh 


periments -withothe fulpbur globe, -he-cautions him not to 
make -ufe sof chalk on -the';cushion, telling him.that, fome 
fine powdered fulphur would do better. And he expreffes his 
hope that if the Doctor thould find the two globes to»charge 
the prime conductor differently, |he would, beable to difcover 
fome: method of determining which it was that. charged 
pofitively. | 1oTta pit ssw Iliyr 4a: fini act loos 
_ Dr. Phsoegitieg wher thefe experiments and conjeGtures 
were propofed to him, had no idea of their having any real 
foundation ; but imagined,’ that. the different attractions and 


repulfions. obferved by Mr. Kinnerfley. proceeded rather from. 


the greatét or fnialler quantities of the electric fire, obtained 
from: different: bodies, than. from its being either of a dif- 
ferent kind, or having a different direétion. But finding, 
upon trial; that the principal of Mr. Kinnerfley’ s, feppelitipas 
were verified by fact, ;he had ‘no doubt of the reit. ae 
-oIIn canfwer to the idoubt of Mr. Kinnerfley,, whether ie 
glafs, or the fulphur. elestrified pofitively, the Doctor, gave it 
as his opinion, that the glafs globe charged pofitively, and 
the ful plurnégatively; for the following reafons. \) » 
oct.oi Beeauts;: though the fulphur globe. feemed to, work 
equally well with the glafs:oné,. yet, it could never occafiom 
forlarge,iand fo diftant a {park between his finger and conduc~ 
tor as when the glafs globe was ufed..' But what he adds to 
confirm this’ proof does'not feem tovbe fatisfactory. « He fup~ 
pofes that bodies of a certain bignefs cannot fo eafily part with 
the quantityof electric fluid ‘which they -have,\ arid hold at- 


* Franklin’s. Letters, p.-io2, 103. 
iwsq tracted 


| Pers IX. Sec." “Mri KINNERSLEY. tor 


f fed witia i as they.canieceive an additi- 
onal. their furface, by way of atmofpheres and 
‘that thie fo much: Sere er eee ee 

duétor, :as:tnight be thrown on it. Vidclav Silt tadt-gaiisbht 
f | ai, Hie obferved that the rervca or betthof resiappeering 
atithevehilof the wire: eonnected ‘with the conduéor, ‘was 
long,»Jarge, ‘and much!diverging when’ the’ glafs’' globe! was 
_— ufed, and made a fnapping or rattling noife; but that‘when 
the fulphuf/globe was ufed,’ it'was thort, ‘fmall, and ‘made a 
——hiffing noife. ““He-alfo obferved, that juft the’ reverie of bothi 
-_ thefe‘cafes' happened When he held the fame wire in his hand, 
"and the'gldbes owere ‘worked alternately. > The ‘bruth Ie 
large, long, diverging, and fnapping or ‘rattlidgs ° when the 
fulphur globe was’turned; but hort, fmall/°and hiffihg, 
~ when the glafs_ globe was tarned.” “When thé bruth was long; 
large; and ianuch ‘diverging, it feemed to the Dodor, ‘that 
the‘body to nehich;it jdined ‘was’ ‘throwing’ the fire out,’ ‘and 
when) they conttary*lappeared,’’ it feemed’ to be» ry 
in. + 
3- He obferved, that when he held his kitackle before 
the fulphur globe, while it. was, turning, the ftream of fire 
‘between his knuckle and the globe feemed to fpread on its 
farface, as if it flowed from the finger, but before the glafs 
globe it was otherwife. 
4. He obferved that the cool wind (or what was called fo) 

- which is felt as coming from an ele¢trified point, was much 

more fenfible when the glafs globe, than when the fulphur 


* Franklin’s Letters, p. 104. + Ib. 


one 


192 IMPROVEMENTS tn” Parrli 


one was ufed. But thefe, though the beft arguments which 
the fenfes can furnifh, of the courfe of the eleétric fluid, the 
Doétor acknowledges were but hafty thoughts. Indeed, con-= 
fidering that the velocity of the eleétric fluid has been found, 
by experiment, to be, nearly, inftantaneous in a circuit of 
many miles, it cannot be fuppofed that the eye fhould be able 
to diftinguith which way it goes in the {pace of one or two 
inches. * 

I sHact conclude this article with obferving, that the ex- 
‘periments, which the Doétor made with globes of glafs and 


fulphur, are much more eafily exhibited by the conductor and. 


infulated rubber of either of them, all the effects being the 
reverfe of each other. 

I must now, for the prefent, take leave of this ingenious 
writer and his friends, after having brought the hiftory of 
their labours to the year 1754, and muft return to fee 
what was doing on the continent of Europe for two or three 


years aerenre.® this date, while we left it to go over to- 


America. 


* Franklin’s Letters, p. 105. 


PERIOD 


col. ELECTRICAL’ APPARATUS, 193. 
yisg dds to sohahtennatio.zidt AsvawoH - 
pqoxy ni .hoisog!eidy ni. bodlinw? elaiveisen to.y2si1 
| slicrax. baa: onsiodid ne dsnsdoss oi ebas? 
ob hats 2p ae ea Jbefe noiaudind ib agony 
i B10 Dom cKidiw divys % aot 
: n ietiotsteiute¥-buupiixSele ‘p-anawol ga 
6 uboi1eq uodvone ai seas} od? guaisnos dary, 
am iad .o3 Sunitdoa aoizovontib, to Devisdl odds ti 


Mt MAD Fe Ho ASERR MENTS. 
Jypdae me gem rch 0108). ai. eid? ei sna ” 
BUNT pithy ects thes Seeire ee tahini 
: Pa ie Soe Poe 

we vy et PE Be de yp PRET re i 

re ne entering upon the laft iposind into which 
oan, ‘leétricity divides jreang in which the 


aces as the bufinels of alee ri been confider- 
ultiplied in it, and a greater number of labourers have 
been employed in gathering in the harveft of difcoveries, the 
feeds of which were fown by Dr. Watfon, Dr. Franklin, and 
others, in the preceding periods; I am obliged to fubdivide 
this into more diftin@ parts, but I hope they will not be 
found to be t more coe, were neceflary, in order to prevent 


‘wana 


Cre However 


194: IMPROV. EMEN TS! mn » Parr LT 


However, this circumftance, of the great quantity and va- 
riety of materials furnifhed in this period, in proportion as it 
tends to embarrafs an hiftorian, and exercife his talent for 
proper diftribution and arrangement, is a ftriking demonftra- 
tion of a truth, which muff give the greateft pleafure to all 
the lovers of electricity and Natural Philofophy. If the pro- 
grefs continue the fame in another period, of equal length, 
if the harveft of difcoveries continue to be more plentiful, 
andthe labourers proportionably more numerous; what 'a glo- 
rious fcene (hall ~we {ee ‘unfolded, what 4 fund of entertain- 
ment is there in ftore for us, and what! ifnportant ‘benefits 
may be derived to mankind ! 


; 
J 2hSO iG UF 


SECTION 


Perv X! Sec. I. ELECTRICAL APPARATUS. 195 


borinkevattigian jyth stig ssw Fi Nir sri sil¥ swidd 43) rts 
pPadieriigsetti Sno oil Bs 01 2s A Ss Nefg a en liek en 
PS igvetpetenehinoi fi silken ‘bhrow skort FAN Sry nso torkz 
sr 0aHR Adina High phe p eyes sists sdrr vt 
NO VRdGNH: awe AREAS Yo Yow oq’ sc gAtlisiadi 194 ba 
ons Gpiseeis lf); belid-ords ‘Go \sdols YAY Yo noidvd “ort 
“it Paaytesiem. toleicgisink ma Yo Witaiep! teri’ Y Vodes 
IMPROVEMENTS IN THe ELECTRICAL APPARATUS, wire 


°-BXPERIMENTs AND OBSERVATIONS RELATING TOIT. 
20 wen prot ober ad asddbr sii Vi yilsivsqis* norhiit 


: *f iotid pst yeltt Hons550 | vs 
eligi 3 2xd ows elalg’s sais yayeh Ya IW aM 
“S'lour awe apparatus has’ been much improved 
. within this period, I thall firft recite what has occurred 
ped fapon’ this’ fubje@ ;'particularly the methods .which 
have, from time-'to ‘time » been communicated of incteafing 
manpower vbaastesty; mitt diifetent pei herineae of exci~ 
tation. tunilabaiV - 
~vSo ‘early\/as'the year 1751, upon elibetion? of ieyitiy’ Mr: 
Winkler’s “periments, ‘notice is taken of Mr. Canton’s. mes 
thod”of ‘ribbing! tubes with’ filk’°prepared with linfeed oil. 
Thele he had found, by ‘the ‘experience of fome confiderable 
time, ‘to »produce the greateft effect upon tubes, but-he had 
not found’ that they were ae cE ufeful:in rubbing 
globes. #)-)« yutroit b 
~ Upon another. occafion, Mr, Contre eines that. by 
_ means of this rubber, a folid cylinder of glafs, which had 


* Phil, Tranf, Vol. 47. p. 239, 
Wuers been 


196 |. IMPROVEMENTS Nn Parr I. 


been fet before the fire till it was quite dry, might be excited 
as eafily as a glafs tube, fo as to act like one in every refpect; 
that even the firft ftroke would make it ftrongly electrical. * 

Bur the greateft improvement which Mr. Canton difcover- 
ed for increafing the power of electricity, was by rubbing on 
the cufhion of the globe, or on the oiled filk rubber of the 
tube, a fmall quantity of an amalgam of mercury and tin, 
with a very little chalk or whiting. By this means, a globe 
or tube may be excited to.a very great degree with very little 
friction, efpecially if the rubber be made mire damp or dry 
as occafion may require. ++ 

Mr. WI ke fays, that a glafs tube excited with a woollen 
cloth, on which. fome white wax oroil hasbeen put, will 
throw out flames with a great noife in the dark. {  Thefe 
flames, -he fays, he never knew,to.be thrown from a globe, 
except fometimes when they were firft ufed..||; 

Our electrical apparatus has, been much saeantand thin 
this period by the difcovery of father Windelinus Ammerfin 
of Switzerland, who, in a Latin treatife, publithed at Lu- 
cern, in) the year 1754, +has hewn us, that wood: properly 
dried, till it becomes. very brown, . is a non conductor of 
eleCtricity.. He recommends boiling the wood in linfeed. oil; 
or Covering it over with varnith, after being dried, to pre- 
vent any return of moiftute into its pores;, and adds, that 
wood, fo treated, feems to afford ftronger appearances 
of cleétricity than’even glafs.. He himfelf made ufe of com- 
mon wooden meafures, fuch as are ufually found in granaries; 
* Phil. Tranf. Vol. 48. pt. 2. ps 784. | + Ib. ar yo pis p-461. ft Wilke, p. 124. 


i Ib. p 
' : firft 


pee. X. Sec.) ELECTRICAL APPARATUS. 197 


Get boiled in oil, and afterwards mounted, fo as to be turned 
_ by a wheel. * a 2 ; 
|" Tr appears from the Philofophical Tranfactions, fays, Mr. 
Wilfon; fo carly as the year 1747, that Dr. Watfon, having 
‘ecafion to fapport a long wire, in an experiment made near 
Shooter’s hill, with a view to determine the velocity of the 
ele&tric fluid, ufed ftakes of dry wood, which he told him, 
- -qwete baked, to prevent the eleétric fluid from efcaping into 
the ground. + 
OO—A more extraordinary method of procuring eletricity than 
by baked wood, was one that Signior Beccaria made ufe of. 
He put a dry and warm cat’s fkin upon his glafs globe, and 
rabbing it with his hand, excited a very powerful electricity. ¢ 
| Purse wooden cylinders electrify pofitively or negatively 
A -as the rubber is filk or flannel, but much more powerfully 
when negative than when pofitive, owing to the roughnefs 
which there generally is upon their furfaces, and therefore 
make an agreeable variety in an- electrical apparatus. But the 
oldeft and moft ufual method of procuring negative electri- 
city was by globes of fulphur. Thefe Mr. Le Roi made by 
putting a coating of fulphur upon a globe of glafs, and then 
{moothing it with an hot iron; but Mr. Nollet preferred 
melting the fulphur in the infide of the glafs globe, and then 
breaking the glafs from off it, becaufe this method made a 
“mutch finer polith. || 
OnE globe he made of a mixture of fulphur and pounded 
glafs, but he found that it had the fame effe@t as if it had 


\) @ Phil. Tranf. Vol. 52. pt. 1. p. 342. Ib. Vol. 51. pt. 2. p. 896. 
4 Lettere dell’ Elettricifino, p. 58. - I Notlet’s Daa, Vol, re ve 


been 


198 IMPROVEMENTS. 1 Parr I. 


been all of fulphur. He fays that, when one part of this globe 
was excited, the whole furface became electrical. *...,- . » 

Bur fince Mr. Canton’s difcovery of the negative power of 
rough glafs, fome philofophers have made ufe of glafs. globes 
made rough by emery ; and the. ufual method of taking off 
their polith was by rubbing them as they turned upon, their 
axis; but Mr. Speedler, a mathematical inftrument maker at 
Copenhagen, obferves, in his letters upon the fubje& of elec- 
tricity, that glafs globes, made rough by drawing the ftone, 
or emery, from pole to pole, -have a much greater virtue; this 
method of taking off the polith giving them a greater rough- 
nefs with refpect to the rubber + 

Bur a better, and a readier method than all thefe of pro- 
ducing negative electricity, is by infulating the rubber of a 
fmooth globe, and connecting it with an.infulated prime con- 
ductor, while the common conductor hath a communication 
with the ground. The rubber, if well infulated, is {ure to 
produce a negative electricity, equal in power to the pofitive 
of the fame globe. Mr. Dalibard direéts a great number of 
precautions, in order to electrify well at the rubber, and to 
prevent it from receiving any eleétric fire in its ftate of i in- 
fulation, ¢ 

Mr. BercMan of Upfal, fays, that very Woes hee ‘bia 
glafs globes could not be excited to.a fufficient degree of 
ftrength, he lined them with a thin coating of fulphur, and 
that then they gave a much ftronger eebiins heyy than 
before. || j t 


* Nollet’s Letters, Vol. 2. p..125,127. + Wilke, p. } Dalibard’s Franklin, p. 110. 
i Phil. il. Tranf. Vol. 52. Pe 2: 485 I 
N 


- Per: Xi Sec. I. ELECTRICAL APPARATUS. 199 


} © IneItaly; and other places, Mr. Nollet informs us, it is 
i the cuftom of eleétricians to put a coating of pitch, or other 
_ refinous matter on the infide of their globes, which they pre- 
tend, makes them always work well. - 
__ + Wevare obliged tothe Abbé Nollet for fore obfervations 
onthe! eleétrical powers of different kinds of glafs, in the 
-— fixth volume of ms Legons de phyfique printed in the year 
ua apiir’ bafsqi ul » 
is ‘not Wiis he of glafs, fays he, that is equally elec- 
faye eta “* There’ are fome forts which are not fo at all, or 
hardly-at all fuch, for example, is that of which they make 
- plates of glafs at'St: Gobin in Picardy. I have tried it, fays 
- he; ‘an hundred times, in the form of plates, tubes, and 
globes, and in all’/kinds of weather, but have fcarce been e- 
ver able to draw from it the leaft fenfible figns of electricity. 
-OTur glafs- “of which panes for windows are made, and 
which is alfo wfed for drinking glaffes, when it is newly ma- 
nufagtured, is excited with great difficulty. I have often, 
fays he, jeeaealy rubbed tubes, and other pieces, even in 
the glafs- houfe where they were made, but without fuccefs s 
and it has not been till after fome months, and fometimes 
years, that I could bring them to act. 
‘Tr is certain, and he fays he has conftantly obferved, that 
_ glafs becomes more fit for ele@trical experiments by force of 
rubbing, and that fometimes it has required fome months 
to bring globes and tubes to act well. : 
He did not think that thefe fa@s could be accounted for 


* Lettres, Vol. 2. p- 322. 
either 


is IMPROVEMENTS 1x Panr-I. 


either by the different degrees of tranfparency, or’ the dif- 
ferent colours of glafs. This, indeed, was evident from 
fome globes acquiring eleétricity from ufe which had it not 
originally. The glafs of which bottles are made at Severs 
ferved him very well, whereas globes of white glafs did not 
become tolerable till after having been ufed a certain time. 
He could not tell pofitively why certain kinds of glafs were 
ele&trizable or not by rubbing, but he fufpeéted, that it was 
principally owing to the degree of its hardnefs and vitrification, 
He was induced to think fo, becaufe he foundithe glafs at 
the French manufaGory at St. Gobin, and at/Cherbourg 
(the hardeft, the moft compa, and the beft vitrified of all 
the kinds of glafs in France). was the moft difficult to be elec- 
trized ; whereas the chryftal glafs of England, that of Bohe- 
mia, &c. which are much fofter, were the beft of all for ex- 
periments in electricity. He fays, moreover, that he had pro- 
cured imperfect glaffes, which had not been long enough in 
the furnace to be clear; and that, though they were of the 
fame compofition as plates of glafs, which, he obferved be- 
fore, was ot eafily electrized, yet that shee were excited 
very fenfibly. : 
He fays that a globe of ten or twelve pa diameter, and 
which makes about four revolutions in a fecond of time, will 
receive a convenient rubbing; but that we muft not expeé that 
if the globe be one half, or one fourth part greater or lefs, that 
the effects will be increafed or diminithed in proportion. * 
Uron the fubje& of infulating bodies, he obferves, that 


* Legons de Phyfique, Vol. 6. p. 273.---276. 
when 


tebe I. ELECTRICAL ‘APPARATUS. zor 


cakes’ ‘of. fulphur, > rofin; . fealing, wax,:. and bees wax 

ad eu fe of. for this purpofe, they ought to! be well cool= 
they are. ufed: for; he fays, he, has conftantly-ob- 
h hat when they are newly made, they are not fo pro- 
ate bodies, as, Shey, gcaccally, are at the vier — 
-~mo nt 8. lye Soor e¢fy oni tat .bov 4sidc 
vill, be propery, sider: shin head; to eoaee voulanns 
ians,’-that globes have. been feveral times known ‘to 
7 during the act! of excitation, and that) the. fragments 


een : have been: thrown with great » violence inievery dire@ion, ‘fo’ 


_ asito-be, very. dangerous for the: by ftanders. This accident 
happened to Mr. Sabatelli |in Italy;“Mr. Nollet in France,’ 
Mr. Beraud at,Lyons, Mr. Boze at ‘Wittemburgh: "Me. - 
Cat at Rouen, and Mr. Robein.at Rennés.. 90: 

\ Tue ainin the)infide.of Mr. Sabatelli’s globe. haa no ‘com- 
‘®nunication with the externabair, but that of the Abbé Nol: 
Tet had... This aft, which was of: Englith flint; which had 
been ufed two years, and which was more than a line-thick, 
burft like abomb.in the hands of a-fervant who was rubbing 
it; andthe fragments (the largeft of which were not more 
than aninch in diameter) were difperfed on all fides, to:a 
confiderable diftance. The Abbé :fays,° that all» the globes- 
which were: burft in that manner exploded after five or fix) _ 
turns of the wheel; and he afcribes this effect to the action 
of the electric matter, making the particles of the glafs vibrate 
in a manner he could not conceive. + 


_ * Legons de Phyfique, Vol. 6, p. 299. + Nollet’s Letters, Vol. 1..p. 19. 
Dd WHEN 


202 IMPROVEMENTS “1n.) .o°? PArt on 


> Wuen Mr. Beraud’s globe burft (and he was the firfttowhom 
this accident was ever known. to happen) he was making fome 
experiments in the dark, on the 8th of February 1750; when 
a noife was firft heard, as of fomething rending to’ pieces ;' 
then followed the explofion, and when the lights:were brought 
in, it' was obferved, that thofe places of the floor which were 
oppofite to the equatorial diameter of the globe) were ftrewed 
with fmaller pieces, andiin greater numbers than’ thofé which 
were oppofite to other parts of it) ‘This’ globe had been 
cracked, but it had been in conftant ufe in that ftate above a 
year, and the'crack: had extended itfelf from the! pole to the 
equator. The proprietor afctibed the accident to'the vibra+ 
tion of the particles of glafs, and thought that the 84 had 
fome way impeded thofe vibrations, * ~ 

WueEn Mr..Boze’s globe broke, he fays’ that the: whole of 
it appeared,..in the: act of breaking; like: a flaming’ coal'y 
a circumftance which we sa fee sichonashatie for hereafter 
by Mr. Wilke. + 

Mr. Bourancer fays, that alate globes have fometimes 
burft.like bombs, and have wounded many perfons, and ‘that 
their fragments have even’ penetrated feveral inches into @ 
wall.{ He alfo fays, that if globes ‘burft:in whirling by the 
gun barrel’s touching them, they burft with the fame violence, 
the fplinters often entering into the wall. || 

Tur Abbé Nollet had a globe of fulphur which alfo burft, 
as he was rubbing it with his naked hands, after‘two or 


* Hiftoire, p. 87. + Wilke, p.124.  ¢ Boulanger, p. 23. | Ib. p. 144. 
three 


a oe 


jvh vitdela ody HeickecDBobeied ton swe" 
apislsx orld Hit iadifteup aici on gaitelorencls 
Anca wod aobsthsido aedrsiontghidion 
orited: bas iraesonn'ono doworqdeavibod 
7, ehoitnessbdo Stods ({qnisast won t 
acyialia Rog won eth E sv ~ fais draqut’ 
00d (doidw je) uate x9 stetevon bas ui Yer 
> aeargedaor Dogior dice Hotels 20) svg dort 
it oqo (adgil-amol words toy: baepirirsmovode 
moles sat bad totter exonefidiit rect wot 


¥ al pe SRE a OT Pe er 
OF CU M2, oie ano Rhsoseuch a 


OY TSD 
ww Jz 


y Sees SECTION 


ao, Mri CANTON's EXPERIMENTS> Parr I. 
“SECTLON IL 


OBSERVATIONS ON THE CONDUCTING POWER OF VARIOUS 
SUBSTANCES, AND PARTICULARLY Mr. CANTON’s 
EXPERIMENTS ON AIR3)) AND: SIGNIOR’ BECCARIA’s on 
AIR, AND WATER. 


NE of the principal defiderata in the {cience of eleGri- 

city, is to afcertain wherein confifts the diftinétion be- 
tween thofe bodies which are conduétors, and thofe which 
are non-conduétors of the eleétric fluid. All that has been 
done relating to this queftion, till the prefent time, amounts to 
nothing more than obfervations, how near thefe two claffes of 
bodies approach one another ; and before the period of which 
I am now treating, thefe obfervations were few, general, and 
fuperficial. But I hall now prefent my reader with feveral 
very curious and accurate experiments, which, though they do 


-not give us fatisfaction with refpect to the great defideratum 


abovementioned; yet throw fome light upon the fubject. 
They thow that fubftances which had been confidered as per- 
fe& conductors, or non-conduétors, are fo only to a certain 
de gree 

s 6 d 


 PereX. See. By 4, on ATR, liad 


degree; and that, probably, all the known parts of nature 
have, in fome meafure, the properties of both. 
. Tuese experiments were made by two perfons, whom, in 
He ftyle of hiftory, I may juftly call two of the greateft he- 
roes ‘of this part of my work ; viz. Mr. Canton; whofe 
difcoveries in eleétricity are far more numerous, and more 
confiderable than thofe of any other perfon, within this 
period, in England ; and Srenror BeccariA, one of the moft 
‘eminent of all the eleétricians abroad. 
- "Pyar air was capable of receiving electricity by communi- 
“cation, and of retaining it when received, had not been dif- 
covered by any perfon before Mr. Canton ; but, by the help 
of one of his exquifite contrivances, he was able to afcertain 
that delicate circumftance, and even meafure the degree of it, 
if it was in the leaft confiderable. j 
_ He got a pair of balls, turned in a lathe, out of the dry 
pith of elder. Thefe he put into a narrow box, with a fliding 
cover, fo difpofed that the threads (which were of the fineft 
linen) were kept ftraight in the box. . Holding this box by 
the extremity of the cover, the balls would hang freely from 
a pin in the infide. Thefe balls, hung at a fufficient diftance 
from buildings, trees, &c. eafily fhow the eleétricity of the 
atmofphere. They alfo determine whether the eledtricity of 
the clouds and the air be pofitive, by the decreafe; or nega- 
tive, by the increafe of their repulfion, at the approach of 
-excited amber or fealing. wax. : 
© By the help of this inftrument,; he obferved, that it was 
poflible to electrify the air of a room near the apparatus ; and 
even the air of the whole room in which it was, to a confi- 
, derable 


206 S. BECCARIA’s. EXPERIMENTS Part I. 


derable degree, and he was able to do it both pofitively and 
negatively. 

In a paper read at theRoyal Society, December the 6th, 1753, 
he obferves, that the common air of a room might be elec- 
trified to a confiderable degree, fo as not to part with its 
electricity for fome time. Having rendered the air of his 
room very dry, by means of a fire, he eletrified a tin tube 
(with a pair of balls fufpended at one of its extremities) to a 
great degree; when it appeared, that the neighbouring air 
was likewife eleétrified: For, having touched the tube with 
his finger, or other conduétor, the balls, notwithftanding, 
continued to repel one another, though not at fo great a dif- 
tance as before.* But he obferves that their repulfion would 
decreafe as they were moved towards the floor, wainfcot, or 
any of the furniture; and that they would touch each other 
when brought within a fmall diftance of any conductor. Some 
degree of this electric power, he has known to continue:in 
the air above an hour after the rubbing of the tube, when the 
weather had been very dry. 

To electrify the air, or the moifture contained in it, nega- 
tively, Mr. Canton fupported, by filk ftretched: between two 
chairs (placed back to back, at the diftance of about three 
feet) a tin tube with a fine fewing needle at one end of it; 
and rubbed fulphur, fealing wax, or a rough glafs tube.as 
near as he could to the other end, for three or four minutes ; 
after which he found the air to be negatively eleétrical, and 
that it would would continue fo a confiderable time after the 
apparatus was removed into another room. -+ 


* Phil. Tranf. Vol. 49. pt. 1. p. 300. + Ib. Vol. 48. pt. 2. p. 784. 
In 


-PeeeX Sec. TP 11/1) (ok CATR & 207 
Iw a paper dated November the r1th. 1754, he fays, that dry 
air, at a-great diftance from the’earth, if in an eledtric ftate, 
will continue fo till it meets with fome conduttor, is pro- 
bable from the following experiment. An excited glafs tube, 
with its natural polith, being’ placed ‘upright in the middle of 
a room (by putting one end of it in an hole, made for that 
purpofe, in a block of wood) would, generally, lofe its elec- 
‘tricity in Jefs than five minutes, ‘by attracting to it a fufticient 
quantity of moifture, to conduct ‘the cleétric fluid from all 
. ‘parts of its furface to the floor 5 ‘but if, “immediately after it 
_ was" excited, ‘it was placed, in the fame manner, before 4 
good fire, at the diftance of about two feet, where no moif- 
ture would adhere to its furface, it would continue eleétrical 
 atwhole day, and how much longer he knew not. * 
- Srenror Beccarra, who had no knowledge of what Mr: 
Canton had done, made the fame difcovery of the communi- 
cation of éleétricity to the air, and diverfified the experiment 
in a much more pleafing and fatisfa@ory manner. He proves, 
“that the air, which is contiguous to an electrified body, ac- 
_ quires, by degrees, the fame cleétricity ; that this electricity 
of the air counteracts that of the body, and leffens its effeéts$ 
and that as the air acquires, fo it alfo parts with this clec- 
tricity very flowly. 

He began his experiments by hanging linen threads upori 
an eleétrified chain, and obferving, that they diverged the 
' moft after a few turns of his globe. After that, they came 
nearer together, notwithftanding he kept turning the globe, 
and the excitation was as powerful as ever. + 

* Phil. Tranf. Vol. 48. pt. 2.p.784. | + Lettere dell’ Elettricifmo, p. 87. 

F when 


208 S. BECCARIA’s EXPERIMENTS Part I. - 


. Wuen he had kept the chain electrified’ a confiderable 
time, and then difcontinued the friction, the threads collapf- 
ed by degrees, till they hung parallel. After this, they 
began to diverge again, without any freth electrification ; and, 
if the air was ftill, this fecond divergence would continue an 
hour, or more. 

Tuis divergence was leffened by the eleétrification of the 
chain. For if the globe was turned again, the threads would 
firft become parallel, and then begin to diverge again as be- - 
fore. Thus the fecond divergence of the threads took place, 
when the chain was deprived of its ele@ricity, and when 
that which the air had acquired began to fhow itfelf... 

Wuite the threads were beginning to diverge with the 
electricity of the air, if he touched the chain, and thereby 
took off what remained of its eleGtricity, the threads would 
feparate farther. Thus the more the electricity of the chain 

- was leffened, the more did the eledtricity of the air appear. 

Wuite the threads were in their fecond divergence, he 
hung two other threads, fhorter than the former, by another 
filk thread to the chain; and when all the eleétricity of the 
chain was taken quite away, they would feparate, like the 
former threads. 

Ir he prefented other threads to the former, in their fe- 
cond divergence, they would all avoid one another. * 

In this complete and elegant manner did Signior Beccaria 
demonftrate, that air actually receives electricity by commu- 
nication, and lofes it by degrees; and that the electricity of 


~ 


the - 


* Lettere dell’ Elettricifmo, p. 90. 


ee sos on WATER. 209 
counteracts: that/of the nett ehhh conveys Laird 
9m bade ont AGordh orl 
paeae Beccaria alfo made a _variety of. other ciate: 
mentsy) which demonftrate other mutual affections of the air 
and the electric fluid; particularly fome that prove their mu- 
tuabtepulfion sand ‘that the electric fluid, in pafling through 
4 of air, makes a temporary vacuum. | 
, peat the ends of two wires within a {mall diftenee 
E r, in a glafs tube, one end of which was clofed, 
other immerged i in water; and obferved, that the wa-: 
“ter fane in the tube, every time that a {park paffed from the 
; » the electric fluid having repelled the air. * 
re Hee made the, electric explofion a great number of times, 
inthe fame air, inclofed in a glafs tube, in order to afcertain 
the elafticity of the air was affected by it; but he 
cou \d: nat. find any alteration. After the operation, he broke — 
the tube under water, but neither didany air make its efcape, 
not; any» water force its way into the tube. The experi- 
mient was made with all the precaution, with refpect to heat 
and:¢old, that the nature of the cafe required. -+ 
7 SrGNior-Beccarta’ s experiments on water, fhowing its 
imperfeétion a as a'conduttor, are more furprizing. than thofe 
hecmade upom air, fhowing its imperfection in the contrary | 
refpeé&. They prove that water conduéts ele€tricity  accord- 
ing tojits quantity, : and that a fmall quantity of water makes 
aivery-great refiftance to the paflage of the electric fluid. 
SoH made tubes, full of water, part of the eleétric citcuit, 


tol * Elettricifmo artificiale ¢ naturale, p. 110...» + Ib. p. 81 
Be and 


210 S. BECCARIA’s’s EXPERIMENTS PART Ji 


and obferved, that when they were \very/{mall, they, wouli 
not tranfmit a fhock, but that the fhock increafed as wid o? 
tubes were ufed. * 

Bur what aftonithes us moft in Signior Bithsaiats experi-=- 
ments with water, is his making the eleétric {park vifible in 
it, notwithftanding its being a real conductor: of eleGricity: 
Nothing, however, can prove more clearly how Sere a 
conduétor it is. i 

He inferted wires, fo as nearly to meet, in fimall wie 
filled with water; and, difcharging fhocks through them, the 
electric {park was vifible between their points, as if no water 
had been in the place. The tubes were generally broken to 
pieces, and the fragments driven to a confiderable: diftance, 
This was evidently occafioned by the repulfion of the water} 
and its incompreflibility, it not being able to give way. far 
enough within itfelf, and the force with whichiit) was 
repelled being very great. + uv adyg.ods 

Tue force with which {mall quantities of water are thus 
repelled by the eleétric fluid, he fays, is prodigious.) -By 


means of a charge of four hundred {quare inches, he broke 


a glafs tube two lines thick, when the pieces :were driveii to 
the diftance of twenty feet: Nay he: fometimes:broke:tubes 
eight, or ten lines thick, and the frapeihnei ny were driven to 


greater diftances in proportion. £ ogter 


He found the effect of the eleCtric {park upon axpuaninariel 
than the effect of a {park of common fire on gunpowder; and 
fays he does not doubt, but that, if a method ‘could be found 


* Elettricifmo artificiale e naturale, :p. 113... ¢ Ib. p. 114. ; t Lettere dell’ elettri- 
; of” 


cifmo, p. 74. 


coe langle I. on’ WATER. 211 


them equally well, a cannon charged with wa- 
irene be more dreadful than one charged with gunpow- 
der. He aétually charged a glafs tube with water, and put a 
a ball into it, when it was difcharged with great force, fo 
-itfelf in fome clay he placed to receive it. * 
‘ ce which {mall quantities of water make to 
tic matter, he imagined, was greater than the refift- 
»made to it by air.+ And yet he thought it was poffible, 
i inthis cafe, the electric matter might not aét upon the 
‘immediately, but upon the fixed air that was in it. 
en the tubes were not broken, he obferved that a 
Bes aati of air bubbles were fet loofe, through the whole 
mafs of the water, rofe to the top, and mixed with abr com- 
_ mon atmofphere,t ” 
| Healfo imagined that the electric fluid acted upon the fixed 
Poem bodies, though no venperimment could make it fen- 
: I { 
} ON ikl he fappokia that the a@ion of the adet 
ic matter tended to fix elaftic air, by exciting a fulphureous 
snatter, which Dr. Hales thows to have that property. § But 
the experiment. abovementioned, of the ele¢tric fpark taken 
in a clofed tube, doth not favour this fuppofition. 
~ Wuen a fmall drop of water was put between the points 
of two wires, and a large fhock paffed through them, the 
Water was equally. difperfed on the infide of a glafs {phere, in 
which they were all inclofed. In the fame manner, he con- 


* Lettere dell’ patkifes, 7 75> 76- — + Elettricifmo artificiale, &c. p. 115. 
3 Ib. p. 116. dl Ib. p. 83. § Ib, 


Ee2 ] jectures, 


212 S$. BECCARIA’s’ EXPERIMENTS, Parm T. 


jectures, that the action of the eleétric: matter’) promotes? the 
evaporation of water. * d ‘bittov" 94 
Discuarcine a fhock through a quantity of water, pour- 
ed on a flat furface, where fomé parts/of the circuit’ were 
purpofely left almoft dry; thofe parts: becamé \quite dry 
fooner than they would have been, ifno ony ioe ee 
through them. + rf 
Upon this principle he accounts for the tilted burfting 
of the blood veffels in fmall birds killed by. the eleétric 
fhock. ¢ And when a mufcle contraéts by the thocky!' he 
fuppofes it is owing to the dilatation’ of the fluids! their fibres 
contain, as the electric matter pafles through thems * =), 
So imperfect a conductor of electricity'is mere water, that, 
he thought, a green leaf conducted a fhock» better than: an 
equal thicknefs of water. |} If this be true, and ‘vegetable 
fluids conduét electricity better than’ water, it will confirm 
2 conjecture which Dr. Franklin told me, he had drawn 
from fome experiments that he had not propertly purfued,: viz. 
that animal fluids conducted electricity better than water. “He 
faid the finew of a deer, which did not feem very'moift, con- 
duéted a thock, when a wet thread would not doit.© 9)? 
Sicnror BeccariA alfo found, that even metal was not 
a perfe& conduétor of eleétricity, but made fome refift- 
ance to the paflage of the electric fluid. This he: even 
afcertained, by meafuring the time that. it: was. retarded, 
in its pafling through long and {mall wires, notwithftanding the 


* Elettricifmo artificiale, &c. p. 117. +Ib.p.s21. ” ¢ Ib. p. 228. — 
I Tb. p. 135. 


experiments 


a aaa Oe 


_— es _s - 


Per X. Sec. IY Vf “ow! MEOTTA"LE 213° 


/——expérinerits! which” had been ‘iriade ‘Beforé, <that feemed to. 
; ‘prove the contrary. > Rovemiit ods diixe ‘aicddiv amotlMotnis 
He fupended a wite'6f 500 Patis'feet, in'a laige building, 
‘and, by means Of a pendulum! which’ vibrated~half> feconds, 
obferved, that light bodies placed under:ayball of gilt ipaper, 
—— fatotie’ nid) didnot: inove, vtillyiapleaft; cone! vibration of this 
Pendulum; aftérhe had applied the -wiré of: avcharged phial 
3 % BH isdtis ids ot babtindin oder -ods, Jo tieq aodw 
-'TryING ‘the fame! with -hempen cord, "he could count 


. 


of the fame author, fhowing the manner in which the fmoke* 


of rofin and of colophonia is ‘affééted by’ the approach’ of an 
Bho: ‘ele@trified body, ‘as they have a very’ near! affinity to this 
_fubject. 


* Elettricifmo artificiale, p. 51. + Ib. 
REPEATING 


214 EX PIERIMENT Sy. Part I. 


ee vifble pa the fame of Pai which he 
prefeiired, fot this putpofe;’ to rofins he obferved feveral 
curious’ circumftances; which had efcaped the, notice of that 
ingenious philofophersiy, boosig cise) so 
cid cheated: theocolophonia!| ‘on a-coal, cra e held i in a 
{poon ‘under' an. dleGrified cube of metal|; and obferved, that 
when part of the fmoke afcended to the cube, another part 
covered the handle of. ‘the {poon, and {pread to his hand. * 

| Tur, fmoke. -dayuibiae pe she Aes at of the cube than 
onthe edges, and corners... 1, a 

. Ip a fpark, was taken from the. laces she fmoke was 
proses into an agitation, but. prefently, refumed its former 
fituation. 

Tue. cube with: its atmosphere, gave larger, and. longer 
fparks,. than ,a,cube not furrounded with one.) ,., 

A Larcer fpark might be taken from it by the fpoon, 
than, by any other body. 
. Havine infulated the {poon, lnwhibetred that hardly, any 
of the fmoke went to the cube ;. and) that what happened ito 
go near it 'was not affected ‘by it, any more than it would 
have been by any other body. He put his finger to. the 
fpoon, and the former phenomena) returned...Taking it off 
again, . the fraoke that had tested on the cube foon dif- 
perfed. 

Unper this head of the Bill er of various fubftances, it 
will not be improper to mention an experiment made by Mr, 


* Elettricifmo artificiale, &C. p. 72. + Ib. p. 73, 74+ 
Henry 


“Perv XT Sec. IL? TV onvSiIMOKEA  —@rs 


rin op ‘of Lifmore in Ireland, |which,-he ‘thought, 
dd that fteam, and-exhalations of-all kinds, areceleétrical: — 

+ ntaining ee 
a. ‘Society, “April the 23d. 1755. SS Saidsd “yvisias 
| Heveleétcified a’ piece of down, fufpended on-the middlé of 


ei along leeing, sinidsiriade Steamed Grsolketa6 fexebab deftids 


vinnder it, and through it; ‘andobferved, thatvits-electri+ 
‘was hot in the-leaft diminithed,!-as' he thought :it! would 
0s... if, the vapotr hadi been non cleétric,, and: donfex 
- quentlybad. taken away. withiit part, of the-ele@ric mitted 


as 


ts __ | with which, the down was loaded, » He'obferved that the! ef= 


© fede was: the fame,: whether. the down was electrified: with 
He. egg ate owas not eafy'to be accounted 
for, * 5A Alii £ Umaes 16 | 18], 85% giadotib bios od ciditive 
Bh: “To this. experiment, Dr. Darwin of Litchfield,.. ina letter 
 addreffed to the Royal Society, and read May, the §thii17 575 
~ anfwerss that «many. electrified | bodies,, and) particularly, all 
¢ light,. dry, animal and vegetable fubftances, will, not) eafily 
part with theirelectricity, though they be touched, for a 
_ confiderable time, with ii eat _He_ touched: a feather, 
» electrified like that of Mr. Ecles, ‘nine. ‘times withyhis,finger,. 
“and flill found it electrified. ;A.cork ball, was touched feven 
times:in,ten feconds before it .was exhaufhed, ae i 
Mr. Kinnerstey of Philadelphiay in: a ester 3 Aiked 
- March), 1761, . informs ,his, friend, and., correfpondent/Dr. 
- Eranklin,,, thea, in) England, _ that he could not electrify any 
- thing by means, of team from: elegtrified. boiling water ;, from 


® Phil. Tranf. Vol, 49- pt-d> P-153e jn -tbs Vol so. pt. 1. p. 252. 


«bo whence 


216 E.X PE RIEM-EN-T S.! coc PArrel 
whence! ‘he ‘concluded, . that,» contrary to’ what had been be- 


- fore’fuppofed by hhinifelf and shis:'friend; fteam was ifonfar 


from rifing ieleGtrifiedyy that:cit: left its _ of common elec 
tricity behind. * 
oTo try the: effects of: ebuthciy upon. air, ‘Mr. _ Kinnetfley 
contrived»an’ excellent inftrument,? which he calls'an eleGrical 
air thermometer. ' Ateconfifted of d:glafs tube, about:eleven 
inches long; ‘and! one! inch! in! diameter, ‘madéiair tight; clofed 
with brafs caps at each end, and‘afmall tube, open at both ends, 
let down through the upper plate, into fome water at the bottom 
ofthe wider tube. Within this veffel he placed'two' wires, one 
defeerding: ‘from *the’ brafs’ dapat the’upper end, andthe o- 
ther afcending from the brafs ‘¢ap at tlie lower end through 
which he could difcharge a jar, or tranfmit a fpark, &c. and 
at ithe fame:time 'fee-the expanfidn'of the’air'in the veflal,’ by 
the rife of the water in the {mall tube: | With thivinftrament 
he made the following experiments,’ Felated'in wietter to/Dr. 
Franklin; dated March'the f2thea76 fe ‘ocies gtd arly! 
| He fet the ‘therindiieter 968 lan electric: Rand, swith ‘the 
testis fixed to the’ prime condor, and’kept it well'eleetriz 
“zed @ ‘cotiderable tine "but! ‘this produced’ iio Confiderable 
effect ? from’ Whence He iiferred, thut the eléétrie fire, when 
in a ftate of reft) had no ihoré heat ‘thatthe: aif, "and ‘other 
matter wherein if refidess 0" 1 smug. ald 
\ Wuew' the two wires within the’ ethaiviee in’ ‘conta&t, a 
‘eine charge of 'cleétricity; from: ‘above’ thirty: {quare feet ‘of 
coated se caponpenmmamassnnert diss «03% 


© 1 OF Phil Diant, Vols 53. pete preg © leet Tet” 


2202 wW 


Patti fe Hint Kod DodpAGAs 2 217... - 
that the wires ‘were not event byithe fire palling wee! 


& cx 1 snob bas. si s2200 so0in a Jota jv is 
1 Wie the wires. were about two ached tudes aains 
of a three pint bottle,. darting from one to the other, rarefied 
the air very evidently ; which thowed, that the electric fire 
produced-heat i imitfelf, as'Mr.' sik aahwee mh aowell ane 
their, by its rapid motions 219 -b0 so .000 bl 
Tue charge of a jar which contained about ove ellen a ‘ 
_ whalfy-darting from» wire to wire, would caufe .a prodigious 
expanfion in the air sand the charge-of his’ battery of thirty 
“fquare feet of coated glafs would: raife the water im the finall 
tube quite tothe top. Upon the coalefcing of the air, the 
column. of water, by its gravity, inftantly: fubfided,’ till it 
Was in’ equilibrio ‘with ‘the rarefied ‘air. © It. then’ gradually 
_ defcended, as the air cooled, and fettled SAba it ftood .before.: 
By ‘carefully obferving at what height the defcending water 
firft topped, the degree of rarefaction; he fays, might :be:dif= 
covered, which, in great explofions, was very confiderable. 
Iris. obvious to remark, that the firft fudden rife of pi 
water/of Mr. Kinnerfley’s thermometer, upon an explofion 
being made in the veffel which contained ‘it, is not to be af- 
cribed to the rarefaction of the air by heat, ‘but to'the quan~ 
lity of air actually difplaced by the ele@trical flath. It is on- 
ly when that firft fudden rife is fubfided, as Mr. Kinnerfley 
himfelf obferves, that the degree of its rarefaction by the heat 
can be eftimated, viz, by the height at which the water then 
ftands above the common level. 
Dr. Franxzin had faid, that ice failed to condu& a 
fhock of ele&tricity ; and Mr. Bergman, in a letter to Mr. 
F f Wilfon, 


218 EXPERIMENTS Part k 


Wilfon, read at the Royal Society November the 20th. 1760, 
fhows (what Signior Beccaria had done before) that a {mall 
quantity of water failed as muchas the ice had, done, with 
Dr. Franklin, who feems to, have made ufe of an icicle whichs 
Mr. Bergman thought, was not large, enough for the pur- 
pofe, | From hence he fufpected that large: quantities. of ice 
would tranfmit a fhock of electricity as perfectly as a large 
quantity of water. * 

However, he feems, afterwards, to have changed his 
fentiments with’ refpect to ice > for, in a fubfequent paper, 
read at the Royal Society March the 18th, 1762, when he had 
remarked that frow would not, conduc the electric thock ; 
he fays, he believes, if he could procure plates of ice of a 
proper thicknefs, he could charge. them in the fame manner 
aarglafs. mpofl si sxodw beli3s has 

Jonannes Franciscus Ciena was fo fully perfuaded of 
the-non conducting power of ice, that he made ufé of it in an 
experiment, defigned to afcertain whether ele&tri¢ fubftances 
did, according to Dr. Franklin’s, hypothefis, contain’ more 
of the electric matter than other bodies. | He inclofed a quan- 
tity of ice in a glafs veffe], and’when he thoughtjhe had con- 
verted it from an electric to a non electric by melting; he 
tried whether it was eledtrified:' but, though he found no 
appearance of its having acquired any more of the fluid than 
it ought to have in its new ftate, he does not feem ta have 
given up his opinion. {> : 

* Phil. Tranf. Vol..51. pt. 2. p. 908. + Ib. Vol. 52. pt. 2. 10d 7h 


1 Memoirs of the Academy at Turin, for the year 1765. p. 47- 
; ; In 


PerwX. Secs HW.) cow IC EL) +> 219 


_ In the laft part of this work the reader will find fome ex- 
periments, which, it is imagined, will afcertain the clafs of 
bodies in which ice ought to be ranked, by proving its con- 
ducting power to be, at leaft, nearly equal to that of water. 


Ffa SECTION 


2ze Mr. CANTON’s EXPERIMENTS» Paar i 


«5 pte W tbspr srlt Aiow eis? 16 tasq Ask anf 
ote : i y orl } j fel orft x 


fave o:tnit-oB IN Reda QUINT 0 Hild ch's 


Mr. CANTON’s rxPERIMENTS AND DISCOVERIES RELAT-~ 
ING TO THE SURFACES OF ELECTRIC BODIES, AND OTHERS 
MADE IN PURSUANCE OF THEM, OR RELATING To THE 
SAME SUBJECT; ALL TENDING TO ASCERTAIN THE 
DISTINCTION BETWEEN THE TWO ELECTRICITIES. 


ILL this laft period of the hiftory, the fame eleétricity 

had always been produced by the fame eleétric. The 
frition of glafs had always produced a pofitive, and the fric- 
’ tion of fealing wax, &c. had always produced a negative elec. 
tricity. Thefe were thought to be effential, and unchange- 
able properties of thofe fubftances; and hence the one was 
by many called the vitreous, and the other the refinous elec- 


tricity; and to electrify negatively, or produce a refinous: 


eletricity by means of glafs; or to electrify pofitively, that 
is, produce a vitreous electricity, by means of fealing wax, &c. 
would have been thought as great a paradox, as to electrify 
at all by the friGtion of brafs or iron. For though it was not 


known why, the-electric matter fhould flow from the rubber 
to 


| Per.X, Sec.III. on THE Two ELECTRICITIES. 221 


‘to the excited glafs, or to the rubber from excited fealing wax, 
the faé& had been invariable ; and nothing is even mentioned 
to have happened, in the courfe of any experiments, that 
could lead a perfon to fufpect the poffibility of the con- 
trary. som 
ee then muft have been the furprife of electricians, to 
find;that thefe different powers of glafs and fulphur'were fo - 
far from being invariable, that they were even interchange- 
able; and that the fame glafs tube could be made to aflume 
the powers of both! And what muft have been their fatif- 
faGtion to, find the circumftance on which the convertibility 
of thofe oppofite powers depended, completely afcertained. 
This furprife and pleafure was given them by Mr. Canton, 
who fhowed that it depended only on the rubber, and the 
farface of the glafs, whether it electrified pofitively or nega- 
tively. 
~_ In’ what manner, by what train of thought, or by what 
accident he was led to this difcovery, this excellent philofo- 
pher has not been pleafed to inform us. but it is certainly a 
difcovery that, in an eminent manner, diftinguithes this pe~ 
tiod of my hiftory. It throws great light upon the doétrine 
of pofitive and negative electricity, and led the way to other 
difcoveries which throw {till more light upon it. 

Tuis fubje& of the two eleétricities feems to have engaged 
the attention of eleétricians in a more particular manner, in 
the whole courfe of this period, and ever fince the difcovery 
of Dr. Franklin, that the electricity of the two furfaces of 
charged glafs are always contrary to one another. Accord- 
ingly, the reader will find feveral fections in this period of 

4 the 


222 Mr. CANTON’s EXPERIMENTS Parrl. 


the hiftory relating to it; but he will find that though much 
has been done, much yet remains to be done; and that we 
are ftill far from thoroughly underftanding the nature of the 
two electricities, with their rire upon, and — to 
one another. 

Previous to the communication of the difcovery itfelf, 
Mr. Canton obferves, that fealing wax might have pofitive 
ele&tricity fuperinduced-upon it. He excited a ftick of fealing 
wax about two feet and a half in length, and an inch diame- 
ter; and, holding it by the middle, he drew an excited glafs 
tube feveral times over one part of it, without touching the 
other. The confequence was, that half which had’ been 
expofed to the action of the excited glafs was pofitive, ang 
the other half negative: for the former half deftroyed the re- 
pelling power of balls electrified by glafs, while the other 
half increafed it. + 

Tue experiments, which prove that the appearances of pot 
tive and negative electricity depend upon the furface of the 
electrics, and that of the rubber, were made i in the latter end 
of December 1753. 

Havine rubbed a glafs tube with a piece of thin theet lead, 
and flour of emery mixed with water, till its ttanfparency was 
intirely deftroyed, he excited it (when it was made perfectly 
clean and dry) with new flannel, and found it act in all re- 
{pects like excited fulphur or fealing wax. The eleétric fire 
feemed to iffue from the knuckle, or end of the finger, and 
to fpread itfelf on the furface of the tube, in a very beautiful 
manner. 


* Phil. Tranf. Vol. 48. pt. 1. p. 356. 
Ir 


wee 


Per.X. Sec. IIL. on THE Two ELECTRICITIES. 223 


te this rough or unpolithed tube was excited by a piece of 
dey oiled filk, efpecially when rubbed over with a little chalk 
or whiting, it would a@tlike a glafs tube with its natural 
- polith. In this cafe the electric fire appeared only at the 
_ knuckle, or the end of the finger, where it feemed to ss very 

_ much condenfed before it entered. 
eh: Bur if the rough tube was greafed all over with tallow 
from | a candle, and as much as poftible of it wiped off with a 
i napkin, | then the oiled filk would receive a kind of polith’ by 
rubbing i it;,and, after a few ftrokes, would make the tube 
a& in the'fame manner as when excited at firft by flannel. 
|| The oiled filk, when covered with chalk or whiting, would 
the greafed rough tube act again like a polifhed one ; but 
if the friction was continued till the rubber became fmooth, 
the eleétric power would be changed to that of sss feal- 
ing wax, &c. | 

_ Tuus, fays he, may the pofitive and negative powers of 
electricity be produced at pleafure, by altering the furfaces of 
the tube ‘and rubber, according as the one or the other is moft 
affected by the friction between them. For if the polith be 
taken off one half of a tube, the different powers may be ex- 
cited with the fame rubber at a fingle ftroke ; and, he adds, 
the rubber is found to move much eafier over the rough, than 
over the polithed part of it. 

Tuar polifhed glafs electrified pofitively, and rough glafs 
rubbed with flannel negatively, feemed plain from the ap- 
pearance of the light between the knuckle, or end of the 
finger, and the refpective tubes. But this, Mr. Canton 
thought, was farther confirmed by obferving, that a polifhed 

glafs 


224 Mr. WILSON’s EXPERIMENTS Part I. 


glafs tube, when excited by fmooth oiled filk, if the hand 
was kept three inches, at leaft, from the top of the rubber, 
would, at every ftroke, appear to throw out a great number 
of diverging pencils of electric fire ;- but that none were ever 
feen to accompany the rubbing of fulphur, fealing wax, &c. 
not was he ever able to make any fenfible alteration in the 
air of a room merely by the friction of thofe bodies ; whereas 
the glafs tube, when excited fo as to emit pencils, would, in 
a few minutes, electrify the air, to fuch a degree, that, after 
the tube was carried away, a pair of balls, about the fize of 
the fmalleft peas, turned out of cork, or the pith of elder; 
and hung to a wire by linen threads of fix inches long, would 
repel each other to the diftance of an inch and an half, when 
held at arms length in the middle of the room. * 

Arter thefe experiments of Mr. Canton, Mr. Wilfon 
made feveral, which throw a little more light upon this cu- 
rious fubje& ;|. but. it is,difficult to draw any general conclu- 
fion from them, and his own is not fufficiently determinate. 
It is, that two electrics being rubbed together, the body 
whofe fubftance is hardeft, and electric power ftrongeft, will 
always be plus, and the fofteft and weakeft minus. + Rubbing 
the tourmalin and amber together, he produced a p/uselectricity 
on both fides the ftone, and a minus on the amber; but 


‘rubbing the tourmalin and diamond together, both fides of the 


tourmalin were electrified minus, and the diamond plus. 
TueEse experiments, which, he thought, proved this pro- 
pofition, encouraged him to try what would be the effect of 
* Phil. Tranf. Vol. 48. pt. 2. p. 782. 1 + Ib. Vol. 51. pt. 1. p. 331 q 

: . rubbing 


Per. X.Sec. 1, on ELECTRICS... 225 


rubbing or forcing air againft different eletrics, and the ef- 
fects were every confiderable. In thefe experiments -he only 
made ufé of a-common pair of bellows, and his: firft: experi- 
‘ment was upon the tourmalin, This fubftance -he brought 
‘near the end of the pipe, and found, that after it had received 
about twenty blafts, it was eleétrified p/us on both fides. 
Ait, therefore, feemed to be lefs eleGtric than the tourmalin. 
| Inro the place of the tourmalin, he brought a pane of glafs, 
and blew againft it the fame number of times as in the former 
; experiment ; and when he had examined both fides, he found 
that ot were nislecteified plus alfo, but: lefs than the tour- 
malin. 

SS adniln; thicated 4 in the fame imanner, was cle@rified lefs - 
than the glafs. 

\. He next had recourfe to a fmith’s bellows. The diffesece 

rails thefe oceafioned was only a much ftronger electricity 
in the tourmalin.: Amber was {till weaker than the glafs ; 
and the glafs weaker than the tourmalin. 
_ Havine in view the medium (which, I have obferved, he 
laid great ftrefs upon, as conftituting the difference between 
electrics and non eleétrics) he confidered that heat would ra- 
tify it on the furfaces of the particles of air; by which 
means, air, having its refiftance leflened, would more readily 
part with the ele@ric fluid, and, of confequence, apity 
more powerfully. 

Tue pipe of the bellows being made red hot, he blew a- 
gainft the tourmalin twelve times only, which was eight 
times lefs than in the former experiment with cold air. In 
this experiment the tourmalin was electrified p/vs on both 
; Gg fides, 


226 Mr. WILSON’s EXPERIMENTS Part I. 


fides, but to a confiderable degree more than was done in the 
former experiments. The hot air had the fame effect upon 
glafs, but ele¢trified it lefs than the tourmalin: and amber ; 
though, like the other bodies, it received an increafe of 
ty by the fame treatment, was electrified the leaf of 


ai the air ele&trifying more powerfully when it was tit 
than when it was cold, and the tourmalin® being eleétrified 
more than glafs, and glafs more than amber, as appeared by 
the laft experiments ; we feem, fays Mr. Wilfon, to have 
obtained a'proof, that the whole atmofphere is conftantly 
promoting a flow of the electric fluid, by the alternate changes 
of heat and cold; and further, that airs not -only lefs elec- 
tric than the tourmalin, but lefs than glafs, or even amber. *: 

In another paper, read at the Royal Society November the 
13th. 1760, Mr. Wilfon recites fome curious experiments, 
which, hefays, thew that a p/us ee may be produced 
by means of a minus electricity. 

-Havine cleétrified the infide of a large scp deechattde pes; 
by means of a conduting wire from:an excited glafs globes 
he fet it on a ftand) of prepared wood, and took away the 
conducting wire, after which the mouth of the bottle was 
clofed with a ftopple of glafs. ‘Then the pointed end of an 
ivory conduétor was brought oppofite to the middle of the 
bottle, and about two inches from it. Upon doing this, the 
balls were electrified minus; and the more fo as the ivory was 
moved nearer the bottle, in an horizontal direction. _ 


by Phil. Tranf. Vol. 51. pt. 1. p. 332, &c. 


idan 


“perX. ‘See. TI. on THE Two ELECTRICITIES. 227 


i Bor, | on removing the ivory to a greater diftance; the mi- 


o> Lahr Se 


nus clettricity decreafed ; and, at a certain diftance, there 


| was not any fign of it remaining ; but when the diftance was 


increafed to about eighteen inches from the bottle, a p/us clec- 

tricity appeared, which, | continued even after the \ivory was 
entirely away. * ct 

"Wit a cylinder of baked wood he elegtrified the balls 


ha ging to the ivory minus, at the diftance of four fect or more, 


by holding the cylinder over the middle of the ivory,,and 
ont: inuing it there; and, on moving it nearer, they were more 
yn ‘ly’ electrified minus, but the fame cylinder, on removing 


‘it back again to the diftance of two or three feet, or more, 


eleGtrified the balls plus. 


Wen another conduaor of wank, without sed or 


one was ufed, inftead of the ivory, and’ without any thing 
ging from it, the fame cylinder held over the metal (as 
was done in the laft experiment over the ivory, at the diftance 
of two feet) produced a plus ele&tricity ; and this was render- 
ed weaker as the cylinder was moved nearer; but by leffening 
the diftance to ‘about one foot, the minus electricity took 
place. ‘In thefe'cafes Mr. Wilfon thought, that the p/us ap- 
pearance» ‘arofe from the earth, air, or other neighbouring 
bodies: 

" Wuen the preceding experiments were firft made, he was 
a little embaraffed,: by ‘the uncertain appearances of a plus 
clegtricity at one time, and a minus at another, in the fame 
experiment; but, by repeated trials and obfervations, he 


s * Phil. Tranf. Vol. 51. pt. 2. p. 899, &c. 
Gg2 found, 


228 Mr. WILSON’s EXPERIMENTS. Parr fF. 


found, that a plus or minus ele&ricity may be produced at 
pleafure, by carefully attending to the three following cir- 
cumftances; viz. the form of the bodies, their fudden or 

gradual removal, and the degrees of electrifying. } 

Mr. Witson, after this, proceeds to mention fome other 
circumftances of a very nice nature, where, the flighteft and 
almoft imperceptible differences in the pofition or in the. 
courfe of the friction of two bodies produce, in either of 
them, the p/us electricity at one time, and the minus at ano- 

ther. Such, fays he, are the effects of this fubtle and active 
fluid, when the experiments are carefully made; and there- 
fore they require the moft {crupulous attention to trace out 
the caufes which occafion them. 

SEALING wax and filver were the bodies ufed in the two 
firft experiments, but many other fubftances feemed to per- 
form as well. The fealing wax was clean, and undifturbed 
by any friction whatever, but that of the air furrounding it, 
and had been fo for fome hours. ‘The filver was fixed toa 
piece of prepared wood, which was alfo preferved from fric- 
tion for the fame length of time. Then, taking one of thofe 
fubftances in each hand, the filver being at the end of the 
wood the fartheft from the hand, he laid the fmootheft part 
of the filver upon the fealing wax, and moved it along the 
furface gently, once only, and with a very flight preffure, 
after which the filver was electrified plus, and the wax minus. 

On repeating the experiment with equal care, and in the 
fame manner, except that the fmooth fide of the filver was a 
little inclined, fo that the edge of it preffed again{t the wax 5 
the filver, after moving it as before, was eleétrified minus, 

and 


Per.X. Sec.II. on tHe two ELECTRICITIES. 229. 


and the wax plus,’ contrary to what was obferved: in: the Jaft 
"experiment. ; sit 
 'Tuese oppofite effets, occafioned by the different appli- 
cations of the fat or edge of the filver, feemed to arife from 
an alteration made inthe furface of the ‘wax, by deftroying 
the polith in one cafe, and not in the other; and in this. re- 
fpe&t refembled the polifhed and rough glafs mentioned 

before. ’ > . 6 

~ Upon making ufe of prepared wood inftead of wax, and 
employing different degrees of preflure in the friftion, with 

the fame edge of the filver, he produced the like appearances ; 
_ the leaft preflure caufing a plus, and the greateft preflure a 

minus appearance in the filver. ~ 
A erat piece of fteel well polifhed, and the edges round- 
ed off, afforded the fame appearances, by only applying the 
flat furface to the wood, but it required more prefling to pro- 
duce the minus effe& in this cafe than it did in the former, 
where the edge was concerned. 

/ Wueruer the reafon offered above for explaining thefe 
~ Jaft curious appearances be true or not, Mr. Wilfon did not 
yenture to affirm, for want of farther experiments. but thus 
much he thought might be fafely advanced, that we have 
learned to produce at pleafure a p/us. or minus electricity from 
the fame bodies, by attending to the manner of their appli- 
cation and friction. * 
~ Mr. BERGMAN, ina letter to Mr. Wilfon, read at the 
Royal Society February the 23d. 1764, gives an account of 


* Phil. Tranf. Vol. 51. pt. 2. p. 899, &c. 
fome 


230 Mr. BERGMAN’s EXPERIMENTS Parr I, 


fome curious experiments of his, which, in conjunction with 
thofe of Mr. Canton abovementioned, concerning furfaces, 
may. throw confiderable light upon the doétrine of uci 
and negative electricity. 


Tue experiments were made with two pieces or fkains of | 
filk, one of which was extended in a frame, while Mr. Berg= 


man held the other in his hand. He obferved, that if the 
two fkains of filk were the fame with refpect to texture, co- 
lour, fuperficies, and in every thing elfe, as far as could be 
judged; and if he drew the whole length of the piece which 
he held in his hand over one part of that which was extended 
in the frame, the piece in his hand contraéted the pofitive 
electricity, and the piece in the frame a negative. If he drew 
one part of that which he held in his hand over the re 
length of the other the effects were reverfed. 

Ir the piece in his hand was of a different colour from that 
in the frame (provided it was not black) the event was the 
fame. 

Ir the piece in his hand was black, it was always negative, 
which ever way it was rubbed, except the piece in the frame 
was black too; for then, if the whole length of it was weber 
bed, it was electrified pofitively. 

In endeavouring to account for thefe effeats, he obferves, 
that the piece which was moft rubbed was made /moother, 
and warmer than the other; and was of opinion, that though 
fmoothnefs did difpofe bodies to be excited pofitively, yet 
that other circumftances were alfo to be taken into confidera- 
tion; having found that when he held in his hand a fkain of 
filk, which, by much friction, was made very fmooth, and 
drew 


—- 


Per.X. Sec. III. on THE Two ELECTRICITIES. 232 — 


drew it over one part of another fkain, which was rough, and 

hhad never been ufed before, that the rough fkain was, never- 

‘thelefs, pofitive. From this experiment he concluded, that 

' this effet was, in fome meafure, owing to the colour; and, in 

‘purfaing this thought nhs he was led to the norte 
ents. 

Ir the piece in his hand was well wind eiougti it was 
drawn over one part of the piece in the frame, it became e- 
“‘leétrified negatively, and the piece in the frame’ pofitively. 

‘He-made thefe experiments with the fame fuccefs upon fkains 
of file of various colours, blue, green, red, white, &c. 

Tr the piece in the frame was black, it never contraéted 2 
peer electricity, although the piece in his hand had been 
much heated, except this were black too. From thefe ex- 
periments, he thought he might fafely conclude, that heat 
did difpofe fome fubftances, at leaft, toa negative ftate; and 
thought that the want of attention to this circumftance might 

have occafioned miftakes in the event of fome experiments, 
efpecially thofe concerning ifland chryftal. 

From the whole he concludes, that there is a certain fixed 
order with refpeét to negative and pofitive eleétricity, in 
which all bodies may be placed, while other circumftances 
remain the fame. Let A, B, C, D, E be certain fubftances, 

“each of which, when rubbed with one which is antecedent to 
it, is negative, but with a fubfequent pofitive. In this cafe, 
the lefs diftance there is between the bodies that are rubbed, 
the weaker, cet. par. will be the ele@tricity; wherefore-it 
will be ftronger between A and E, than it will be between 
Aand B. Heat, he fays, difpofes bodies to a negative elec- 

: tricity, 


‘232 Mr. WILKE’s EXPERIMENTS). © Part I.- 


tricity, but if the diftance abovementioned be confiderable, 
it may not be able to’ overcome, though it may weaken that 
eleétricity, as is evident from the fkains of black filk. When 
a glafs globe grows warm in whirling, we are fenfible that 


its ele€tric power is diminifhed. Is it not owing, fays he, to 


this circumftance, that by heat it is more difpofed to negative 
eleétricity, by which means the diftance above-mentioned be- 
tween the glafs and the rubber is leffened? * . 

Upon the fubjec& of this fection, I muft introduce to the 
acquaintance of my reader two eminent cleétricians, whofe 
difcoveries will give him the greateft fatisfa@tion ; I mean Mr. 
Wixke, and pinus, the former of Roftock in Lower Saxony, 
and the latter of Peterfburgh: a circumftance which gives me 
an occafion of congratulating all the lovers of the fciences, 
and particularly of electricity, on the extenfive fpread of their 
favourite ftudies. What joy would it have given Mr, Haw- 
kefbee, or Mr. Grey, to have forefeen that two fuch admi- 
rable treatifes on the fubject of electricity, as thofe of the 
perfons above-mentioned, would come from countries fo rer 
mote from. the place of its rife! 

Mr. Wirke.relates many.curious experiments concerning 
the generation of what he calls. /pontaneous. electricity, pro- 
duced by the liquifaétion of electric fubftances, which, com- 
pared with thofe of Mr. Canton, throw great light upon the 
doétrine of pofitive and negative eletricity. 


He melted fulphur in an earthen veffel, which he placed 
upon conductors; then, letting them cool, he took out the 


* Phil. Tranf. Vol. 54. p. 86. 
fulphur 


ee le — 


dill 


daw Ill.) :on, Tue: Two ELECTRICITIES. 233. 


iy 2 Ss falk ary nd.found it ftrongly electrical,;. but, it was not, fo 
sip . ad ftoo to cool L upon electric fubitances., 
iz, melted fulphur,i ‘in glafs veflels, whereby, they k both ace 
peek electricity in the circumftances wears 
; et tlic r they were placed upon eleétrics or not; but a 
* Stronger in, the former cafe than, in the latter; and. they ac- 

Lerqnaen ict the glafs yeflel into whi 

eg i was coated with metal, In. thefe, cafes, . the glafs 
was always pofitive, and the. fulphur negative. It was par- 
ticularl ticularly remarkable, that the fulphur-acquired. no electricity 

ul ‘began to cool, and contract,,and was the ftrongeft when 
fiat of greateft contraction ; whereas the ele@tricity of 

ees wwas,,at the fame time, the. weakeft ; and, was the 
ftrongeft ‘of, all when the. fulphur was fhaken out, before it 
began to contract, ‘and. acquire any negative electricity. 

Pursuing thefe, experiments, ‘he found that melted, fealing 
wax, poured into glafs, acquired. a negative electricity,» but 
poured into fulphur it acquired a pofitive eleCtricity, and left 
the fulphur negative. Sulphur poured into baked wood be- 
sans, negative, .. Sealing wax alfo poured into wood was ne- 

ive, and the, wood confequently pofitives. but falphur 
poured in into. fulphur, or into ough. glafs, acquired no, ¢lec~ 
tricity at all. * 

_ Experiments fimilar to thefe were alfo. made, by, Epinus. 
He poured melted fulphur into metal cups, and obferved that 
when the fulphur was cool, the cup and the fulphur together 
fhowed no figns of electricity, but thowed very {trong figns of 


* Wilke, p. 44, &c, ~ 
Hh it 


234 Mr. WILKE’s EXPERIMENTS Parr. 


it the moment they were feparated. The eleétricity always 
difappeared when the fulphur was replaced in the ‘cup, and 
revived upon being taken out again. ‘The cup had acquired 
a negative, and the fulphur-a pofitive electricity; but if the 
cleétricity of either of them had been taken off while they 
were feparate, they would both,’ when ‘united, fhow figns of 
that eledtricity which had not been taken off.’ "This ele@tri- 
city, he obferves, was only on the furfate of the falphar. * ’ 

Mr. Wire has, likewife, recited {everal curious experi- 
ments, which he made on the fri@tion’ of various fubftances, 
which likewife throw confiderable light on'the fame fu in 
~ Sutpuur’and glafs rubbed together’ produced a ftrong’ 
tricity, pofitive in the glafs, and negative inthe fulphur. © 3 
' SutpHur and fealing wax being rubbed together, the wax 
became pofitive, and the fulphur negative. 9) 

Woop rubbed with cloth was always’ negative. ©” a 

Woop rubbed againft fmooth gla ‘Seca negative, “but 
againft rough glafs pofitive. 

Sutpuur rubbed againft metals was petive ponte and 
this was the only cafe in which it was fo; but being rubbed 
againft lead it became negative, and’ the metal pofitive ; ‘lead 
appearing, thereby, to be not fo good a conduétor as the o- 
ther metals. 

Arrer thefe experiments, Mr. Wilke gives the following 
catalogue of the principal fubftances with which eleétrical ex- 
periments are made, in the order in which they are difpofed 
to acquire pofitive or negative cleétricity ; 3 any of the fubftan- 


- * Zpini Tentamen, p. 66, 70. 


ces 


ea seer oN) THe, Two ELECTRICITIES. 235 


pofitiyely. electric when; rubbed ;with. any. that 
follow, it cae negative: hrs rubbed with any. ‘that 


) ior sls od3 bail hetini-nstiv pow? ods 

Yea orl WISGHO sinst 

ts AMAL 3531 White wax, iw re uid 

wit Woollen pte Rough gla... ey 

RMS Quills, Lead. ; 
Sy Wood. yg vem Sulphur. 
vt 4 : ‘Paper. Metals. * 


Sealing wax. 


In all experiments made to determine the order of thefe 

fubftances, Mr. Wilke fays, that great care is neceflary, to 

a inguith original eleétricity from that which is communi- 
or the confequence of friction. + 

i Wikz fays that fmooth glafs is in all cafes pofitive, 

and thence infers that it attracts the electric fluid the moft of 


“ae all known fubftances ; but Mr. Canton tells me he has found, 


that the fmootheft glafs will acquire a negative electricity by 
being drawn over the back of a cat. 

Or the fame nature with thefe experiments of Mr. Wilke 
are the following of Apinus. He preffed clofe together two 
pieces of looking glafs, each containing fome fquare inches ; 
~ and obferved, that when they were feparated, and not fuffered 
to communicate with any conduétor, they each acquired a 
ftrong ele&tricity, the one pofitive, and the other negative. 
When they were put together again, the electricity of both 


* Wilke, p. 54, &c. + Ib. p. 69. 
Hha2 difappeared, 


236 Mk. DELAVAL's "EXPERIMENTS Part f. . Jae 
difappeared, but not’ if either of thei had been deprived of F 

Mie ete cetehp Wan eke were attr for) in that cafe, 

the two, when united, had the ele€tricity of the other. ‘The 


fame experiment, he 
phur, or with ‘any 
piece ‘of metal. + feat 


z: 
) 4 tit 
Pid tae Eto Digeree: MOE CALEL | cabrl ose thot Te 


‘ oq eid Me iii 
‘to ape iia JBM pe rnthrs 
ful and oa sty is titite) iMod: 2 


¢ emdonti’ BInUpl omok giinteidga Asad a3 of 
boise som ne eer 


az Paixisieatv: . ON THE Two: iuabiaectitie. 237 
bats (Poanaves enw ~ ied’ Ils mandi ..yaiiisgmas | Hos 


ia ‘ 
ae ia acs MOLHSSiS unit rH 


rhnpogimos bod 5 i sais .bsi3$qx5 


Mn. DELAVAL’s EXPERIMENTS RELATING TO THE TWo 


et ELECTRICITIES, AND HIS | CONTROVERSY WITH Mr. 


mid ©: ae UPON THAT suBJEcT. fee : 
ot, : wap) ¥ : 13 


rR. cANTC ON, in the courfe of experiments related in ~ 
. the preceding, fection, clearly proved, that the pro- 
det of either of the two eleétricities depends intirely upon 
: e furface of the excited eleétric with refpect to the rubber, 
iat thowed, that the very fame glafs tube would produce 
either of ‘them at pleafure; yet, notwithitanding this de- 
monftration, Mr. Delaval, feveral years afterwards, propofed 
another theory of the two cledtricities, which feems to be 
‘more ingenious than folid ; as it goes upon the fuppofition of 
‘the different powers depending intirely upon the different 
fubftances themfelves. The account of this theory was read 
‘at “the Royal Society March the.2ad. 1759. It neceflarily 
“oceati oned fome controverfy with Mr. Canton, in the courfe 
‘of which fome new experiments. were made, and fome new 

acts difcovered ; on account of which I fhall, with the ut- 
ae moft 


238 Mr. DELAVAL’s EXPERIMENTS Parr I. 


moft impartiality, report all that was advanced on both 
fides, 

Mr. Deravat obferved, that there were two of the pure 
chymical principles of bodies, viz. earth and /ulphur, which 
were each poflefled of a different kind of eleétricity; one of 
which we might call a p/us electricity, the other a minus; and 
thought that it might be expected, that, in a body compound- 
ed of both, the oppofite powers of thofe ingredients would 
counter-balance, and deftroy the effect of each other ; and 
therefore, that bodies in which the negative and pofitive powers 
were equal, would be neutral, or non eleétrics. Such a fub- 
ftance he took metal to be, confifting of calx and fulphur ; 
metals not being calcinable without a degree of heat fufficient 
to diffipate all their fulphur ; as is evident from their not be= 
ing reducible again to their metallic form, without the ad- 
mixture of fome unétuous matter. The fame ‘diffipation of 
fulphur, he fays, muft take place in animal and vegetable 
fubftances, before they become white afhes. Tranfparent 
ftones he confidered as little more than pure earth, free from 
the leaft mixture of oil ; judging | of others by the chymical 
refolution of chryftal. 

To confirm this theory, Mr. Delaval made experiments 
with dry powders of calcined metals, viz. cerufs, lead afhes, 
minium, calx of antimony, &c. inclofing them i in long | lafs 
‘tubes, and endeavouring to tranfmit the eleétric virtue through 
them, and always finding it impoffible. Animal and vegeta- 
ble fubftances, when reduced to afhes, were alike i impermea- 
ble to electricity, as alfo the ruft of metals, 
He 


—— 


Per. X. Sec. IV. on THE Two ELECTRICITIES. 239 


iia led to thefe experiments, and to this hypothe- 
that, aay mould would -not conduc eleGricity. 
with dry Portland ftone, fome. of which he 

Boy ~~ ee nearly as thin as window glafs.. Thefe 
a behead. to a proper degree, and coated them on both fides 
. 1 ne in order tomake Seana sedi l i “When 


; ‘in ftrength for about..ten, minutes, at which time it, was 

ic its moft perfedt ftate, and. remained: (© near a quarter 

, fia ) of z Fan hour. After that time, the fhocks gradually decreafed, 

ee ‘as the ftone grew cooler; till, at laft, they ceafed, andithe 

a ea ftone returned to its conducting ftate again, but this ftate 
“ sppeaed, before the ftone was quite cold. 

XPERIMENTS of this kind fucceeded with all bodies a- 


ir bounding with calx.or earth, as ftones, earth, dry clay, wood 
when rotten, or burned in the fire, till the furface becomes 
black. “Among other fubftances he tried a common tobacco 
pipe, part of which, near the middle, he heated to a proper 
degree, and then applied one end of it toan eleétrical bar, 
while the other was held in the hand; and he obferved, that 
the cleGtric fluid paffed no, farther along the pipe than to the 
heated part. * 
_ Fro thefe experiments Mr. Delayal inferred, that ftones 
and other earthy fubftances were convertible, by feveral me- 
thods, and particularly by different degrees of heat, from 


© | * Phil. Tranf. Vol. 51. pt. 1. p. 83. 
non 


240 Mr..CANTON’s EXPERIMENTS Parr I. 


non eleétrics to electrics. But finding,’ afterwards, that it 
was the opinion of fome perfons (Mr. Canton’ was the perfon 
chiefly hinted at) that this change did ‘not’ immediately, but 
only confequentially depend on heat, by evaporating the moift- 
ure, which would return again when the fubftance cooled ; 
he obferves, in a paper read at the Royal Society December 
the 17th. 1761, that the tobacco pipe loft its electricity be- 
fore it was cold, and therefore before it ‘could have imbibed 
moifture fufficient to deftroy its electricity; and befides, that 
the fubftance employed i in the experiment was not of that kind 
of: bodies ‘which is apt pulley to draw ev ag from the 
air. 

To hele arguments Mr. Canton replica in a paper read at 
the Royal Society February the-4th> 1762, hot air air may 
eafily be proved to be a conductor of electricity, by bringing 
a hot iron poker; but’ for a moment, within three'or four 
inches. of a {mall electrified’ body; ‘when’ it would be perceiv- 
ed, that its eleétric power would be almoft, if ‘not. intirely 
deftroyed; and by bringing excited amber within an inch of 
the flame of acandle, when it would lofe its electricity — 
it had acquired any’ fenfible degree of heat. 

To confirm this, he mention’ ‘his having obferved, that 
the tourmalin, Brafil topaz,” and Brafil emerald, would give 
much ftronger figns of electricity when cooling, after they 
had been held about a minute within two inches of an almoft 
furrounding fire; where the air is a conduétor, than they ever 
will after heating them in boiling water. He! adds, that if 
both fides of thofe ftones be equally heated, “in a lefs degree, 
than will make the furrounding air a conductor, the eleétri- 


city 


afd 


Per. X. Sec. IV. on HOT AIR. * 241 


city of each fide, whether p/us or minus, would continue fo 
all the time the ftone was both heating and cooling, but 
would increafé while it was heating, and decreafe while it 
_ §was cooling ; whereas, if the heat was fufficient to make the 
* furrounding air conduc the eletric fluid from the pofitive 
fide of the ftone to the negative fide of it, while it was heat- 


ing, the eleétricity of each fide would increafe while the ftone 


_ -was cooling, and be contrary to what it was while the hing 
-was heating. 
As to the tobacco pipe, Mr. Centon fays, that it not. only 
attraéts the moifture’of the air, but abforbs it. Hence a to- 
bacco pipe, after it begins to cool, will become a conductor | 
again fooner than wood. And that it imbibes moifture fafter 
than wood, he fays, is evident, becaufe when wetted, it will 
not continue wet fo long as Wenn imbibing the moifture 
oprefently. > 
. Tuam tobacco pipe does not hbetinit: a conductor by a pie 
ticular degree of heat, without evaporating its moifture, is 
evident, he fays, from the following experiments. 
»<Ip three or four inches of one end of a tobacco pipe, of 
‘more than a foot in length, be made red hot, without fenfi- 
~ bly heating the other end, this pipe will prove a ready con- 
duétor ;- through the hot air furrounding one part of it, and 
the: moifture contained in the other, although fome part of 
it muft have the degree of heat of a non conductor. But if 
the whole pipe be made red hot, and fuffered to cool till it 
: has only fupesficial moifture enough to make it a good con- 
ductor, and then three or four inches of one end be again 
-madehot, it will become a non conduétor. : 
4 i Tr 


242 Mr. DELAVAL’s EXPERIMENTS. Part L. 


Ir a nail be placed at, or near each end of a longith folid 
piece of any of the abforbent bodies above-mentioned, fo as 
the point of each nail may be about half the thicknefs of the 
body within its furface ; this body, by heat, may be made @ 
non conductor externally or fuperficially, while it remains a 
good condutor internally. For the eleétric fluid will 
readily pafs from one nail to another, through the middle of 
the body, when it will not pafs on its furface, and even when 
the internal parts of the body are in an equal degree of heat 
with the external, as they muft foon be after it begins to cool. 
But if the fame body be expofed, for a fhort time, toa great- 
er degree of heat than before, or if it be kept longer in the 
fame heat, it will become a non conduétor intirely. * 

Mr. Devavat, in confirmation of particular bodies re- 
quiring particular degrees of heat to render them electric or 
non eleétric, independant of moifture, mentions a fubftance 
which, he fays, is affected by heat in an oppofite manner to 
the former inftances; fince the degrees of heat, neceflary to 
render the. other fubftances electric, makes this non eleétric. 

Tue fubftance was ifland chryftal (which is well known for 
its fingular property of a double refraction) on a piece of 
which he made the following obfervations. 1. After this 
piece of chryftal had been rubbed, when the heat of the air 
was moderate, it fhowed figns of eleétricity, though not very 
ftrong ones. 2. If the heat was increafed, fo as to be a little 
greater than that of the hand, it deftroyed its ele€tric power 
intirely. 3. By cooling the ftone again, the electric power 
was reftored. 


* Phil. Tranf. Vol. 52. pt. 2; p. 459 
He 


Prr. Ki Sec. IV. on ISLAND CHRYSTAL. 243 


» He immerfed this piece of chryftal into a veffel filled with 
quickfilver, and furrounded with ice, where it remained near 
two hours, when the weather was very cold; and obferved, 
that, upon taking it out with a pair of tongs (that’it might 
not be altered by the heat of his hands) and rubbing it again, 
it was more ftrongly electric then he had at any other time 
experienced; but that, on placing it a few minutes upon the 
- hearth, at fome diftance from the fire, its electric property was 
again deftroyed, for that rubbing would not occafion any figns 
of it. sil} Sex 
» Tuus, fays he, we fee two different kinds of fixed bodies, 
the one of which acquires an electric property with the fame 
heat with which another lofes it; while a third fet of fubftances, 
as glafs, &e. retain their electricity through both the degrees 
of heat neceflary to the other two, 
» Some pieces of ifland chryftal, which he had procured from 
different places, had not the property of lofing their elec- 
tricity by a moderate heat. He had; in particular, a piece 
of that chryftal, one part of which, when greatly heated, 
became non electric, while the other part, with the fame 
heat, or even with a much greater one, remained perfectly 
electric, © 
_ He found feveral other earthy Seitsbien; whofe eleétrici- 
ty was deftroyed by different degrees of beat. 
. From confidering that the degree of heat, at which the 
ifland chryftal firft mentioned was in its moft perfect eleGric 
ftate, was lefs than the ufual heat of the air, and that a fmall 
increafe of that heat rendered it non electric; he did’ not 
Tiv2 think 


‘o44 Mar. BERGMAN’s EXPERIMENTS~ Parr I. 


think it improbable, that many fubftances, which are not 
known to be ele&ric, might prove fo, if expofed toa greater 
degree of cold then they have been hitherto examined in. *. 
To thefe obfervations Mr. Canton replies, that having 
formerly obferved that the friction between mercury and glafs 
in vacuo would not only produce the light of eleétricity, as in 
the luminous barometer, or within an evacuated glafs ball, but 
would alfo electrify the glafs on the outfide, he immerged a 
piece of dry glafs in a bafon of mercury; and found, that by 
taking it out, the mercury was ele¢trified minus, and the-glafs 
eleéttified plus, toa confiderable degree. He alfo found, that 
amber, fealing wax, and ifland chryftal, when taken out of 
mercury, were all electrified pofitively. How then, fays he, 
does it appear, that the electricity which was obferved in rub- 
bing the laft mentioned fubftance, after it was taken’ out of 
mercury furrounded by ice, was owing to cold, and not 
to the friétion between it and the mercury in taking it out. 
Ifland chryftal when warm is a non conduétor, and all non 
conduétors may be excited with proper rubbers. ++ pa 
Mr. BerGMan of Upfal, ina letter to Mr. Wilfon, read at 
the Royal Society April the 14th. 1761, fays, that he had tried- 
the experiments of Mr. Delaval with ifland chryftal, but that 
the event had always been contrary to what Mr. Delaval had 
reported. Trying different pieces of chryftal, he found one 
which, inftead of having its virtue increafed by cooling, was 
fenfibly increafed by heating. Afterwards trying all the reft 


* Phil. Tranf. Vol. 52.-pt. 1. p. 354, &c. = + Ib. Vol. 52. pt. 2. p.461. 5° 
which 


Per. X. SecvIV. oF ISLAND CHRYSTAL. 245 


which he had by him, whether Swedifh chryftal, or ifland, he 
found the effeét to be the fame. From this he inferred, that 
the chryftals which he had ‘were of!a quite different kind from 
that of Mr. Delaval. * 

* Phil. Tranf. Vol. 53. pt. 1. Ki 98. 


1g aquonat 


SECTION 


246 Mx.\CANTON’s EXPERIMENTSjon_ Part I, 


basit io: daftyrdo Mibow2 sodsodv yentid yd bail od dvider 
i3 1 abo 1Sini- on aids ord. seus aris 5d ot Roo-ads hawt 


cowi§ BG Rob Ow Vins 


ae i tor tA 
AhVHISS . : 


y- ; 


foV Aon T Lidt * 

Mr. CANTON’s pik eaed AND DISCOVERIES RELAT- 
ING TO BODIES IMMERGED IN ELECTRIC ATMOSPHERES, 
WITH THE DISCOVERIES OF OTHERS, MADE BY PURSUING 
THEM. ' 


N this fection I fhall prefent my reader with the fineft 
feries of experiments that the whole hiftory of electricity 
can exhibit, and in which we {hall fee difplayed the genius 
and addrefs of-four of the moft eminent ele¢tricians in this 
whole period; viz. Mr. Canton, and Dr. Franklin, Englith- 
men; and Mr. Wilke, and /pinus, foreigners. Mr. Canton 
had the honour to take the lead, and he made all the ef- 
fential experiments. Doétor Franklin profeffedly purfued 
them ; and though a// bis frrength he put not forth on this oc- 
cafion, he diverfified the experiments, and made fome im- 
provement in the method of accounting for them. But Mr. 
Wilke and fPrinus in conjunction carried the experiments 
vaftly farther, and completed the difcovery; which is, cer- 
tainly, one of the greateft that has been made fince the time 
of Dr. Franklin. I fay the time of Dr. Franklin, though he 
himfelf be one of the perfons concerned; for by the time of 
Dr, 


Se — 


Pert X. Sec. V. “ELECTRIC ATMOSPHERES. 247 


Dr. Franklin will always be underftood the time in which he 
made his capital difcoveries in America, This will’ always 
be a diftinguithed epocha in the hiftory of electricity, from 
which all his own:future difcoveries-will be dated. > 
- "Tue original experiments in this fe&ion,; when Mr. Canton 
firft publithed them, ‘in his:ufual:concife, though perfpicuous 
‘manner, ‘without any” preamble,'-to inform us how he was 
Jéd to them, exhibit fuch a’ variety ‘of attractions and repulfi- 
ons of eleatrified bodies in different’ circumftances, as looked 
like the power ‘of magics” and::were they ‘conducted. with a 
4ittle art, “Ido: not know any :eleétrical’ experiments (made 
without light, or noife)»more proper fora deception of this 
kind: | But when they are attentively confidered, they de- 
monftrate a remarkable: property| of all electrified ‘bodies, 
which has often been.referred:to in the courfe of this hiftory, 
‘but which had not been attended to;before ; : nor:indeed do I 
apprehend it was fully underftood, till it was explained in all 
itsiextent by Mr. Wilke and ASpinus. . It is, that the elec- 
tric fluid, when ‘there is a redundancy of it in any body, ‘re- 
pels the’ eleétric fluid in any other: body, ‘when’ they are 
brought ‘within ‘the {phere of each other's’ influence, | and 
drives it into the remote parts of the body ; or quite out ‘of 
_ the body, if there be any outlet for-that. purpofe. In other 
‘words, bodies immerged in electric atmofpheres always’ be- 
‘come poffefied of the electricity, contrary to that of the body, 
in whofe atmofphere they'are immerged. And this principle 
_purfued led’them to the method of charging a plate of air, 
dJike-a plate of glafs,. and to make the moft. perfect imitation 
of the phenomena of thunder and lightning. 

Tue 


248 . Mr. CANTON’s\EXPERIMENTS. © Parr I. 


| THE paper containing an-account of Mr. |Canton’s experi- 
ments was read/at the Royal Society December the 6th: 1753. 
Mr. Canton fufpended ‘cork, balls, one pair by linen 
threads, and another pair by filk;» then holding the excited 
. ,tube:at a confiderable diftance from the balls ‘with the linen 
thread, they feparated;-.and, upon drawing it away, they 
immediately came together,:| but he-was obliged to bring the 
excited tube much nearer to the balls hanging by filk threads, 
before they would feparate; though when the ee was with- 

drawn, they continued feparate for fome time.» 5 > 
As the balls-in. the former of thefe Acpasinnaths were not 
infulated, Mr. Canton obferves, that they could not properly 
be faid to. be eleétrified 5 but ‘that when they hung within the 
atmofphere of the excited tube, they might attract and con- 
denfe the ele@tric fluid‘round about them, and be feparated 
by the repulfion of its: particles: :'\ He conjectures; alfoy that 
the balls, at this time, contain lefs:than their:common: fhare 
of the electric. fluid, om account of the repelling: power of 
that. which furrounds them, though fome may be continually 
entering and paffing through the threads. | And if that be the 
cafe, he fays,: the reafon is»plain why the balls hung by filk 
in the fecond experiment muft:be in.a much more denfe part 
of the atmofphere of.the tube before they will repel each. o- 
ther. , He adds, that at the approach of an excited ftick of 
wax 'to the balls, in the firft experiment,’ the jelectric fire is 
fuppofed to come through the threads into the balls, and to 
be condenfed there, in its paflage towards the wax; fince, 
according to Dr. Franklin, excited glafs emits the eleétric 

fluid, and excited wax receives it. 

Wuen two balls, fufpended by linen threads upon an in- 
fulated 


=< | 


Res3e Sec. V. “on ELECTRIC ATMOSPHERES. 249 


ted in tbs, were electrified pofitively, and had feparated ; 

he obferved, that the approach of) the excited tube would 

make t ome near together; if ‘brought to acertain dift- 

ance, y would somes and if bane nearer, they would 

feparate again, 

__ Iw the return of the nates they would erica “a btheln : 
ey touched, and then repel-as at firft.. If the tin tube. 


was electrified by wax;.or the wire of a charged phial ;..the 
balls would | be affected in the fame manner at the approach 
of excited. wax, or the wire of the phial. If the cork balls 
were clectrified by glafs, their repulfion would. be increafed at 
_ the approach of an, excited. tick. of wax.) And the effect 
would be the fame, : if the excited -glafs was brought towards 
them, when they had been eleétrified by wax. 

_. Tue bringing the excited glafs to thesend, or edge ofthe 
tin tube, in the former of thefe experiments, is by Mr, Canton 
fuppofed to electrify it pofitively, or to add to the éleétric fire 
it before contained ; and therefore fome. will be running off 
through the balls, and they will repel each other. But at 
_' the approach of excited glafs, which likewife emits the elec+ 
tric fluid, the difcharge of it from the balls will be:diminith- 
ed, or part will,be driven back, bya force acting in a con- 
trary direction;| and they will comernearer together. If the 


of the depity of the fluid round about them above the common 
quantity in airy be equal, to. the excefs:ofi the! denfity of, that 
Within them above the common quantity contained in .cork, 
their repulffon willbe quite deftroyed«i: But: if the tube’ be 
Prought nearer, the iluid without being n more denfe than that 

iit logs : Ke kas . withins 
7 aby 3] 


aso “MR. CANTON’s EXPERIMENTS ’Parr'T. 


within the balls, it will be attracted sh Paar and: ‘they will 
recede from each other! again! i gatly. <bowi: 

Mri: Canon’ farther ‘obferves,. that: whee the’ apparatus 
has loft part of its natural ftore of this fluid, by the approach 
of excited wax to one end of it, or is eleétrified negatively» 
the’ electric fire is attracted and inibibed ‘by the’ balls; ‘to ‘fup- 
ply the’ deficiency ;:and that-more:plentifully at thé approach 
of excited iglafs, ‘or a’ body pofitively cle&rified, ‘than before ; 
whence the diftance between the balls will be increafed, as 
the fluid furrounding ‘them is augmented.’ “And, in general, 
whether by the approach or recefs of any body, if the dif- 
ference between the denfity of the ‘internal and external fluid 
be increafed,-or ditinifhed's\ the'repulfion of the balls will 
be increafed, or ditminifhed accordingly. 

. Hp obferved,. that when the infulated tin tube was not e- 
lectrifitd, if the excited’ glafs was’ brought towards the 
middle of it, the: balls hanging “at 'the'end would ’repel each 
other, and: the more fo'as the excited tube was brought nearer. 

When it had been held a few feconds, at the diftance of a+ 

bout fix inches, and withdrawn, the balls: would approach ; 
each other till they touched; and, feparating again, as the - 4 
tube was removed farther, would continue to repel when the 
tube was taken’ quite-away. This laft repulfion would’ be 
increafed by the approach of excited glafs, and diminithed by 
that of excited wax; juft as if the apparatus had been ele@ri- 
fied by wax, after the manner defcribed» in the! ——— 
ment. nininos ¥iilnagp ae 1102. dal dvods engi geisti 

‘He inflated two. tin telsen) bethany Ue anigestneheby 
calling them.A and B, fo'as tobe’ in a iine with‘each other, 
cand-half an inch afunder, and at' the remote end of each fuf- 


Baal vat sf tok bil, 2-'DhAh,;i: “upon ringing the ex=, 
> elted’glafs tube towards the middle of A, and holding ita 
me atthe diftance of a few inches, he obferved’each 

pair of balls to. feparate. "Upon withdrawing’ the tube, the 
toe ‘would ‘come speeds repel each other 
t thofe of B:would hardly be affe@ted. By the ap- 


, proach of excited glafs the repulfion of the balls'oF Aweuld 


, and thofe of B diminithed: *, 
Sopirntie Sormmet of thefe experiments, Mr. 1Onsibin faypotes 
the comtiion ftock ‘of eleétric’ matter in the tin tube to'be at- 
tenuated about the middle, “and to be condenfed at the ends, 
e ing power of the atmofphere of the excited glafs 
rN ah Rab ‘And perhaps, he fays, the tin an 
may lof fome of its natural quantity of the eleétric fluid be- 
fore it receives’ aity from’ the’ gla(s, as that fluid will more’ 
readily fin off from ‘the ends ‘or edges’ of it than enter at the 
middle’; and. accordingly, when the glafs tbe is withdrawn,’ 
and the fluid is again equally diffufed through the apparatus, 
it is found’ to be eleétrified negatively ; fince excited glafs 
brought ‘under the ‘balls will increafe their repulfion. 

In the latter of the experiments, Mr. Canton’ fappotes that 
part of the fluid driven out of one tin tube enters the other, 
which is found’ to be eledtrified’ pofitively, by the decreafing 
of the repulfion of its balls at'theapproach of excited glafs. 
- ‘Tr will readily be feen that, at the time thefe experi- 
ments were made, Mr. Canton retained the common idea of 
eleGric atmofpheres; whereas it will appear by the experi- 


* Phil. Tranf, Vol. 48. pt. 1. p.. 350. 
Kk2 ments 


252 Dr. FRANKLIN’s EXPERIMENTS Parr. 


ments of Mr. Wilke and Apinus (which in fa& contain no- 
thing more than thofe of Mr. Canton) that they: tend to re- 
fute the common opinion, and are much eafier explained up- 
on the fuppofition, that the portion of fluid belonging to any 
electrified, body is conftantly held in contact, or very nearly 
in contact,’ with the body; but rt: st the Bote: of 
other bodies at a certain diftance. — ti! Braie 

Dr. FRANKLIN purfued, or ei diverfified the experi- 
ments of Mr. Canton, but retaining, likewife, the common 
opinion of eleétric atmofpheres, he'thought that the phenomena 
were more eafily explained upon the fuppofition, that thefe 
atmofpheres, being brought near each other, did. not eafily 
mix, and unite into one atmofphere, but remained feparate, 
and répelled each other ;. and moreover, that an eleétric at~ 
mofphere, would not only repel another electric atmofphere, 
but alfo the electric fluid contained in the fubftance of a body 
approaching it, and, without joining or mixing with it, force 
it into the other parts of the body that contained it. 

TuoucH it muft be difficult to affign a reafon why the 
particles of one atmofphere fhould repel the particles of ano- 
. ther atmofphere, or of the fluid contained in another body 
with more force than they repel one another, or the particles 
of the fluid contained in the body to which they belong; 


fince the matter is the fame in both: yet this idea of the’ 
mutual repulfion of electric atmofpheres, could it once be fup-_ 


pofed, will certainly and clearly account for all the facts ; 
and the theory pleafes on account of its fimplicity. But 
the fame appearances will be accounted for, in a manner as 
fimple and intelligible, upon the fuppofition, that the portion 

of 


Per.X.Sec.V. on ELECTRIC ATMOSPHERES. 253 


of elegtric fluid belonging to each body, being ftrongly at- 

. tradted by the body, is held in clofe contaé with it; but that 
‘it adts by repulfion upon the ele@ric fluid belonging to other 
bodies, at a diftance from them; and that the eleétric fluid 
doth not aétually pafs out of one body into another, till it 
have firft repelled the fluid out of the other body, and then 
be more ftrongly attracted by the other body than by its own; 
which has already got more than its natural fhare. 

_ Tue paper containing an account of thefe experiments of 
Dr. Franklin was read at the Royal Society December the 
18th. 1755. His apparatus, was different from that of Mr- 
Canton, but ftill he exhibited the fame effects proceeding 
from the fame caufe. He fixed a taffel of fifteen or twenty 
threads, each three inches long, at one end of his prime con~ 

ductor, which was five feet long and four inches in diameter, 
fupported by filk lines. The threads were a little damp, but 
"not wet. 

In thefe circumftances, an excited tube brought near the 
end of the prime conductor, oppofite to the threads, fo as to 
give it fome fparks, made the threads diverge, each thread 
having thereby acquired its feparate electric atmofphere. 

In this ftate, the approach of the excited tube, without 
giving any fparks, made the threads diverge more; but, be- 
ing withdrawn, they clofed as much; the atmofphere of the 
conductor being driven by that of the tube into the threads, 
and returning again upon withdrawing the tube, which had 
then left no part of its atmofphere behind it. 

Tue excited tube brought under the diverging threads 
made them clofe a little, having driven part of their atmof- 

pheres 


254 .Mr. WILKE’s EXPERIMENTS  Parrlh 


pheres into the conductors © Upon being withdrawn, they 
diverged as much ; that portion of their atmofpheres which, 
they had loft returning again from the conductor, and the 
tube having left no part of its own. 

Tue excited tube, held at the diftance of Sites or fix inches, 
from the end of the conduétor oppofite to the threads, made 
them feparate, and, upon being withdrawn, they came to- 
gether again: but if, in their {tate of feparation, a {park was 
taken from the conductor near them, they would clofe; and, 
upon removing the tube, would) feparate. The tube, in 
both cafes, left no part of its atmofphere behind it. It only 
drove the natural quantity of electricity contained in the con- 
ductor: towards the threads; and part of that being taken a- 
way by the fpark, the tube would leave.the conductor and 
threads negative, in which cafe, they. would repel one ano- 
ther, as.if they had been electrified pofitively.. | 

In this fituation, if the excited tube was brought near the 
conductor, they would clofe again ;. the’atmofphere of the 
tube forcing that of the conductor into the threads, tofup- 
ply the place of what they had loft: but, upon withdrawing 
the tube, they would open again ; the tube, as : before, tak- 
ing its whole atmofphere away with it. When the excited tube 
was brought under the threads, diverging with negative e- 
leGricity, they diverged more; the) atmofphere of the tube 
driving away more. of. the atmofpheres of the ktiniee and 
giving them none in its place, 

Lastiy the Doétor brought the excited ‘ani near “Ahh 
prime condudtor, when it was not.eleétrified ; and when the 
threads were, thereby, made to diverge, he brought his fing- 


Ft eh Ren 


er. 


Per. X. Sec. V. on ELECTRIC ATMOSPHERES. 255 


et near ‘them ; and obferved, that they receded from. it. 
This appearance had been taken notice of by Mr. Hawketbee, 

and others. ‘Dr. Franklin accounts for it by fuppofing, - that 
‘when his finger was plunged into the atmofphere of the glafs 
tube, part: of its natural electricity. was driven back, through 
his hand and- body, fo as'to leave the finger negatively electri- 
fied, as well as the threads ;. in which cafe, they muft necef= 
farily repel one another. To confirm this hypothefis, he held 
~ aflender lotk of cotton, two or three inches long, near the 
prime conductor, electrified by excited glafs, which made the 
cotton ftretch itfelf towards the conductor; «and obferved, 
that, in this ftate, it would recede from the finger of his:o- 
ther hand, at the fame time that it was attracted by a wire of 

a bottle charged pofitively. * 

» Turse experiments of Dr. Franklin, made in purfuance 
of thofe of Mr. Canton, were confirmed, as I obferved be- 
fore, and-carried much farther by Mr. Wilke and A®pinus. 

Mr. Witke obferves, that a {mall body immerged in any 
eleGtric atmofphere, if it be touched by no other body, and 
be withdrawn before it be repelled, fearce ever fhows any 
fign of ele&tricity; if any, it is of the fame kind with:that 
of the body into whofe atmofphere it was plunged. + If any 
body, communicating with the ground, be: brought to this 
light body, while it remains immerged in the atmofphere of 
the clectrified body, it is firft attraéted, and then repelled 
by it. Ifa:point be prefented to this light body, -and after- 
wards withdrawn, it will be found to have acquired an clec- 


* Phil. Tranf. Vol. 49. pte 1. p. 300. + Wilke, p. 73. 
q tricity 


256 ZEPINUS’s EXPERIMENTS . Part I, 


tricity oppofite to that of the electrified body. From this he 
concludes, that parts of non electric bodies, plunged in elec- 
tric atmofpheres, acquire an ele¢tricity oppofite to that of the 
atmofphere in which they were plunged. *, 

He placed two large infulated badges with their ae 
oppofite to one another, and a cork ball fufpended on filk be- 
tween them; and obferved, that,. upon the application of the 
excited glafs tube to one end of either of them, the cork ball 
would play between them very faft; and if the tube were 
held a while at the fame diftance, would be at reft. Upon with- 
drawing the tube, the motion of the cork ball began again, 
and, at length, ceafed gradually as before. If the conductors 


were removed from one another, while they were within the 


atmofphere of the tube, they would, upon being brought to- 
gether again, give a {park. This experiment confirmed the 


demonftration, that the part of a body which is immerged in 


the atmofphere of an electrified body acquires the contrary 
electricity. -- 

Bur the moft complete demonftration of this general max- 
im is an experiment of Aipinus. He placed a {mall weight 
upon one end of a large metallic conductor, and, by means 
of a filk ftring, removed it from the conductor, while’ the 
end on which it refted was immerged in’ the atmofphere of 
an eleétrified body; and found that it had atually acquired 
a different eledtricity from. that of the atmofphere. If the 
end of the conductor, oppofite to that on which the move- 


able weight was placed, was made to communicate with the 


* Wilke, p. 77. + Ib. p. 78. 
earth, 


Per. X. See. V.. oN ELECTRIC ATMOSPHERES. 257 


earth,” ‘ftill that part of it which was near the excited electric 
was affected with the oppofite electricity. Placing the move- 
able weight on the oppofite end of the conductor, when it was 
infulated, he found that it had fometimes acquired an elec 
tricity contrary to that of the excited electric, fometimes the 
ech a weak, and inaaeetets no eleGtricity 
at a med oris : 3! 
m asi. e’ ingenious philofopher confidered that the « file 
principle mi ft extend to glafs, and all other clerics; fince 
they, as well as condudtors, contain a certain quantity of the 
étric fluid; in ‘their natural ftate. To verify this, he took 
A glafs tube, and eleétrified one end of it pofitively. The 
confequence was, that four or five inches of that end were 
politive; | but beyond that there were two inches negative, and- 
yond. that the tube was again pofitive, though weakly fo. 
nis experiment he repeated very often with the fame fuccefss 
- asalfo when, inftead of glafs, he ufed a folid ftick of fulphur. 
To account for this fact, he fuppofed, that the eleétricity 
_ Communicated to the end of the tube repelled the natural 
quantity of the fluid in the glafs to fome diftance. ‘This na~ 
tural. quantity retiring from its former fituation, he fuppofes 
, to become condenfed, and confequently to repel another 
quantity of the fluid natural to the glafs from its place; and 
that thus the whole rod would be alternately pofitive and ne- 
gative. The author afferts, that it was from theory only 
that he was led to this curious experiment, the fac exactly 
; correfponding to what he had before deduced, as the neceflary 


* pini Tentamen, p. 129. 


L1 confequence 


258 . Mr. WILKE ann APINUS on Parr I. 


confequence of Dr. Franklin’s ee of negative and: 
fitive electricity. * 

Tue hint of thefe experiments Bpinus received. Sens tate 
above-mentioned of Mr. Wilke; and thefe gentlemen, re- 
fiding at the fame time at Berlin, purfued thefe curious ex- 
periments jointly, till they were led by them to difcover a 
method of charging a plate of air in the fame manner as 
plates of glafs had ufually been charged, and‘to throw ftill 
more light upon the theory of the famous arin genie 
ment. 

In the above-mentioned experiments; thisfe ictal hie, 
ferved, that the negative ftate of one of the bodies depended 
on the oppofite ftate of the other, which was known to be 
exadtly the cafe of the two fides of a charged pane of glafs ; 
and the reafon of the non-communication of the fame elec- 
tricity was evidently the impermeability of the glafs to the 
electric fluid in the one cafe, and the impermeability of 
the air in the other. Upon this hint, they made feveral at= 
tempts to give the electric fhock by means of air; and at 
_ length fucceeded, by fufpending large boards of wood cove- 
red with tin, with the flat fides parallel to one another, and 
at fome inches afunder. For they found, that upon elec- 
trifying one of the boards pofitively, the other was always 
negative, agreeable to the former experiment: but the dif 
covery was made complete and \indifputable by a perfon’s 
touching one of the plates with one hand, and bringing his 
other hand to the other plate; for he then received a fhock 


* #pini Tentamen, p. 192. 


through 


Per. X. Sec. V. ELECTRIC ATMOSPHERES. 259 


through. his bate ‘exactly like ved .of the Leyden experi- 
ament.* s 

_ Wir this doen: of air, as we may call it, they made # 

seeciipes experiments. The two metal plates, being 
oppofite ftates, ftrongly attraéted one another, and would 

heh a a if they had not been kept afunder by 


~ ftrings, Sometimes the electricity of both would be dif- 


charged by a ftrong {park between them, as when a pane of 
- glafs bunts. nese too great a, charge. A finger put between 
_ them promoted the difcharge, and felt the fhock. If an 
eminence was made on either of the plates, the felf difcharge 
always be made through it, and a pointed body fixed 
n either of them prevented their being charged at all. 
HE fate of thefe two plates, they excellently obferve, 
y “reprefents the ftate of the clouds and the earth during 
a thunder ftorm; the clouds being always in one:ftate, and 
the earth in the oppofite; while the body of air between them 
anfwers the fame purpofe as the finall plate of air between 
the boards, or the plate of glafs between the two metal coat- 
ings in the Leyden experiment. The phenomenon of light- 
ning is the burfting of the plate of air by a {pontaneous dif- 
charge, which is always made through eminences, and the 
bodies through which the difcharge is made are violently 
thocked. + 
» Tuts principle, they Jikewife thought, would explain an 
‘obfervation of the Abbé Nollet, thateledtricity was often ob- 
_ fetyed to be peculiarly trong, when the room was full of 


* Wilke, p. 97. + Ib. p. 101. 


Lia company, 


260 APINUS’s. EXPERIMENTS ~ ‘Part I. 


company, and more particularly, when numbers of them drew 
near together, to fee the experiments. The conductor was 
then in one ftate, and the company in another ; fo that, con- 
ftituting a large furface, when any of them took a fpark, as he 
thereby difcharged the electricity of all the company, he 
would feel it more fenfibly than if he had ftood fingle.*  — 

Tuis difcovery, of the method of giving the electric thock 
by means of a plate of air, may be reckoned one of the greateft 
difcoveries in the fcience of eleétricity fince thofe of Dr. 

Franklin. . It is beautiful to obferve how this fine difcovery 
took its rife from the experiments of Mr. Canton. © Mr. 
Canton’s experiments were purfued by Dr. Franklin, and 
thofe of Dr. Franklin purfued by thefe gentlemen pro- 
duced the difcovery. It is one and the fame principle that, 
in different wochmalanyee, accounts for ais sae feries 
of experiments. iu tae 

Tuts experiment of Laigilg a plite of air is siccinen re- 
lated by Aspinus, who fays that he was led to the difcovery, 
by reafoning from the pypeceursaiia of Dr. Franklin's 
theory. 

From thefe experiments he was alfo led to form a more 
diftin& idea of the impermeability of glafs to the eleétric 
fluid. For fince a plate of air might be charged as well as a 
plate of glafs, that property, whatever it be, muft be com- 
mon to them both;) and: could not, as Dr. Franklin once 
fuppofed, be any thing peculiar to the internal ftru@ture of 
glafs. Impermeability, he, therefore, infers, muft be com- 


* Wilke, p.gd &c. 
mon 


’ 


| Per.X/Sec.V. ow ELECTRIC. ATMOSPHERES. 261 


“mon to all ‘electrics ; andl fince they can all receive ele&ricity 
. by ‘communication to a-certain degree, it muft confift in the 
‘difficulty:and flownefs ‘with which the electric fluid moves in 
_ their pores ; whereas, i in perfect eonductom,-4 it meets with no 
—obftruction at all. * 
» In was chiefly this courfe of phpreisbowes alfo, that led Mr: 
-fBpinus to deny the'exiftence of electric Ripe piel confift- 
_ ing of effluvia from ‘eleétrified bodies. : 
_ He feems, however, to confider this as a bold opinion ; 
_fince he-herein differs, as he fays, from all the. eletricians 
who had written before him, and even from Dr. Franklin 
himéélf:.»- Though the common opinion, -he fays, is by no 
_ means countenanced. by the general principles of his theory, 
_ which fuppofe the eleétric fluid to move with aneny through 
__ every-electric fubftance like the air. 
© To thofe who might fay, that an eleétric dtanibehadeisd isa 
_ thing obvious to the fenfes, and no matter. of theory ; fince 
it may be felt like a {pider’s web upon the hands or face; he 
_-seplies, that this feeling, together with the fulphureous fmell 
. of electrified bodies, are only fenfations excited by the action 

_ of the fluid in the electrified bodies upon the electric fluid in 
the noftrils, or the hand; :or upon’ thofe parts of the body 
__. themfelves in-an uneleétrified ftate; and that they are not felt 
_ bya perfon who is not poffeffed of the fame kind and degree 
_ of electricity. . ? 

- He, therefore, thinks there never was any fufficient reafon ~ 
to admit thofe atmofpheres; and declares, that whenever he 


* Z£pini Tentamen, p. 82. 


ufes 


262 . Mr. CANTON ON Part I. 


ufes the word, he means no more by it than the {phere of 
action of the electricity belonging to. any body. . Or, he fays, 
the neighbouring air, which is eleétrified by it,. Paka be fo 
called. 

_ Bur that thefe atmofpheres have little effe@in eleéttical 
experiments, +he fays, isievident from this circumftance ; that 
if it be blown upon with a pair of bellows, the electricity 
of the body which it furrounds is not fenfibly diminithed. 

The electric fluid, he fuppofes, to refide wholly in the elec- 
trified body, and from thence to exert its.attraction or popes 
fion to a certain diftance. * 

Tue fubject of electric atmofpheres had not: eftaiped the at- 
tention of the accurate Signior Beccaria, who. was probably 
prior to Zpinus in fuppofing, that electrified bodies have no 
other atmofphere than the electricity communicated to: the 
neighbouring air, and which goes with thevair, and not with 
the electrified bodies, agreeable to that curious. difcovery of 
his mentioned above. 

He alfo mentions an experiment, which, he thinks, direa@= 
ly proves, that all the electricity communicated to any body 
adheres to its furface, and does not fpread‘into the air. -He 
electrified a large conductor of gilt paper, in which the gild- 
ing was, in feveral places, taken off quite round ; and obferved 
that whenever he difcharged it, by taking a {park at the end, 
other fparks were vifible at all the interruptions; the charge 
of the more remote parts having come off through the fub- 


* £pini Tentamen, p. 257. 
ftance 


ee 


GRRE hy ie alee eee 


Plate 1. 


I Mente fe. 


oti arent = 
cts rte | 4 


ee 


fluid from it, and confequently, beyond 
it more denfe ; ‘whereas excited wax at- | 
¢ 
{ 
i 
4 


« the'eleétric fluid exitting in the air nearer to it, making 
gait ieee debowe.po9 54 gogo dud disiy 4 30 
be beft underftood by a figure. Let A (PI. r. fig.1-] 

<cited glafs or wax, Bexcited glafs,andC excited wax; 

¢ dots on-each fide of A reprefent a line of particles 

ba ie sGtric fluid at’ their proper diftance in a natural ftate. 

Let Band C be ¢arried about where. you will in the air, | 

- Bwill make an atmofphere equally denfe, and C an atmof- — 
; phere equally rare, while thé quantity of the electric fluid — 
each of them contains is the fame as at firft. When any part — 
e of a conduétor comes within the atmofphere of 'B, the elec- 
trie fluid it naturally contains will be repelled by the denfe — 
} 
: 


Bay sphere, and will recede from it. But if any part of a 
._ conduétor be brought within the atmofphere of C, the elec- 
trie fluid it naturally contains will be attraéted by the rare at- 
_ fmofphere, ‘and move towards it. And thus may the eleétric 
fluid contained in any body be condenfed or rarified ; and if 


io] 


ry uty * # Blettricifimo artificiale, p. 54+ 1 


the 


' 
4 


_264 8, BECCARIA’s EXPERIMENTS) -+ Parr I: 


the body be a'conduttor; it may be condenfedor:'rarified in 
_ any part of it, and fome’ may. be eafily drawn out of; or an 
additional quantity put into it. 

_ Ir was obferved before, that an experiment of Dr. Frank- 
lin which he thought proves: that electric atmofpheres did 
not exclude the air, might juftly make us fufpect the exift- 


ence of thofe atmofpheres, fince the eleétric matter is known _ 


to repel the air. Another experiment of the fame nature was 
made by Dr. Darwin of Litchfield, who fent an account of it 
to the Royal Society, which ‘was read May. the (sth. 1757. 
He got a glafs tube, open at one end, and having a ball, at 
the other.’ This ball-and half ‘of the tube) he coated; and 
when,he had inverted it, and dipped a confiderable part of ig 
in a veffel containing oil of turpentine, he introduced a,wire 
into it,| and charged it; and-obferved,; that the oil did not at 
all appear ito fubfide... From this-he concluded, that the elec- 
. tric atmofphere, flowing round. the wire and the coating, of 
the tube, above the oil, did not difplace the air, but exifted 
in its pores. * I 
An experiment fianilen to that of) Dr. Franklin and that re 
Dr. Darwin was made by Signior, Beccaria.’ He took a coat~ 
- ed phial, and when he had inferted into it a {mall glafs tube, 
bent horizontally when it-came out of the phial ; he clofed it 
with cement, | and prefented light athes to. the extremity 
of the tube, the orifice of which was very fine; ,and always 
found, that the afhes were blown off, when a {park was taken 
into the phial, but they returned towards the end of the tube 


* Phil. Tranf. Vol. 50. pt. 1. p. 351+ “a 
ter- 


F 
- 
: 
: 


super se ces pt mn ny LM 


— % 


< 


di ied Dandies veightals) Io anni Ot ua 

Storls-Ian,yR Ci novay, -bink oii. 
a nesye give! ciotions baosigostits, beshiodd beeig, 
abt’. 338° {nitor or aeiluasq bas —_ Yo tnat, 
i HOU ati3' to) tnobasr poburi UID» oh parverty¢) 
Gy -sbonidmog:) tava. axaw, eaoin:>"j0 


nowitibront: sates sobive Yow atwii sdguods aildn ard 


i 
10) eaitiaindal>--ons oft. 199873, 


at mM %6 yohsivabb sw xerdto vot. haat yonsbatb, 


SONGS SOSAS5G) Den LAA elioeiteGxo OG) th bis 


iil 4: oe oe ERI ie 
SA ORS jC Q(8 C160 ETT 10? Dogioss wHivi7 Bale over 


~ MW. ove: 
SC. go 


eee sre TION 


[then ech bag deon?r cKAS eT INET AAR: er 


; STR 


; | 3 ee 


266 © Mx; SYMMER’s EXPERIMENTS ..° Parr. 


i 
' 


SECT FON vk 


Mr. SYMMER’s eExpERIMENTS RELATING TO THE TWO | 
ELECTRICITIES AND THOSE MADE BY JOHANNES Pe 
FRANCISCUS CIGNA In PURSUANCE OF THEM. 


‘ 
‘ 


) 


T had hitherto been univerfally fuppofed, that all the phe- 
nomena of electricity were produced by the action of one 
eleétric fluid. Even Mr. Du Faye, at the time that he ima- 
gined he had difcovered another eleétric fluid, diftin@ from 
that of glafs, and peculiar to rofin, &c. thought, however» 
that it was quite independent of the other, and that their 
operations were never combined. Dr. Watfon, and Dr. 
Franklin thought it was very evident, that the difference be- 
tween the two electricities confifted in the one being a re- 
dundancy, and the other a deficiency of the fame matter. 
And all the experiments that had been made concerning the 
two eledtricities feemed to confirm this hypothefis. At length, 
however, Mr. Symmer produces a great number of curious 
experiments, relating to the fame fubje&t ; and infers from 
them the probable exiftence of two elefric fluids, not inde- _ 
vit ty pendent, 


Per.X:Sec. VI. ON 'Tur Two ELECTRICITIES. 267 


ponents, sbatalweyecomsiftenty: debsenpeneS INOS 
ther. Biovail o3-139096 yous bib. {elt 
. Tur firkt fet of his pupeslendati are sbi scossikabten but 
he does, little more than-relate naked facts... They were di- 
verfified,, and purfued much farther by Johannes Francifcus 
‘Cigna, who has alfo explained them upon the printiples of 
Dr. Franklin’s theory.s; though) he, was of opinion, that no 
experiments that had-yet been made' were decifive, in favour 
»of .cither) of the two, hypothefes.>: Few hittories of experi- 
sments. are more entertaining than the firft of thefe of Mr, 
Symmer.:. the fubfequent experiments are lef fatisfactory. 
The papers relating to them all were read at the ey ces 
ety inthe year 1759." 
 » Tuts gentleman had for feline thence 6Udkeved, that upon, 
putting off bis fockings, in an evening, they made a track- 
ling or {napping noife, ‘and that, in the dark, he could per- 
ceive them to emit {parks of fire. He had’ no doubt but that 
this proceeded:from the principle of ele&tricity, and, after a 
great number of obfervations, to determine on what cir- 
cumftances thofe ftrong ele&trical appearances depended; he 
found, at length, that it was the combination of white and 
black that produced the electricity; and that the appearances 
were the ftrongeft when he wore a white and black filk 
ftocking upon the fame leg. Thefe, however, difcovered no 
fign of eleGtricity while they were upon the leg, or hand 
(for he found that his hand was fufficient) though they were 
drawn backwards and forwards upon it/feveral times. Nor 


* Phil. Tranf. Vol. 51. pt..1. p. 340. 


Mma2 when 


268 © Mr. SYMMER’s EXPERIMENTS °° Part TI. 


when taken from the hand, and prefented to an ele&ttometet 
(i.e. Mr. Canton’s balls) did they appear to have acquited 
any more than a very fmall degree of electricity; but ‘the 
-noment they were feparated, they were found, both of them, 
to be highly ele@trified, - iat re and on re 
negatively: | 3 ¢ 

~ Boru the ftockings, ial held'at: a! aitance fed She's 
nother, appeared inflated to fuch a degree, that, when high- 
ly electrified, they exhibited the intire fhape of the lég; and 
when two black, or two white ftockings were held together, 
they would repel one another, fo.as:to form an myst apres 
ingly, ‘of thirty or thirty five degrees. ns 


Wuen a white and black ftocking were prefented to! ian 


other ; they would be mutually attracted ; and, if permitted, 

would ruth together with furprifing violence. In their ap 
proach their inflation gradually fubfided, and their attraction 
of foreign objects diminithed, but» their attraction of one a2 
nother increafed. . When they actually met, they grew flat} 
and joined as clofe together, as if they had been fo many 
folds of filk. When they were feparated, their electricity 
did not feem to have been in the leaft impaired by! the fhock 
of meeting ; for they would be again inflated, attra, repel, 
and ruth together as before. 

Wuen this experiment was performed with two black 
ftockings in one hand, and two white ones in the other, ‘it 
exhibited a curious fpectacle.. The repulfion of thofe of 
the fame colour and the attraétion of thofe of different 
colours, threw them into an agitation which was not 
unentertaining, and made them catch each at the oppofite 
colour, at a greater diftance than could have been expeéted. 

WHEN 


aa 


Debi Sec. VEY. Sh THE Two ELECTRICITIES. 269 


-WuEN the ftockings were feparated from one another, they 
would lofe theit power very foon, much like the excited 
tube; but when they were together, they would retain it 
-an hour or two, or longer, if the air was favourable to 
eleGtricity. The tharpeft metallic point could not deprive 
them of it; and ‘when they were one within the other, no 
means he could think of could procure the leaft perceivable 
difeharge of the electricity. In this refpect, Mr. Symmer 
thought there was a confiderable refemblance between the 
black and the white ftocking, when put within one another, 
and the Leyden phial. 

© Waar was ftill more remarkable in thefe experiments 
with the white and black ftockings, was the power of elec- 
trical cohefion which they exhibited. Mr. Symmer perceiv- 
ed that the white and black ftockings, when eleCtrified, and 
allowed to come together, not only joined extremely clofe, 
but actually ftuck to each other. By means of a balance, he 
found, that in order to feparate them, it required from one 
to twelve ounces. Another time they raifed feventeen ounces 
which, was twenty times the weight of that ftocking which 
fapported them, and this in a direction pg to its 
furface. 

~ Wun one of the ftockings was turned infide out, and put 
within the other, it required twenty ounces to feparate them, 
though when they were applied to — other externally, ten 
ounces were/fufficient. 

/Grrtine the black ftockings new dyed, and the white 
- ones wafhed, and whitened in the fumies of fulphur ; and 
then putting them one within the other, with their rough 
fides 


270 |. Mr. SYMMER’s EXPERIMENTS Parr h 


fides together, it required three pounds three ounces to ‘fe- 
parate them. And he had reafon to think that we Sulphur 
contributed nothing to.the experiment. 


Tryinc this experiment with ftockings of a more fub- 


ftantial make, he found the effects more confiderable. When 
the white ftocking was put within the black one, fo that the 
outfide of the white was contiguous to the infide of the black, 
they raifed nine pounds wanting a few ounces, which was 
fifty times the weight of the ftocking. When the ‘white 
ftocking was turned infide out, and put within the black one, 
fo that their rough furfaces were contiguous, they raifed fifteen 
pounds one pennyweight and a half, which was ninety wee 
times the weight of the flocking. 

Havine cut off the ends of the thread, and the tufts al 
filk, which had been left in the infide of the ftockings,, the 
cohefion was confiderably diminifhed. Prefling them toge- 
ther between his hands contributed much to ftrengthen it..* | 

Wuen the white and black ftocking were in cohefion, and 
another pair, more highly eleétrified, were feparated. from 
one another, and prefented to the former, their cohefion 
would be diffolved; and each ftocking of the fecond: pair 
would catch hold of, and carry away with it, that of its op- 
pofite colour. If the degree of eleCtricity of both pairs were 
equal, the cohefion of the former pair would be weakened, 
but not diffolved; and all the four would cohere, forming 
one mafs. If the fecond pair were but weakly eleétrified, the 
cohefion of the firft pair would be but little impaired, and 
the cohefion of the whole mafs would be {mall in propor- 
tion. 


* Phil. Tranf. Vol. 51. pt. 1. p. 393. 
Mr. 


Per.X.Sec. VI, on rie two ELECTRICITIES. 271 


Mr. Symmer alfo obferved, that white and black filk, 
when: ‘cletrified, not only cohered with each other, but 
would: alfo adhere to bodies with broad, and even with po+ 
lithed furfaces, though thofe bodies were not electrified. 
This he difcovered accidentally, having, without defign, 
_ thrown a ftocking out of his hand, which ftuck to the paper 
hangings of the room. He repeated the experiment, and 
found’ it would continue hanging near an: hour. . 

» Havine ftuck up the black and white ftockings in this 
- manner, he came with another pair of ftockings highly elec- 
trifieds and-applying the white to the black, and the black to 
the’ white, he carried them: off from: the wall, cach of them 
hanging to that which had been brought to it. 

_Tue fame experiments held with the painted boards of the 
room, and likewife with the looking glafs, to the fmooth 
furface of which both the white and the black filk appeared 
to adhere’ more tenacioufly than to either of the former. * 

A Frew obfervations fimilar to fome of thefe of Mr. Symmer 
were made by Signior Alefandro Amadeo Vaudonia, a friend 
of Signior Beccaria.. He put a beaver fhirt between two o- 
thers, which he wore in extreme’ cold weather; and when- 
ever he putioff the uppermoft fhirt, which he did every day» 
he found it adhered to'the the beaver fhirt, and, on the fepa- 
ration, electric {parks were vifible between them. Whenever 
he put off the beaver fhirt, it adhered ftill more to the under 
_ fhirt;, and when held at a confiderable diftance from it, would 
tufh to it. . Thefe attrations would be repeated many times, 


®* Phil. Tranf. Vol. 51. pt. 1. ps 366. 
but 


272 Mr. SYMMER’s EXPERIMENTS ... Part IL 


but they grew more languid by degrees, till they intirely 
ceafed.. Signior Beccaria, upon hearing of this experiment, 
repeated it with fome variation, and found it to anfwer on 
him/felf * 

Tue cohefion of the two ftockings induced Mr. Symmer 
‘to try the force of electrical cohefion in electrified panes of 
glafs. For this purpofe, he got two panes of common’ win- 
- dow glafs, the thinneft and the {mootheft that he could find, 
and coated one of the fides of each with tinfoil, leaving a 
fpace uncovered near the edges. He then put the uncovered 
fides together, and charging them both as one pane, he: 
found, as he expected, that their cohefion was confiderably 
ftrong: but he had no apparatus to meafure the ftrength of 
it. He then turned the plates upfide down, and found that 
the fame operation which had before charged them, did now 
uncharge them, according to the anology of the Leyden phial.’ 

Pracine two panes of glafs, each of them coated on both’ 
fides, one upon the other, he found that they were both 
charged feparately, and that there was no cohefion betwee 
them. ‘ ga hy 

Mr. Symmer concludes his account of thefe experiments’ 
with declaring it to be his opinion, that there were two elec— 
tric fluids, or emanations of two diftin@ eleétric powers, 
effentially different from each other; that electricity does not’ 
confift in the afflux and efflux of thefe fluids, but in the ac- 
cumulation of the one-or the other of them in bodies elec= 


trified; or, in other words, it confifts in the pofleflion of a 


* Dell’ elettricifmo artificiale, p. 197. 1 
larger 


Per. X.Sec. VI. on Tue two ELECTRICITIES. 277 


larger portion of one or the other power, than is. requifite to 
‘maintain an even balance within the body; and laftly, that, 
according as the one or the other power prevails, the body is 
_ eleétrified in the one or the other manner. Nor will this 
principle, fays he, of two diftin& ele@rical powers be found, 
upon due confideration, to difagree with the general fyftem _ 
of nature. Itis one of the fundamental laws of nature, that ac= 
tion and:reaction are infeparable and equal; and, when we look 
round, we find that every power which is exerted in the ma- 
terial world meets with a counteracting power, which con-> 
trouls and regulates its effects, fo as to anfwer the wife eek 
pofes of providence. * 5 
» Mr. Symne_r alfo alledges, in proof of his two diftiné 
powers of eleétricity, the experiment which Dr. Franklin 
‘has related, of piercing a quire of paper with an electric 
fhock. He thought that the bur which was raifed on both 
fides of the paper was produced by two fluids, moving in two 
different dire@tions. To fhow the manner in which this 
ftroke was made more evidently, he mentions two other fi- 
milar experiments, in which the circumftances of the ftroke 
. were a little varied. 

A piece of paper, covered on one fide with Dutch gilding, 
and which had been left accidentally between two leaves, in 
a quire of paper in which the former experiment had been 
made, was found to have the impreffion of two ftrokes upon 
it, about a quarter of an inch from each other ; the gilding 
being ftripped off, and the paper left bare for a little {pace in 


* Phil. Tranf. Vol. 51. pt. 1. p. 389. 
No both 


274 Mr. SYMMER’s EXPERIMENTS Parti. 


both places.. In the center of one of thefe places was a little 
round hole, in the other only an indenture or impreffion, fuch 
as might have been made with the point of a bodkin. 

Tuese obfervations Mr. Symmer communicated to Dr. 
Franklin, who, notwithftanding Mr. Symmer was endeavour- 
ing to eftablith a theory of electricity contrary to his own, 
with the generofity natural to him, affifted him with his ap- 
paratus in making another experiment in purfuance of ‘that 
mentioned above. 

In the middle of a paper book, of the thicknef§ of a quire, 
Mr. Symmer put a flip of tinfoil; and in another, of the fame 
thicknefs, he put two flips of the fame fort of foil, including 
the two middle leaves of the book between them. Upon 
ftriking the two different books, the effects were anfwerable 
to what he expected. In the firft, the leayes on each fide of 
the foil were pierced, while the foil itfelfremained unpierced; 
but, at the fame time, he could perceive an impreffion had 
been made on each of its furfaces, at a little diftance from one 
another ; and fuch impreffions were ftill more vifible on the 
paper, and might be traced, as pointing different ways. In 
the fecond, all the leaves of the book were pierced, excepting 
the two that were between the flips of foil ; and in thefe two, 
inftead of holes, the two impreflions in contrary directions 
were vifible. 

Mr. Symne_r afterwards got an eleétrical apparatus of his 
own, formed on the model of that of Dr. Franklin, with 
which he frequently repeated. the experiments above-men- 
tioned, the refult of all which he comprifes in the three fol- 
lowing obfervations. 

1. WHEN 


Per. Xi Sec. VI. on THE Two ELECTRICITIES. 275 


a2 Wueiw-a quire of paper, without any thing between the 
~ Jeaves, is pierced with a ftroke of elettricity, the two differ- 
ent powers keep in the-fame track, and make but one hole in 
‘their paflage through the paper: not but that the power from 
above, or that from below, fometimes darts into the paper at 
two'r'mote different points, making fo many holes, which, 
howéver, generally unite before they’go through the paper. 
They feem to pafs each other about the middle of the quire, 
for there the edges are moft vifibly bent different ways; 
whereas, in the leaves near the outfide of the quire, the holes 
vety often carry miore the appearance of the paffage of a 
power iffuing out, and exploding into the air, than of one 
darting into the paper. 
2. Wuen any thin metallic fubftance, fuch as gilt leaf, or 
_ tinfoil, is put between the leaves of the quire, and the whole 
is truck in that cafe, the counteracting powers deviate from 
the direct track, and leaving the path which they would in 
common have taken through the paper, only make’ their 
way: in different lines to the metallic body, and ftrike it in 
two different points, diftant from one another about a quarter 
of an inch,’ more or lefs; the diftance appearing to be the 
leaft when the power is‘greateft: and’ whether they pierce, 
BP only ‘make impreffions upon it, in either cafe, they leave 
evident marks of motion from two different parts,’ and in two 
contrary dire@tions. It is this deviation from a common courfe, 
and the feparation of the lines of direction confequent upon it, 
fayshe, that affords a proof of the exertion of two diftin@ and 
counteracting powers. 
Nn2 3- WHEN 


276 . Mr. SYMMER’s EXPERIMENTS. — Parr I: 


3. Wuen two flips of tinfoil are put into the middle of the 
quire, including two or more leaves between them; if the 
electricity be moderately ftrong, the counteracting powers 
only trike againft the flips, and leave their impreffion there. 
When it is ftronger, one of the flips is generally pierced, but 
feldom both; and from what he had obferved .in fuch. cafes, 
he fays it thould feem, as if the power which iffued from the 
outfide of the phial ated more ftrongly than that which pro- 
ceeded from within, for the lower flip was moft.commonly 
pierced. But this, he ‘adds, may be owing to the greater 
{pace which the power from within has to move through be- 
fore it ftrikes the paper. * 

In the fame paper, Mr. Symmer furnithes a _remakable 
inftance of the power of an hypothefis in drawing facts to it- 
felf, in making proofs out of faéts which are very ambiguous, 
and in making a perfon overlook thofe circumftances in an 
experiment which are unfavourable to his views. 

. Wuewn a phial is electrified, but a little, Mr. Symmer | fays, 
if we touch the coating of it with a finger of one hand, and, 

at the fame time, bring a finger of the) other hand to the wire, 
we, fhall. receive a pretty fmart blow upon the tip of each of 
the fingers, the fenfation of which reaches no farther. If the 
phial be electrified a degree higher, we thall feel a,ftronger, 


blow, reaching to the wrifts, but no farther. When, :again, 


it is electrified to,a ftill higher degree, a feverer blow will be 
received, but will not be felt, beyond ;the elbows. Laftly, 
when the phial is ftrongly charged, the ftroke may be per-= 


® Phil. Tranf. Vol. 51. pt. 1. p. 377, &c 


ceived 


Per.X. Sec. VI. on tHe Two ELECTRICITIES. 277 


ceived in the wrifts; and elbows ; but the principal thock is 
felt in the breaft, as if a blow from each fide met there. 
This plain and fimple experiment, fays Mr. Symmer, feems 
obvioufly to fuggeft to obfervation the exiftence of two difting 
powers, acting in contrary directions ; and, I believe, fays 
he, it would be held as a fufficient proof by any perfon, who 
fhould try the experiment, with a view to determine the 
queftion fimply from his own perceptions. * 

- Ir is a fufficient anfwer to this remark of Mr. Spmmer’s, 
that if twenty people join hands, they may all be made to 
feel the fhock in their wrifts, or their elbows, without havin 
their breafts affected in the leaft. And can it be fuppofed, 
that the two currents of eleétric fire could come at all their 
wrifts or elbows, without pafling through their breafts. Ac- 
cording to Mr. Symmer'’s hypothefis, it fhould feem, that, in 
a large’ circle, thofe perfons only who ftood near the phial, 
on either hand, fhould feel @ fmall fhock ; that a few perfons 
more, at each extremity of the circle, fhould feel one fome- 
thing ftronger; and that it could only be a very ftrong fhock, 
which could at all affect the perfon who ftood in the middle; 
and that then he fhould be affected the leaft of any perfon in 
the company. But all thefe confequences are contrary to 
fac. y : . 
Tuts hypothefis of Mr. Symmer, notwithftanding he has 

_ failed in his application of it to the experiments above-men- 
tioned, has attracted the notice of feveral eleCtricians, both 
at home and abroad ; and fome perfons feem inclined to adopt 


* Phil. Tranf. Vol. 51. pt. 1. p. 373, &c. 
it 


278 J. F. CIGNA’s EXPERIMENTS Part I, 


it, in preference to Dr. Franklin’s theory. I thall therefore 
confider it more at large, when I come to treat of theories 


profefiedly ; till which time, I take leave of this ingenious - 


philofopher, and his two electric fluids. 

Tue experiments of Mr. Symmer excited the attention of 
Johannes Francifcus Cigna, and led him to a courfe of expe- 
riments, which throws ftill more light, both upon the doc- 
trine of the two ele¢tricities, and the Leyden phial. They 
are alfo a further illuftration of the difcovery of Mr. Canton, 
improved by Mr. Wilke and AZpinus, of the mutual ‘repel- 
lency of fimilar ele&tric atmofpheres. 

He took two white filk ribbons, juft dried at the fire, 
and having extended them upon a fmooth plain, either a 
conductor or a non-conduétor, he drew over them the tharp 
edge of an ivory ruler, and found, that both the ribbons had 
acquired electricity enough to adhere to the, plain; though, 
while they remained upon the plain, they fhewed no other 
fign of it. If they were both taken off from the plain toge- 
ther, they attracted one another, the upper having acquired 
the refinous, and more powerful; and the lower the vitreous, 
and weaker electricity. If they were. taken up eparately, 
they repelled one another, having both acquired the refinous 
electricity.* 

In this feparation of both the ribbons from the plain, as 
alfo in their feparation, afterwards, from’one another, elec- 
tric {parks were vifible between them; but if they were/again 
put upon the plain, or joined together, no light appeared 


* Memoirs of the Academy at Turin for the year 1765, p. 31. 
upon 


Per. X.Sec. VI. on THE Two ELECTRICITIES. 279 


upon their fecond feparation, without another friction of the 
ruler. Alfo, when, by being taken off feparately, they had 
been made to repel one another, if they were laid on the 
plain again, and taken off together, they would not attrac; 
and if, by being taken off together, they had firft been made 
to attraét one another, and were laid on the plain a fecond 

time, and then taken off feparately, they would not repel, 
without another friction. Beis 

Wuen, by the operation above-mentioned, they had ac- 
quired the fame electricity, if they were placed, not upon 
the fmooth body on which they had been rubbed, but on a 
rough one, and a conduétor, as hemp or cotton, not very 
dry; they would, upon being feparated, fhow contrary elec- 
tricities ;, which, when they were joined together, would - 
difappear as before. * 

Ir they had been made to repel one another, and were af- 
terwards placed one upon the other, om the rough furface 
above-mentioned, they would, in a few minutes, attract one 
another; the lower of the two ribbons having changed its 
refinous into a vitreous electricity. 

Ir the two white ribbons received their friction upon the 
rough furface, they always acquired contrary eleétricitics ; 
the upper of the two having the refinous, and the lower the 
vitreous, in whatever manner they were taken off. 

j Tue fame thing that was done by a rough furface was done 
by any pointed conductor. If two ribbons, for inftance, were 
made to repel, and hang parallel to one another; and the 


* Ib. p. 33. : 
point 


280 J. F. CIGNA’s EXPERIMENTS Parr I. 


point of a needle were drawn oppofite to one of them, along 
its whole length, they would prefently ruth together ;..the 
eleGtricity of that ribbon to which the needle was prefented 
being changed into the contrary. * 

In the fame manner in which one of the ribbons changed 
its cleGtricity, a ribbon not electrified would acquire elec- 
tricity; viz. by putting it upon a rough furface, and laying 
an eleétrified ribbon upon it; or by holding it parallel to an 
electrified ribbon, and prefenting a pointed conduétor to it. 

He placed a ribbon not quite dry under another that was 
well dried at the fire, upon a fmooth plain; and when he 
had given them the ufual friction with his ruler, he found 
that, in what manner foever they were removed from the 
plain, the upper of them had acquired the refinous, and the 
lower the vitreous _electricity.-F 

Ir both the ribbons were black, all the bint snanewied 
experiments fucceeded, in the fame manner as if they had 
been white. f ; 

Ir, inftead of his ivory ruler, he made ule of any. fkin, or 
of a piece of fmooth glafs, the event was the fame ; but if 
he made ufe of a ftick of fulphur, the electricities were, in 
all cafes, the reverfe of what they were before; the ribbon 
which was rubbed having always acquired the vitreous elec-. 
tricity. 

Wuen he made ufe of paper, either gilt or not gilt, the 
events were uncertain. 

Wuen the ribbons were wrapped in paper, gilt or not gilt, 


* Memoirs of the Academy at Turin for the year 1765, p. 34. t+ Ib. p. 35. Ib. 


and 


Per. X, Sec. VI. oN THE Two ELECTRICITIES. 28¢ 


and the friétion was made upon the paper Jaid on the plain 
above-mentioned, the ribbons sequixed; both of them, the 
refinous eleétricity. * 

Ir the ribbons were one black, and the other white, which 
ever of them was laid uppermoft, and in whatever manner 
the friction was made, the black generally acquired the refi- 
nous, and the white the vitreous electricity. + — 

- He obferved, however, the following conftant event; that 
- whenever the texture of the upper piece of filk was loofe, 
yielding, and retiform, like that of a ftocking, fo that it 
could move, and be rubbed againft the lower, and the rub- 
ber was of fuch a nature as to impart but little eleCtricity to 
glafs; the eleétricity which the upper piece of filk acquired, 
did not depend’ upon the rubber, but upon the body it was 
laid upon; in which cafe the black was always refinous, and 
the white vitreous. But when the filk’ was of -a clofe 
texture, hard and rigid, and when the rubber was fuch as 
imparted a great degree of electricity to glafs; the eletricity 
of the upper piece did not depend upon the lower, but upon 
the rubber. Thus a white filk ftocking, rubbed with gilt 
paper upon glafs, became refinous, and the glafs vitreous ; 
but if a piece of filk, of a firmer texture, was laid upon a 
plate of glafs, it always acquired the vitreous electricity, and 
the glafs the refinous, if it was rubbed with fulphur; and 
for the moft part, if it was rubbed with gilt paper.t So 
that the filk that was rubbed received its electricity, fome- 
_ times from the rubber, and fometimes from the fubftance 


be Memoirs of the Academy at Turin, for the year 1765, p. 36. + Ib. p. 38. 
t Ib. p. 40. 
Oo placed 


282 J. F. CIGNA’s EXPERIMENTS. ParrlI. 


placed under it ; according as it received greater friction from 
the one or the other, or in proportion as one or the other 
was more proper to give electricity to glafs. 

Anoruer fet of experiments, which the fame sehiadies 
Francifcus Cigna made, illuftrate the adhefion of Mr. Sym- 
mer’s electrical ftockings to bodies with fmooth furfaces. He 
infulated a plate of lead, and bringing an eleétrified ribbon 
near it, obferved that it was attracted very feebly. Bringing 
his finger to the lead, a fpark iffued out of it, upon which it 
attracted the ribbon vigoroufly, and both together thowed 
no figns of eleétricity. Upon the feparation of the ribbon, 
‘they again both appeared to ‘be electrified, and a spark v was 
perceived between the ‘plate and the finger. * 

Layine two plates of glafs upon a fmooth conductor com= 
municating with the ground, and rubbing them in the fame 
manner as ‘the ribbons had been rubbed, they likewife acquir_ 
ed electricity, and adhered firmly, both to one another, and 
to the conductor. If it were a plate of lead, not very thick, 
it would be fupported by the attraction. When they were 
together, ‘they fhowed no other figns of eleétricity. + 

Wuen the two plates of glafs were feparated from the con- 
duétor, and kept together, they fhowed, on both fides, a vi- 
treous electricity; and the conduétor, if it had been infulated, 
was feen to have contraéted a refinous eleGtricity. 

Tue two plates of glafs themfelves, when feparated, ‘were 
poffeffed of the two electricities; the upper of the vitreous, 
and ftronger; and the lower of the refinous, and weaker. 


* Memoirs of the Academy at Turin, for the year 1765, p. 43. + Ib. p. 52. 
WITH 


: 


Per.X.Sec. VI. on THE Two ELECTRICITIES. 283 


_ Wirw a rough conductor, whether they were originally 
rubbed upon it, or brought to it, after they had been rubbed 
upon a fmooth one, they fcarce contracted any electricity , 
though, when they were feparated from one another, they 
were affected as before. 

_ Upon this principle, he endeavours to account for the non- 
excitation of a globe or tube from which the air is exhaufted> 
or which is lined with conducting fubftances. In this cafes 
he fays, the vitreous eletricity on the external furface of the 
glafs is balanced by the refinous in the inward coating, or in the 
vacuum which ferves inftead of a coating ; and therefore it is 
in the fituation of the plates of glafs while they lie upon the 
-conduétor above-mentioned: but when the inward coating is 
taken away, the electricity appears on the outfide, without 
any frefhexcitation ; as when the plates were removed from 
the conductor. * 

‘Wuen he laid a number of sibhana of the fame colour up- 
on the fmooth conduétor, and drew his ruler over them; he 
found, that when he took them up fingly, they all gave 


ie {parks, at the place where they were feparated, as the laft 


ribbon did with the fmooth plate, and had all acquired the 
refinous electricity. + 

- Ir they were all taken from the plate eailias they co-. 
hered in one mafs, which, on both fides, appeared to. be re- 
finous: If they were laid upon the rough conduétor, in the 
fame, order (whereby the oppofite electricities were brought 
_ to an equilibrium) and they were all feparated fingly, begin- 


; * Ib. pi 54. + Ib. p. 61. 
Qoz2 ning 


284. ‘J. F. CIGNA’s EXPERIMENTS’ ~ Part T 


ning with the loweft, {parks appeared as before ; but all the 
ribbons had acquired the vitreous electricity ; except the up- 
permoft, which retained the refinous eleGricity it had receiv- 
ed from the friftion. * 

Ir they received the frition upon the rough conduétor, and 
were all taken up at once (in order to have a bundle in which 
the oppofite electricities were balanced) all the intermediate — 
ribbons acquired the cletricity, either of the higheft or the 
loweft ribbon, according as the Saal was begun with the 
higheft, or the loweft. 

Ir two ribbons were feparated from the bundle at the fame 
time, they clung together; and, in that ftate, fhowed no 
fign of eleétricity, as one of them alone would have done. 
When they were feparated, and the different eleétricities were 
manifeft, the electricity was obferved to refide in the outer- 
moft, and was oppofite to that by which they had both ad- 
hered to the bundle, but much weaker. 

He placed a number of ribbons upon a plate of metal, 
which received eleGtricity from the globe, while he held a 
pointed body to the other fide of the ribbons. The confe- 
quence was, that all the ribbons became poffeffed of the elec- 
tricity oppofite to that of the plate, or of the fame, accord= 
ing as they were taken off; except the moft remote, which 
always kept an electricity oppofite to that of the plate. 

From thefe experiments he infers, that as electricity is 
propagated from the outermoft ribbon to thofe underneath it, 
or elfe from the plate below to thofe next above it, when they 


* Memoirs of the Academy at Turin, for the year 1765, p. 61. + Ib. 


are 


Per. X! Sec. VI. on) THE Two ELECTRICITIES. 285. 


are feparated ;: when:the coating»is ‘feparated from’ a charged 
pane of glafs, it likewife depofits its electricity upon the fu- 
perficies of the glafs, the phenomena being the fame:in both, 
For when he put:metal coatings on:the fide-of a platesof glafs,: 
without any cement, they adhered firmly to theglafs when it 
was charged; ‘anda light appeared upon meinen: feparated) 
from/it,: as in the cafe of the ribbons:'* ‘0 Sfo ski Go 

Wuen he coated a number of ribbons in’ the. fame manner; 
and charged them, the coatings adhered firmly to the ribbons; - 
but he could never feparate one of them, but (in confequence 
of the loofe texture of the filk) a {park would go to the op- 
pofite coating, which immediately fell uae the whole be- 
ing then difcharged. +», } 

But he thought the coatings did not Fide ing all their 
ele&tricity on the plate, when they were taken off; for though, 
when both were taken off, the electricities of the two fides 
ftill balanced one another (becaufe each retained the fame di- 
minifhed quantity) yet, when one fuperficies of the glafs, or of 
the ribbons, received its ele¢tricity from friction, and the o- 
ther only from the oppofite coating; he obferved, that the 
ele€tricities which balanced one another while the coating 
was on, were-no longer balanced when it was taken off; the 
electricity of the furface which was rubbed then prevailing, 
becaufe the conducting coating had, upon its feparation, 
taken part of its electricity along with it. ¢ 

To confirm this, he adds another experiment. He charg- 
ed a pane of glafs, coated on one fide, while the other receiv- 


*tb.p.63. +Ib.p.64. Ib. p.65. 
ed 


286 ie Tie OLS FORY ror .:1¥. o-Part dh 


ed eleétricity by a pointed conductor from the machine: He 
likewife inverted the plate, and made) the coated fide com- 
municate with the prime conductor, while a pointed piece of 
metal was_prefented to the oppofite fide ; and, in both cafes, 
found, that while-the coating remained, the two electricities 
balanced one another ;, but that when the coating was flipped 
off, the electricity of the oppofite fide prevailed, fo as to be 
anenenA on both fides of the cristae 


t - . 


* Memoirs of the Academy at Turin, for the year 1765, p. 65.115 3a 


SECTION 


Per.X.Sec.VI. tHe LEYDEN PHIAL. 487 


Rink. wets? 43 fev 


bbc aR AON ceWMoanivy ae: 


38ST SS! 


ti 


‘Tue nisrory or THt LEYDEN PHIAL contwuep. 


“ REAT as were the difcoveries of Dr. Franklin .concern- 
! ‘ing the Leyden phial, he left fome curious particulars 
for this period of the hiftory of electricity ; and the fubject is 
by no means exhaufted. Many of the properties of this won- 
derful bottle, as 'the Doétor calls it, are ftill unexplained. 
But as more and more lights perpetually thrown upon it, let 
us/hope'that,/ at length, we fhall thoroughly underftand this 
great experiment. ..The greateft difcovery concerning the 
properties, of ‘the Leyden phial, in,this period, -hath already 
been related in. the-account, of Mr. 'Wilke’s and A2pinus’s me- 
thod.of giving the fhock by means of a plate of air; and o- 
ther obfervations have, likewife, been occafionally mentioned, 
in places where their connection required them to be inferted, 
This fection, however, will contain feveral, experiments of a 
mifcellaneous nature, which are well worth notice, 
-)IMMéepDIATELY upon the difcovery of the fhock given by 
glafs, all electricians attempted to charge other eleétric fub- 
ftances; but none of them fucceeded before Signior Beccaria. 
He 


28s | TS ALIPurt AISTIORY:# oF .1¥.co PARTI. 


_ He found that a very fmooth plate of fealing wax, made 
_ by pouring that fubftance, when melted, upon an oiled 
marble table, would receive a confiderable charge. * 

ArTer trying. feveral other electrics, in the fame manner, 
he found that a mixture of pitch and colophonia was charged 
lefs than fealing wax, but more than fulphur, and a great 
deal more than pitch alone. + 

Bur the moft curious experiment of this philofopher,~ re- 
lating to this fubjeét, was made with a view to afcertain the 
real direction of the electric fluid in a difcharge. He fufpend- 
edacoated plate of glafs by a filk thread, and having charged 
it, and képt it perfectly ftill; he obferved that’ no motion 
was ‘given to it, when the difcharge-was made by a:crooked 
wire approaching both the fidesat the fame time. The? ex- 
periment, in fact, proved the reaction of the glafs upon the 
‘electric ‘matter; whereby the: plate was-kept {till, aotwith- 
ftanding the'fluid ruthed’ with great violence from one fide to 
the other: He compares the glafs to an ivory ball’ placed be« 
tween’ two others, which keeps its place, .when, by an im- 
pulfe given to one of them, the oppofite ball flies off. po 

A very curious ‘and elegant experiment on the Leyden 
phial was made by profeffor Richman of Peterfburgh, whofe 
unfortunate death will be related in this hiftory.\>” 

He coated both fides of a pane of glafs, within two or 
three inches of the edge, and faftened linen threads to the 
upper part of the coating, on both fides; which, when the 
plate was not charged, hung down in’contact with the coat- 


* Lettere dell’ elettricifmo, p. 64. + Ib. p. 66. t Ib. p. 72. 
ing; 


. 
) — 
B a 3 
we 
—- 


‘Per. X.Sec. VI. «rnHesLEYDEN:PHIAL. 289 | 


ing s but fetting the plate up right, and charging it, he ob- 
fenved, that ‘when neither. of the fides wes touched by his 
finger, or any other conductor communicating with the earths 
both the threads were repelled from the coating, » and‘ ftood 
tan’ equal diftance from it; but when he brought’ his 
finger,: or any other condudtor, to one of the fides, the thread 
hanging to: that, fide fell nearer: to the coating,» while the 
- threadson: thé oppofite fide receded as much ;, and.that when 
hisifinger was brought into contact with one of the fides, the 
thread’ on that fide fell into contac. with it likewife, while 
the thread on the oppofite fide receded to twice the diftance at 
which: it hang originally ;. fo: that’ the two threads always 
hung fo.as:'to make the fame angle with one another. *, |) 
-. #Bpinus fhows, ‘that it is not ftrictly true, that.an infulated 
perfon, difcharging the Leyden phial through his own body, 
contracts'no electricity: « Electrifying a large plate of air, he 
obferved, that if the nearer plate, (by which I fuppofe he 
means that which he firft’ touched) was electrified pofitively, 
he acquired a pofitive electricity by the difcharge ; but if it 
were negative, he acquired a negative electricity. He fup- 
pofes that the reafon why the experiment did ‘not fucceed 
with Dr. Franklin, was, that the furfaces with which he 
tried the experiment were not large enough to make the ef- 
fect fenfible; and that the diftance of the: metal plates was, 
likewife, too fmall, as it neceffarily muft be'in charging of 
glafs. + 


Jouannes Franciscus Ciena has invented a new me- 


© Zpini Tentanien, p. 335. ¢ Ib. p. 27. 
Pp thoc 


ago Tie’ HISTORY» or 1)’ Parr ll 


| thod of charging ‘a phial, pon the principle difcovered by 
“Mr. Canton.and Mr. Wilke}! viz. thatthe electricity of ong! 


body.repels that of another, efpecially if it havea flat etnlfante 


and gives*it the contrary electricity: 

He infulates a {mooth plate of lead, and shied he brings 
an eledtrified body, as) a» ftocking,|..to it, he takes)a {park 
with. the wire: of a phial from: the,oppofite fide ;'; and remov-= 
ing the ftocking,. he takes | another: {park with his finger, or 
any conductor communicating with thé ground. Bringing’ 
the ftocking nearer the plate.a fecond time, he takes a fecond 
fpark, with the wire.of the phial, as: before ; and, removing 
it again, takes another, in the fame manner, with his fingers 
This operation he continues, till the phial is'charged; which, 
in favourable weather, may be done'with very little diminu- 
tion of the elettricity of the ftocking. * - 

. Ir, inftead of taking a fecond {park with his finger; he had, 
taken it with’ the wire of another, phial, that 'would have 
been charged likewife,with no additional labour, and with 
an eleétricity oppofite to that of the other phial. If 
the fecond {park were taken with the coating of the fame 
phial, the charging would be accelerated, but the; operation 
would be troublefome: to manage. 

- Tue’ theory of this. new method of charging a phial 4 is very 
eafy, upon the principle referred to above. The approach 
of the electricity in the ftocking, not being able to enter the 
broad fmooth furface of the metal, drives the electric fluid 
out‘of that part of the plate which is oppofite to it, to the 
other fide, which, being thereby overcharged, will part 


* Memoirs of the Academy at Turin for the year 1765, p. 49. 
with 


os eepdid hppa a 


Per.XiSee. VII. ste LEYDEN PHIAL. 291 


with its fupérfluity to the wire of the phial. » The ftocking 
being taken away, the plate will have lefs than its natural 
fhare of the electric fluid, and will therefore readily take a 
park, either from the finger, or the wire of another phial.* 
_ ‘Tie fame ingenious philofopher makes a confiderable dif- 
‘ference between the ele@tric fluid which gives the fhock, and 
‘that on which fome other phenomena of coated glafs depend. 
‘The former, which is far the greateft quantity, he fuppofes 
to refide, either in the: coating itfelf, or on the furface of the 
glafs; whereas the other, he imagines, to-have entered the 
tpores,» and affected the fubftance of the glafs itfelf. « 

- He laid two plates of glafs, well dried, one upon the o- 
ther, as one piece; the lower of them being coated, on the 
outfide ; and, when they were infulated, he alternately rub- 
bed the uppermoft plate with one handy, and took a. {park 
from the coating-of the lower with \the other, till they.were 
charged; when the coating, and. both, the, plates adhered 
firmly together. Giving a coating to the’ other fide, and 
making a communication between that and the other coating, 
the iufualexplofion was made., But the plates; though thus 
diftharged, « ftill .cohered ;.and, though, ‘while they were in 
this ftate, they fhowed no other figniof electricity; yet, when 
_ they were-feparated, they weré each of them found |to be pof- 

fefied! of eleétricity oppofite to that.of:the other, 0. 4 

orl the two plates: were feparated before they, were difcharged, 
and! thencdating'iof-each were’ touchedy:a {park came from 


* Ibipest ai os i 
Pp2 each 


ag2 lS 1itfin¥ SYS FORY tor-IlY 0:2 Phen E 


veach sand when put together, ‘they would ‘cohere as before, 
but -were incapacitated: for giving a fhock. #5 6 

He, therefore, compares’ the electricity which gives: the 
fhock to the eleétricity of) the metal plate in the former ex- 
-periment;) which is loft with taking one’ fpark, «as the filk is 
‘removed from: it, and: is different from: the eleétricity by 
which the two plates of glafs cohere.’ The ‘one ‘is. difperfed 
-at once, but the other flowly ; the one exifting, as he fup- 
pofés, in the: conduétors, or upon the furfaces of the elec- 
“trics, and the other in:the fubftance itfelfy+ rs 

AmonG. experiments relating to the electric thock,: we. tiie 
-to-mention ‘what has been obferved within this period of its 
amazing foree in melting wires, and heart other furpri- 
fing effects. ieibh< aivintioy é yah 

“THAT even ‘artificial eletiricity, fays” Dr. ‘Watfon i ina 
paper read at the'Royal Society June the 28th. 1764, when 
in too great'a quantity, and hurried’ on too faft, through a 
‘fine iron wire, has’a remarkable effect upon the wire, appears 
froma very cutious experiment of Mr. Kinnerfley.  Thig 
‘gentleman, in the prefence of Dr. Franklin, made a large 
cafe of bottles explode at once through a fine iton wire. ‘The 
wire at firft appeared red hot, and then fell into drops, which 
burned‘ themfelves into the furface of his table or floor. 
Thefe drops cooled in'a fpherical figure like’ very: fmall! thot 
of which Dr. Franklin tranfmitted fome to Mr. Canton; who 
repeated the experiment.) This’ proves’ the’ fufion to have 


' * Memoirs of the Academy at Turin for the year 1765, p. 55. + ‘Ib. p. 56. 
[ been 


Per. X.Sec. VII.. rue LEYDEN PHIAL. 293 


been very complete 5 as nothing lefs than the moft perfect 
fluidity could give this figure to melted iron. 

Mr. CanTon, ina note fub{cribed to the fame paper, ob- 
ferves, that the diameter of a piece of Mr. Kinnerfley’s wires 
which he received from Dr. Franklin, was one part in 182 
of an inch. He adds, that artificial lightning, froma cafe of 
thirty five bottles. would entirely deftroy brafs wire, of one 

“part in 330 of an inch. — At the time of the ftroke, he fays, 
‘a great number of fparks, like thofe from a flint and fteel, 
‘would fly upwards, and laterally, from the place where the 
-wire was laid, and lofe their light, in the day time, at the 
idiftance of about two or three inches. After the explofion, 
a mark appeared on the table, the whole length of the 
‘wire, and fome very round particles of brafs were difco- 
ivered by a magnifier near the mark, but no part of the wire 
ati. could be found. * 

Srontor Brccarta was able 'to melt fall ftrips of metal, 
tibia inclofing, or covering them with pieces of glafs. 
‘But he thought that the fame colour was imprefied upon 
glafs by all the metals; and imagined that this circumftance 
“was a trace of the fundamental principles being the fame in 
them all.-¢ 

Mr.) kadindan: Sd fered, that,. whee a large pane of 
‘glafs' difcharged itfelf, the polifh was taken off at the place 
of the difcharge, and that the track it left. behind it was 
~ufually, asjhe exprefles it, in tne zig zag form. With the 


® Phil: Tranf. Vol. 54. p. 208. .* Elettricifino artificiale, &c. p. 134, 135- 
piece 


294. Tue HISTORY or Part I. 


piece of glafs with which he made thefe difcharges he pierced 
160 leaves of paper. It contained 1200 fquare inches. *))/,/) 

Mr. WInK LER fired the feeds of clubmofs [lycopodium] 
by difcharging a phial through a quantity of them. He alfo 
fired the aurum fulminans placed upon a piece of parchment, 
which was torn to pieces by the explofion. + a ' 

By the eletric fhock, Signior Beccaria could melt borax, 
and glafs. But the moft remarkable of his experiments with 
the electric fhock are thofe by which he revivified metals. 
This he did by making the explofion between two pieces of 
the calces. In this manner he revivified feveral of the me- 
tals, and among others, zink. He even produced real 
quickfilver from cinnabar.{ In this cafe of revivifications, 
he always obferved ftreaks of black beyond the coloured 
metalic ftains, owing, as he imagined, to the’ phlogifton driven 
thither from the parts that were vitrified, when the other 
part revivified the calx. || Probably, the ‘phlogifton which 
revivified the calces was in that black duft, which the electric 
fhock will throw from metals, as — be lachaiest injits proper 
place. 

ANOTHER curious experiment he! csikde vith; the ele@tric 
fhock, by difcharging it through fome brafs duft, {prinkled 
between two plates of fealing wax. The whole was perfectly 
luminous, and tranfparent. § An experiment which throws 
fome light upon one of Mr. Hawkefbee’s: . ; 

Wiru the electric fhock he alfo made that oitisal- experi- 

4 Letone del Pa a p- 282. et Tip Pra a sy hes 
ment, 


| Pex. XSec. VI. tuz-LEYDEN PHIAL. ags 


ment, on which he Jays fo much ftrefs in his theory of thun-, 
der ftorms;, and by which he proves, that the electric matter 
~ forces into its paflage all light conducting fubftances; by 
means of which it is enabled to pafs through a quantity of 
refifting medium, which it could not otherwife do. He put 
- anartow piece of leaf filver between two plates of wax, lay- 
ing) it: acrofs the plates, but fo as not quite to reach one 
of the fides. The difcharge being made through this 
ftrip of metal, by bringing a wire oppofite to the filver, at 
the place where it was difcontinued; the filver was found. 
melted, iand part of it difperfed all along the track that the 
eleétic matter took, between the plates of wax, from the 
filver to the wire. * . An accident gave him occafion to ob- 
ferve another fact of a fimiliar nature. He once, inadyer- 
tently, received the charge of a fmall jar, through fome 
fmoke of {pirit of nitre ; when a hole was made in his thumb, 
where the fire entered; and which he thought-could only 
have been made-by the nitre, which was carried along with 
the electric fluid. -+ 

I suaxt clofe the hiftory of the Leyden phial for this pe- 
riod with the accounts of fome extremely curious facts, which 
Mr. Canton gives me leave to publith relating to this fubject- 
They certainly deferve the utmoft attention of philofophers, 
and may probably throw fome light upon the electricity of 


the tourmalin. 
He procured fome thin glafs balls, of about an inch and a 


* Lettere dell’ elettricifmo, p. 248. + Ib. p. 249. 
half 


296 Dr. WATSON’s EXPERIMENTS Parti. 


half diameter, with ftems or tubes of eight or nine inches in 
length, and eletrified them, fome pofitively on the infide, 
and others negatively, after the manner of charging the Ley- 
den phial, and then fealed them hermetically. Soon after, 
he applied the naked balls to his electrometer, and could not 
difcover the leaft fign of their being electrical: but holding 
them at the fire, at the diftance of five or fix inches, they be- 
came ftrongly eleétrical, in a very. fhort time ; and more fo 
when they were cooling. Thefe balls would, every time 
they were heated, give the electric fire to, or take it from 
other bodies, according to the plus or minus ftate of sit with- 
in them. Heating them frequently, he found, would fenfi- 
bly diminith their power, but keeping one of them under wa- 


ter a week did not appear in the leaft to impair it. That’ 


which he kept under water was charged the 22d. of Septem- 


ber 1760, was feveral times heated ‘before it ‘was kept in. 


water, and had been heated frequently afterwards ; and yet it 


ftill retained its virtue to a confiderable degree, on ithe 31ft.' 
of Oétober following, when he fent an account of it to.Dr.: 


Franklin. The breaking two of his balls accidentally gave 
him an opportunity of meafuring their thicknefs, which he 
found to be between feven and eight parts in 1000 of.an 
inch. SUID Use)? 3h sem) 
Tue balls mentioned in the account above, which was 


written fix years ago, ftill retain their virtue, but in a lefs. 


degree. pall 


SECTION 


ce 


_Per.X. Sec. VIN. . on ELECTRIC LIGHT. 297 


SECTION § VII. 


dems : + 
diyhadins " 
_ EXPERIMENTS AND OBSERVATIONS CONCERNING 


ahs ELECTRIC LIGHT. 


Bs reader has been informed of the neceflity I was un- 
der of dividing the bufinefs of this period of my hiftory 
into Maverel parts. He has already feen titles which he could 
not have expected from the divifions of the preceding periods, 
: but] he would perhaps leaft of all expect a diftin@ fection up- 
on eleétric light ; and yet the experiments and obfervations 
which have been made, immediately relating to this fubjeét, 
are fo many, that they deferve a place by themfelves. And I 
would rather err by making too many fubdivifions, than too 
few; becaufe, above all things, I would with to preferve 
perfpicuity, which is chiefly injured by crowding together 
things diffimilar. 
Many experiments had been ate very early, by Mr. 
_Hawkefbee and others, on eleétricity, and particularly elec- 
tric light, in vacuo; but fo little was, at that time, known 
of the nature of electricity in general, that, comparatively, 


Q4q little 


298 Dr. WATSON’s EXPERIMENTS» Parr. 


little ufe could be made of thefe experiments. Very for- 
tunately, Dr. Watfon happened to turn his thoughts that 
way, after the great difcovery of the accumulation of elec- 
tricity in the Leyden’ phial; and ‘by this means he difcover- 
ed, that our atmofphere, when dry, is the agent by which, 
with the affiftance of other electrics per fe, we were enabled 
to accumulate electricity upon non-eleétrics (he might have 
added ele€trics too) that is, to communicate to them a greater 
quantity of electricity than thofe bedies:naturally have. That 
upon the removal of the air, the eleétric fluid pervaded the 
vacuum to a confiderable diftance, and manifefted its effects 
upon any non-electric fubftances by which it was terminated. 
Tuts he demonftrated by one of the moft beautiful expe- 
‘iments which the whole compafs of eleétricity yet exhibits. 
He exhaufted a glafs cylinder, three feet in length, and three 
inches in diameter, with a contrivance to let down a brafs 
plate, as far as he pleafed, into it; in order to make it ap- 
proach another plate, fixed near the bottom of the veffel. 
Tuts cylinder, thus prepared, he infulated, and obferved, 
that when the upper plate was electrified, the eleétric mat- 
ter would pafs from one plate, to another, at the greateft 
diftance to'which the brafs plates could be drawn; and that 
the brafs plate at the bottom of the cylinder was ftrongly 
electrified, as if a wire had conneéted it with the prime con- 


‘dudtor. It was a moft delightful {peétacle, he fays, when — 


‘the'room was darkened, to fee the eleétric matter in its paf- 
‘fage through this vacuum ; to obferve, not as in the open air, 
fmall brufhes or pencils of rays, an inch or two in length, 
‘but corufcations of the whole length of the tube, and of a 
bright 


Per. X. Sec. VII. on ELECTRIC LIGHT. 299 


bright filver hue. Thefe did not immediately diverge, as in 
the open air, but frequently, ‘from a. bafe. apparently flat, 
divided themfelves into. lefs and lefs ramifications, and re~ 
fembled very much the. mot lively. aceotenes of the, aurora, 
borealis. nS 

- Somerimes. te degre, that nitache' the ne had begni 
eihaishteds in the moft perfect manner, the eleétric. fluid was, 
feen to pafs between the brafs plates in. one continued ftream,; 
- of the fame dimenfions throughout its whole length, which,, 
he thought, demonftrated, that the caufe of that very power-; 
ful ‘mutual repulfion of the. particles, of electric fire, which 
is feen in the open air, is more owing to the refiftance of the 
air, than to any natural tendency of the electricity ittlf., 
For,, in the open air we obferve that thefe. bruthes, when the. 
electricity is. ftrong, slinerge fo, much, as, to ged almoft a 
fpherical figure. * : 
_ He made this vacuum. past nf a, circuit netefiary: to make 
the difcharge of a phial ; and, at the inftant of the explofion,: 
there was feen a mafs of very bright embodied fire, jumping: 
from one of the brafs plates.in the tube ‘tothe other. But 
this did not. take place when. one of the. plates was farther 
diftant from the other than ten inches. If the diftance was 
greater, the fire began to diverge, and. lofe part of its force: 
and this force diminithed in proportion to. its, divergency,) 

_ To find a more perfeet vacuum, for. the paflage of the elec- 
tric. fluid, he had recourfe to an excellent invention of Lord 


* Phil. Tranf. Vol. 47. p. 367. 
Co yee ‘Charles 


joo. Mr. SMEATON’s EXPERIMENTS — Part To 


Charles Cavendifh ; who, by means of a long bent tube of 
glafs, filled with mercury, and inverted, made all the bended’ 
part of it (which was above the mercury) the moft perfect 
vacuum that can be made by man. This vacuum Dr. 
Watfon infulated, and one of the bafons of the mercury be~ 
ing made to communicate with the conductor, when fome 
non-electric fubftance touched the other, the ele@ric matter 
pervaded the vacuum in a continued arch of lambent flame, 
and, as far as the eye could follow it, without the leaft di- 
vergency. 

ConnecTiNG one of the bafons with the machine, which 
was infulated, the fire was feen pervading the vacuum in @ 
contrary direction. And this he confidered as the experimen- 
tum crucis of two principles which he had advanced before ; 
viz. that electricity is furnithed to the conduétor, not by the 
excited eleGtric, but from the non-eleétrics in conta& with 
the rubber; and that we are able to take from, or add to 
that quantity of electricity, which is naturally inherent in’ 
bodies. . 

He -alfo obferved, that if, in the fore-mentioned cir- 
cumftances, the hand of a perfon ftanding upon the floor was 
brought near the fide of the glafs, the corufcations would 
dart themfelves that way in a great variety of forms, ex- 
tremely curious to behold. 

But the Door found,’ that even this vacuum, did not 
conduct fo perfeétly as metals, or water; becaufe a perfon 
ftanding upon the floor, and applying his finger to the up- 
per brafs plate, received a {mart ftroke. This he conceived 
to arife from the electricity of the brafs being fo much more 


rarified 


Per. ‘X. Sec. VII’ on’ ELECTRIC LIGHT: 301. 


rarefied t ‘than fo: of the. pein of the man who applied his: 
finger. wis 

Mr. Witson’e the Mr. Smeaton, the inventor of a new 
and more. perfeét kind of air pump, to make fome eleétrical 
experiments in vacuo.. The following is the account of them. 
that he tranfmitted to Mr. Wilfon.. They are, in feveral 
refpects, fimilar to thofe made by Dr. Watfon, and yet are 
attended with a confiderable variety of circumftances. 

A cxass veffel, about one foot in length, and eight inches 

in its greateft diameter, open at both ends, had one of its’ 
ends clofed by a)brafs ferrule, which conftituted one of the) 
centers on which it turned; the, other end was clofed with 
a metal plate. In the center of this plate was a {quare ftem, 
which was applied to the arbor of a lath, by which the glafs 
. was turned round. On one fide of this laft plate was fixed-a. 
cork, by means of which the glafs was {crewed upon the air 
“pump. ; 
Upon crarefying the air within the glafs about 500 times, 
and afterwards turning the glafs in the lath, whilft, at the. 
fame time, it was rubbed with his hand; a confiderable, 
quantity | of. lambent flame, variegated with all the colours of 
the rainbow, appeared within the glafs, under the hand. 
This light was pretty. fteady. in. every refpect, except that 
every part of it was perpetually changing colour. 

Wuen alittle air was let into the glafs, the light appeared 
more vivid, and ina greater quantity; but was not fo fteady: 
for it would frequently break out into a kind of corufcations, 


* Phil. Tranf. Vol 47. p. 373+ 
Seer ae like 


302) Mr. CANTON’s EXPERIMENTS Part Ii 


like lightning, and fly: all about within the: glafs.... When a 
little more air was let in, the flafhing was continual, andi 
ftreams of bluith light feemed to iflue from under his hand, 
within the glafs, in‘a thoufand forms, with great. rapidity 5: 
and appeared like a cafcade of fire. Sometimes: it ames too 
fhoot out into the forms of trees, mofs, “&c. as 

- WueEn more air was let‘in, the: quantity of light was: die: 
minifhed, and the-ftreams compofing the flathes narrower: 
The glafs now required a greater velocity, and harder friction. 
Thefe circumftances'increafed‘as'more air was.let in; fo that; 
by fuch tite as the glafs was’one ‘third full’ of air, thefe co» 
rufcations quite vanifhed, and a much’ finaller quantity: of 
light appeared partly within, and partly without the glafs. 
And when all the air was let in, the light appeared wholly’ 
without the glafs, and much lefs in Shanes kj 2 wpe a 
glafs was in part exhaufted. * — 

Mr. ee ME in repeating Dr. Watfon’ s experiment “nts 
it, which throws great light upon the Leyden phial. He 
obferved, that when the excited tube was brought near ‘one. 
of the bafons of this machine’ (infulated) a Tight was” 
through more than half of the vacuum ; which foon ‘ vanithe! 
ed, if the tube was not brought nearer, but! which’ appeared 
again as it moved farther off; and that this appearance inight’ 
be repeated feveral times, without exciting’ the tube ‘afref 

‘Tuts experiment he’ confidered ‘as a ‘kind of ocular det 
monftration of the truth of Dr. Franklin’s” hypothefis, “that! 
when the electric fluid was condenfed on one fide of the 
glafs, it was repelled from the other, if it met with no re- 


* Wilfon’s Effay, p. 216. rapaed 
fiftance — 


-Per.Xi Sec.VIIL0 1") ON ELECTRICLIGHT. 303 


: _ fiftance: » Thus, jat-the approach of the excited,tube,: he fup- 


-pofed the fire) to be repelled from the infide of the, glafs fur- 
‘rounding the vacuum, and ‘to ‘be carried off through the 
«columns -of mercury, /but; to, return again as the tube: was 
cwithdrawn. * | 
‘0 'Tuts ‘curious sinenigicnt Mr. Canton howed, and ex- 
plained to-Mr. Wilfon; who afterwards expatiated upon it, in 
a book publifhed by hiny and. Dr. Hoadly in:conjunétion, 
entitled Od/ervations on.a feries of electrical experiments; in a 
-note of which, p. 28, he fays, Mr. Canton has taken no- 
-tice of this vanifhing and returning of the light. 
| Mr. Canton’has.-fince diverfified. this’ beautiful experi- 
~ment, ' by bringing ‘the excited tube to another glafs tube, 
-exhaufted, and hermetically fealed ; by which means, she ex- 
ihibits the, perfe&t appearance of an aurora borealis. The _ 
_-flame from: one of its extremities, which is ina manner coat- 
.éd.by the hand which holds it, will:dart to the other extre- 
<mity, at uncertain intervals of time; for near a quarter of an 
hour’ together, without repeating the application of the ex- 
cited tube. — 
_ Wuen it was generally agreed among electricians, that 
-what had been called vitreous and-refinous ele¢tricity were in 
; reality a redundancy of the ele&tric fluid in one cafe, anda 
‘deficiency in the other; and when, in confequence of this 
fuppofition, ‘the one was called pofitive, and the other nega- 
.tive electricity ; there ftill remained fome doubt which of the 
“two. was pofitive, and which negative. Mr, Wilfon, ina 


* Phil. Tranf, Vol. 48. pt. 1. p. 356. 


paper 


304. +» Mr. WILSON’s EXPERIMENTS Parti. 


‘paper read at the Royal Society, December the 6th. 1759, 
‘recites an experiment which, he thought, put the matter be- 
yond all difpute, and abfolutely determined, that what had 
been called vitreous was really pofitive, and what had been 
called refinous was negative ; as, indeed, had generally been 
-fuppofed, though, as Mr. Wilfon thought, without fufficient 
reafon, notwithftanding what had been advanced by Dr. 
‘Franklin, and Mr. Canton upon that fubject. 

RepeaTineG the beautiful experiment mentioned before, 
as firft contrived by Lord Charles Cavendith, he fays he at- 
tended to a circumftance which feemed to have been over- 
looked by Dr. Watfon, who publifhed the account of it. 
This was a fingular appearance of light upon one of the fur- 
faces of the quickfilver. _To obferve this remarkable appear- 
‘ance to more advantage, Mr. Wilfon let a {mall quantity of 
‘air into the tube, by which means four columns of quick- 
-filver were obtained, and confequently fix vifible furfaces, in 
one of the legs of the inverted tube. He then eleétrified the 
mercury in the other leg, while the mercury_on the oppofite 
fide had a communication with the earth; when, the room ~ 
being dark, the ftream of electric light was vifible through 
the whole length of the vacuum, and its general appearance 
was of a feeming uniform denfity; except at the upper fur- 
faces of each column, where about one tenth of an inch above 
the furface, the light was always confiderably brighter 
whereas the under furfaces exhibited no fuch an appearance, 


the light being rather lefs bright in thofe places than inthe _ 


general appearance of the whole illuminated vacuum. 


Tus 


Per. X. Sec. VIII. ‘on ELECTRIC LIGHT. = 05 


-'Turs luminous appearance Mr. Wilfon afcribed to the -re- 
fiftance the flaid met with at the upper furface of the quick- 
_ filver, in endeavouring to get into it. He therefore inferred 
that excited glafs eleétrified bodies pofitively, or gave them 
a greater quantity of the electric fluid than they had. 

“'Erecrriryine, in the fame place, with a cylinder of 
fofin, inftead of glafsy the luminous appearances were allon 
the under furfaces of the columns of quickfilver; from which 
he inferred, that rofin electrified bodies negatively, depriving 
them of part of the éleétric fluid which they naturally 
had ; 3 ‘or, as he expreffes it, ame cde. a —s of electric 
fluid to fet the contrary way. 

- Turse luminous appearances, Mr. Wilfon alfo sonia ese 
_as a ftrong confirmation of the exiftence of a medium, at or 
near the furfaces of bodies, which hindered the entrarice or 
exit of the eleétric fluid. A doétrine which Mr. Wilfoa 
had advanced, and laid great esived upon on feveral other oc- 
cafions. * 

’ ‘Tue arguments which to Mr. Wilfon appeared conclufive, 
in proof of what is commonly fuppofed, that glafs eleétrifies 
plus, and fulphur, &c. minus, did not appear fo to Epinus ; 
though he acknowledges’ that the knobs of light in the 
vacuum did, in common with many other appearances, prove 
a real difference between the two elettricities ; and thought 
that it was very eafy to conceive, that when an elaftic fluid 
iffues from a body, it fhould be denfer near the furface from 
whence it iffues, than where it finds more liberty to expand 


* Phil. Tranf. Vol. 51. pt. 1. p. 308. 
Rr itfelf, 


306 Mr. WILKE’s, EXPERIMENTS) ., Parr Ie 


itfelf.’ He might have added, that this might, have beensex-. 
pected, from the mutual attraction which. is fuppofed to.fubs 
fift between the electric fluid, and other bodies. But. Apinus 
did not exprefily mention this) circumftance..Mr. Wilfon, 
therefore, makes light of the objections. and-adds, that, when, 
he related the experiment with the bent: tubes: in, his letter to 
Dr. Heberden, he, omitted fome phenomena attending the 
fact; which. greatly favoured the doétrine he advanced. If, 

fays he, when. glafs, is. electrified, and. applied to.the firft 
column, we. fufter the electric fluid to pafs along the tube.in 
finall quantities only, and. at fhort intervals, , little luminous 
ftreams will be {een to move from the firft. to, the fecond) co- 

lumn of quickfilyer,; and confequently from, the glafs.. The 

like appearances happen, but in a contrary: direétion, when, 
rofin or amber is made ufe of, and applied to the fame co-, 
lumn. » Glafs, therefore, he concludes, cletrifies, | phuss . OF, 

fills bodies; with more of this fluid than belongs to them na-. 
turally, and rofin, &c. minus. * 

Ir will excite. no difagreeable fenfation in the lefa. psi 
and faturnine of my readers to be informed, that I haye been: 
amufing them with a controverfy which took, its rife from a 
mere deception: for Mr. Canton informs me, and gives. me 
leave to inform the public, that the light which Mr. Wilfon, 
takes notice of, as appearing on one furface of the merc Lin. 
the double barometer of Lord Charles Cavendith, and wh ich, 
Mr. Wilfon takes. to be a proof of theexiftence of a medium. 
on the furfaces of bodies, which hinders the entrance or exit, 


* Phil. Tranf, Vol. 53. pt. 438. P. 441... 


of 


| Pek/X.Sec. VAI. on ELECTRIC LIGHT. — 307 


of the'/cleétric’ fluid’ to ‘fome “degree, he» found to be 
eaufed by nothing ‘but? common air. ‘For if the: Torricel- 
lian vachum ‘be’ properly made, “no difference of light can be 
feen on the furfaces of the columns of mercury; but if as 
much air be let into ‘the vacuum, a8 will make each column 
of mercury’ ‘a’ quattet’ of am inch’ thorter than that of a-good 
batoitieter, the? light will appear much as’ Mr. Wilfon hay 
defctibed it. “Whei’Mr, Wilfon fuppofed that Dr. Watfon, 
when he ‘made the experiment of the Torricellian vacuum, 
did! not attend to the fingular appearance of light on one of 
the ftfaces ‘ofthe mercury, ‘He: little fufpetted’ that’ if the 
vacuum Dr. Watfon made was free from air, there” “was no 
fach fingular appearance of light to bel attended’ to. ‘Air, Mr. 

Canton adds, muft be condenfed near the furface of all bodies 
that attract it; and will, therefore, be fome hindrance to the 
exit, or ‘entrance of the eleétri¢ fluid, except. the ‘bodies be 
va fharply pointed. : 

‘Some curious obfervations relating’ to elearic’ light were 
made, by Mr. Wilke. Rubbing two pieces of glafs together 
in the dark, he obferved a vivid phofphoreal light: which, 
however, threw out no rays, but adhered to the place where 
it \ was excited. Tt was attended with a ftrong phofphoreaj 
fell, “but with no attraGtion, or repulfion. From this expe- 
Fiment he inferred, that fridtion alone. would not excite elec- 

tricity, fo.as to be accumulated upon any body; and that to 
pet this effect, the bodies rubbed together muft be of 

ifferent — natures, ‘with refpea to their attracting the electric 

fluid. .He,) moreoversi imagined, that all examples of phof- 
ot light, without attraction, were owing to the fame 
er2 excitation 


308 Mr. WILKE’s. EXPERIMENTS . Part k 


excitation. of elettricity, without .the: accumulation. of it, | 
Such. he imagined to be. the. cafe, of, light emitted by) the 
Bolognian ftone,. cadmea fornacum, rotten wood, posnded 
fugar, and glafs.of all kinds, * ast 
A TuBE excited with a woollen cloth,. on. “which white 
wax.or oil had been put, he fays, threw out flames ; each of 
which when examined, appeared to rife out of a little protu- 
berance of fire. The flame was one, and very narrow, at the 
bottom, but farther from the tube it divided into feveral ra- 
mifications; which always leaned to thofe parts of the tube 
which were the leaft Praia or to conductors in the, neigh, - 
bourhood Tole sete aie’ mei idee ‘steak [ munuogy 
He fays that, upon ‘niekendiog, a Ginger, or sane non-elec- 
tric to an excited negative eleétric, a cone of light is formed; 3 
the bafe of which i is at the finger, or other non-electric, and 
the apex at the electric, on the furface of which it {preads 
to a confiderable diftance all round. + 
Sometimes, he had feen fiery particles throws laterally 1 
from an irregular eleétric fpark, which fhone like ftars, oe if 
were very like thofe which are produced by the collifion of ° 
flint and fteel. || 4 
SUsPENDING various balls oat his conduétor, and relent 
ing others to ‘them, ‘which were fometimes of glafs and . 
times of metal, and varying them in every manner =a i 
he always found (except when two metal balls weg 
that the light between them formed a cone, the ba f ‘whic 
was always on. the body which | was wai and cae . 


Aes 
* Wilke, p. 123, 12g. Tb. plaag. cog Ibs pi aap ye Ib lp. rj! 


W Vai fl gil jooighat 


Per. X.Sec. VII. on ELECTRIC LIGHT, 309 


‘that which ‘was negative. He fays that this criterion’ is 
fafficient to een the two electricities iets one an 
‘nother 
He obferves that, at the apex of a cone iffuing fi pallies 
~ ed bodies, eleétrified .pofitively, there is a cylindrical fpark, 
out of which lucid rays, like a river, are darted. Thefe 
rays, he ‘fays, form a lucid cone, the apex of which is turned 
- towards the point from which the fire proceeds. Sometimes 
from the apex, or at fome diftance from it, there is a lucid 
point, which, he fays, Haufenius calls the fire of the fecond 
‘find, out of which flew ftreams of fire. The ftreams never 
iffue from the eleétrified body itfelf, but always from this 
lucid point. He fays, moreover, that this lucid point at the 
* “extremity of an eleétrified body, and which throws out lucid 
rays, forms the diftinétive charaéter of the pofitive cone. * 
- A neGaTive cone, he fays, is fmall, confifting of very 
flender filaments, which immediately adhere to the point at 
which the light enters, or to its fides; and, if accurately ex- 
amined, feems to form little cones, the bafes of which reft 
upon the body. 
. Wuen he afterwards comes to confider the caufe of nega~ 
tive cones of light, he owns himfelf to be at a great lofs how 
to doit. 
~ Mr. Wike put Englith phofphorus upon a pointed body; 
which, in the dark, rendered the whole vifible; and when 
he fufpended this pointed body perpendicularly, the phofpho-= 
seal vapours were {een to afcend; but upon electrifying it, as 


* Wilke, p. 132. 


it 


310 S. BECCARIA’s EXPERIMENTS Parr I, 


it hung in the fame direction, the vapours were carried down 
wards, and formed a very long’ cone, extending out of the 
middle of the cone of electric light, which was feen per. 
fe@tly diftin& from it. When the electrification was difcon- 
tinued, the phofphoreal vapour afcended as at firft. From 
this depreffion of the phofphoreal effluvia Mr. Wilke infers 
the efflux of the eleétric fluid from the point, and upon 
the furface, and not only through the fubftance of the point- 
ed body. It is pity that he did not try this curious experi- 
ment with pointed bodies eledtrified negatively. He would 
certainly have found the fame depreffion of the phofphoreal 


effluvia, and would, probably, have retraéted his conclufion . 


concerning this proof of the efflux. * iy 
Mr. Wixxe alfo thought it to be a proof, that the elec- 
tric matter did not only flow out of the fubftance of elec- 
trified bodies, but upon the furface of them, that a, metallic 
ring, projecting ever fo little beyond the point of a wire on 
which it had been put, prevents the appearance of the lucid 
int. 
Tue laft obfervation which I fhall recite of Mr,. Wilke 
concerning eleétric light is, that if a point not, electrified, 


be oppofed to a point 'ele@rified pofitively, the cones of light, [ 


which, in other circumftances, would appear upon both, of 

them, difappear ; but that if a pofitive cone be oppofed'to a 

negative cone they both preferve their own characteriftic 

properties. -+ be off 
* Wilke, p. 134. + Ib. p. 140. 

SIGNIOR 


Per. X. Sec. VI, on ELECTRIC LIGHT. = git 


»Srontor Beccarra was of opinion, that the: direGion of 
_ the eleGtric fluid may be determined, from the phenomena, of 
"pointed | bodies, “The pencil (by which he means the eleétric 
fire at a point eleGtrified. pofitively) he fays, contratts as it, 
_ approaches a a flat piece of metal, not electrified, whereas the 
far (by which he means the eleGtric fire at a point cle&trified 
‘ negatively), ¢ expands in, the fame. circumftances, and has a 
fmall cavity near the point. towards the large fuperficies. The 
pencil i is attended with a {napping noife, the ftar makes little 
or no noife. He hardly gives any reafon for the firft of thefe 
a3, he only fays, that fuch is. the neceflary confe- 
¢ ofa. fluid ifluing out of, of entering intoa point, But, 
ater noife made by the pencil, he. thought was made by 
ome given by the eleétric matter to the air, caufing i it 
to vibrate : : and this muft be greater when, the fluid. is thrown. 
from the point i into the air, than when i it comes through dif, 
ferent portions of the air, and meetsjin one point. * - 
Wun two points are oppofed to one another, he fays, the 
phenomena are much the fame in both. + 
Sicnior Beccaria obferved that hollow glafs veffels, of 
a certain thinnefs, exhaufted of air, gave a light when they 
were broken i in thedark. By a beautiful train of experiments, 
he found, at length, that the luminous appearance was not 
occafioned by the breaking of the glafs, but by the dafhing of 
the external air againft the infide, when it was broke. He 
covered one of thefe exhaufted veffels with a receiver, and let- 


* Elettricifmo artificiale, p. 63. + Ib. 
ting 


312 Mr. LANE’s EXPERIMENTS Part I. 


ting the air fuddenly on the outfide of it, obferved the very 
fame light. This he calls his new invented phofphorus. * 
’ Tuar electric light is more fubtle and penetrating, if one 
may fay fo, than light produced in any other way is manifeft 
from feveral experiments, particularly the remarkable one of 
Mr. Hawkefbee; but none prove it fo clearly as fome made . 
by the ingenious Mr. Lane, who has likewife made feveral 
other original experiments, with which, it is hoped, he will 
foon oblige the public. He gives me leave to mention’ 
thefe. vi ie) 
Wuen he had, for fome different purpofe, made the elec- 
tric fhock pafs over the furface of a piece of marble, in the 
dark ; he obferved, that the part over which the fire had paff- 
ed was luminous, and retained that appearance for fome time. 
No fuch effeé of the eleétric fhock having ever been obferved 
before, he repeated the experiment with a great variety of 
circumftances, and found it always anfwered with all calcari-- 
ous fubftances, whether animal or mineral, and efpecially if 
they had been burnt into alime. And, as far as he had tried, 
many more fubftances would retain this light than would not 
do it; among others feveral vegetable fubftances would do it, 
particularly white paper. Tiles, and brick were luminous, 
but not tobacco-pipe clay, though well burnt. the 
Tuar gypfeous fubftances, when calcined, were luminous, 
appeared from bits of images made of plaifter of Paris; and of 
this clafs, he fays, is the famous Bolognian ftone. But many 
bodies, he found, were luminous after the electric ftroke, 


* Lettere dell’ elettricifmo, p. 365, &c. 
which 


Per. X:Sec. VI. *on ELECTRIC LIGHT. 313 


which were not apparently fo, when expofed to the rays of 
the fun. 

He made thefe curious experiments by slanive the chains, 
or wires that led from the conduétor to the outer coating of 
his jar, within one, two, or three inches (according to the 
ftrength of the charge) from one another, on the furface of 
the body to be tried, and difcharging a fhock through them. 
If the ftone was thin, he found, that if one chain was placed 
at the top, and the other at the bottom, it would appear lu- 
minous on both fides after the explofion, — 

Mr. Canron, to whom thefe experiments were commu- 
nicated, clearly proved, that it was the Aight only that the 
fubftances retained, and nothing peculiar to electricity ; and, 
moreover, ' after frequent’ trials, difcovered a’ compofition, 
which retains both common ‘light, “and that’ of eleétricity, 
much more ftrongly than-either the Bolognian ftone, or any 
othet’known fubftance whatever. ‘With this new phofphoras 
he makes a great‘number of moft beautiful experiments. 
‘The ‘flat made by the difcharge of a common jar, ‘within an 
inch of a circular piece of it, of about two itiches:and'a half 
in diameter, will illuminate it fo much, that'the figures on a 
watch plate may’ be’ eafily diftinguithed: by itin a darkened 
rodm, and it will retain the light half an hour. — 


Sf SECTION 


314 Tur ELECTRICITY oF Part h. 
Se eC LION cake ueaee 


“THe ELECTRICITY oF ‘THE TOURMALIN. 

OU SO evecian 
32 S197 Ly OF norm wie) ah 
ML pals IVEF Viso.> DOIG 


HIS period of my hiftory furnithes an intirely new fub- 
_ je& of electrical inquiries ; which, if properly. purfu- 
ed,. may, throw great light upon the moft \general. properties 
of ele&tricity. . This is the Tourmalin: .though, it. muft be 
acknowledged, the experiments which have hitherto been 


made upon this foffil ftand like i whi to all that was:be- ; 


fore known of the fubje&. . j1io.6 tora 

Tue tourmalin, as Dr. Watton: shedie ina s eemale 
monftrated, was known to the antients. under the name, of 
the Jyncurium. All that Theophraftus fays concerning ‘the 


lyncurium agrees with the tourmalin, and with no other ~ 


foffil that we are acquainted with. He fays, that it was ufed 
for feals, that it was very hard, that it was endued 
with an attracting power like amber, and that it was 


faid, particularly by Diocles, to attrac not only ftraws, and 
fmall pieces of wood, but alfo copper and iron, if beaten — 


very 


Per. X. Sec. IX) 5) THe "TOURMALIN. 315 


very thin;, that it was pellucid, of a deep red colour, and 
required no fmall labour to polith it. The account which 
pafied current. among the, ancients concerning the origin of 
this ftone was fabulous, which made Pliny think that all-that 
was faid of it was fabulous too, 

" veg ERS ftone, though mot. much ‘attended, to by chien 
philofophers, till very lately, is common in feveral parts of 
the Eaft Indies, and more particularly inthe ifland of Ceylon, 
where, it is called by the natives tournamal. In this ifland 
the Dutch became acquainted with it,and by them it is 
called a/chentrikker, . from its property af fabopctio ithhes, 
when it is thrown into the fire. 

Tue firft account we have had, of late years, ‘eoncscning 
this extraordinary ftone is in the Hiftory of the Royal Aca- 
demy of fciences at, Paris, for the year 17175, where we are 
told, that Mr..Lemery exhibited. a ftone, which was not 
common, and came from Ceylon. This ftone,, he faid, -at- 
_ trated and repelled {mall light. bodies, fuch as) athes, sil 
of iron, bits of paper, &c. 

Linnus, in his Flora Zeylonica, mentions ‘this ftone 1 un= 
der,the name. of, /apis edelir icv and takes notice, of Mr. Le- 
mery’s,experiments...., 

OTWITHSTANDING this, no further mention was made 
of this ftone and its. effects till, fome years.after; when the Duc 
De Noya, in-his letter to Mr, Buffon, prefented to the Royal 
Society, | informed sus, that. when, he :.was. at Naples, in the 
year 1743, the Count Pichetti, fecretary to the king, affured 
him, that, during his ftay at'Conftantinople, he had feen a 

Sf2 fmall 


316 | @PINUS's EXPERIMENTS! -- Parr I. 


fmall ftone’ called *tourmalin, which’ attracted ‘and® ‘repelled 


athes. ‘This account the Duc! De Noya had quite forgotten; 
but being in Holland in the: "year 1758, he faw, and’ purcha- 
fed' two of thofe ‘ftones. With thefe, in’ company with 
Mefirs. Daubenton and Adamfon, he made a great number 
of eaeperiin ite of whieh he ee _the’public: poser a we 


ticularPaccount: #9) ©ommo2 er yyiotal yray, iho 


- Bur prior to the Duc De’ Noye’s experiftients, Mr. aeons 


man had’ acquainted’ pinus with the- attractive power of 
the tourmalin, and: furnifiied him’ with two of them, on 


which he made many-experiments; the refult' of which he. 


publithed in the Hiftory of the Academy’ of fciences and belles 
lettres at Berlin for the year fe pit hs ssc orsand - at 
memoir is as follows.” 


Te tourmatin has’ Waviays, at’ the hui time, a pofitive 


and a negative ele€tricity ; one of its fides being in one ftate, 
and the other in the oppofite ; and ‘this does not depend on 


the external form of the ftone. Thefe eleétricities he could 
excite in the ftrongeft eo bei goa = ftone in ae 
hg Water: “nolanar 


Ir one fide of the tourmalin ee heated more than ae rials 
(as if it be laid upon a hot cake of metal) each’ of the fides 
acquire an ‘electricity Oppofite to that which is natural to: “its 
but if left to itfelf, it will return to its natural ftate’ > 

Ir one Of the fides of the tourmalin be’ rubbed; while the 
Other 3 is in contact With fome agen ent ee m9 


il 


* Phil. ita Vol. 51. Ph 1366 - 
the 


Per. X. Sec. IX. on tHE TOURMALIN. ” 417 


the ground; the rubbed:fide is always pofitive, and the other 
negative... _If neither fide. be, in contaé& with a conduéor, 
both) become pofitive.. . If, in the: former of thefe cafes, the 
tourmalin be rubbed, fo as to, acquire a fenfible heat, and 
the fide which is naturally pofitive be made negative, it will, 
upon ftanding to cool, return to its natural ftate ; but if it 
have acquired no fenfible heat, it will not return to its natu- 
ral ftate while any kind of electricity remains. If it be heat- 
ed, even when it is rubbed and infulated, (in which cafe 
both fides become pofitive) it will ftill return to its natural 
Ras upon cooling. 

_ Tur Duc De Noya, mentions thefe So seas of Fpinus, 
but does not admit of a plus and minus electricity belonging to 
the tourmalin when heated... On the contrary, he fays, that 
both the fides are electrified plus, but one of them more than 
the other, and that it was the difference between thofe degrees 
which led £pinus into his miftake. * 

Tuer tourmalin was introduced to the notice of the Englith 
philofophers by Dr. Heberden, who fortunately recollecting 
to have feen one of them, many years before, in the poffefli- 
on of Dr. Sharpe at Cambridge (and it was the only one 
known in England at that time) procured it for Mr. Wilfon, 
who, though it was but a fmall one, repeated with it moft 
of the experiments-of Apinus, fo far as to fatisfy himfelf that 

_ his opinion of its pofitive and negative power was yg 
founded. 
Arrerwarps, Dr. Heberden, ever defirous of extending 
the bounds of {cience,| procured. fome of thefe ftones from 


* Phil. Tranf. Vol. 57. pt. 1. ps 315. 
Holland, 


318 Mr. WILSON’s EXPERIMENTS Parr I. 


Holland, and put them into the hands of thofe perfons who 
were likely to make the beft ufe of them, particularly’ Mr. 
Wilfon and Mr. Canton; in whofe hands they were not lodg_ 
ed in vain, as will appear by the brief account I thall fubjoin 
of their experiments upon them. 

Mr. Witson’s obfervations are too many, and too particu- 
lar to be all inferted in this work. The refult of them was, 
in the main, the fame with that of #pinus, ‘eftablifhing the 
opinion of the two different powers of this ftone; but, con- 
trary to AEpinus, he afferts, that when the fides of the tour- 
malin are unequally heated, it exhibits that fpecies of elec- 
tricity which is natural to the hotter fide, that is, the tour- 
malin is plus on both fides, when the p/us fide is the hotter; 
and minus on both fides, when the minus fide is the hotter. 

Upon this Apinus repeated all his former experiments, 
and ftill found the refult of them agreeable to his former 
conclufion, and contrary to that of Mr. Wilfon. Mr. Wilfon 
‘alfo repeated his, without any variation in the event, and 
imagined the difference between him and /pinus ‘might 
‘arife from the different fizes of the ‘tourmalins’ they made ufe 
of, or from theit different manner of maki the experi- 
‘ments. And it is evident, from the defcription’ of both their 
apparatufes, that that of Mr. Wilfon was’ much better caleu- 
lated for the purpofe of accurate experiments than that of 
‘#pinus. “Mr. 'Wilfon alfo ufed a greater variety of methods 
‘of communicating heat to his tourmalins. He both p 
them in boiling water, held them to the flame of a : candle, 
and expofed them to heated infulated eleétries. * Foal 


® Phil. Tranf. Vol. 53.’ p. 436, &c. 
TuouGH 


_ Per.X. Sec. IX. on THE TOURMALIN. 319 


©. Tuovcu the detail of all.Mr. Wilfon’s experiments would 
be, as I obferved before, much too long for my purpofe, I 
cannot help relating one of them, which was made with the 
laft mentioned method of treating. He heated one end of a 
glafstube red hot, and when he had expofed what both he 
and A®pinus call the negative fide of the tourmalin to it; he 
obferved that about three inches of the heated part of the glafs 
were electrified minus, though the glafs beyond that wascleétri- 
fied plus, and continued fo even after the glafs was cold, the 
electric fluid having pafled from'the tourmalin to the glafs ; 
fince thefe were the fame appearances that were produced by 
prefenting an excited tube to the heated glafs. 

‘He ‘then applied the p/us fide of the tourmalin to the fame 
heated glafs, and found that the tube was electrified minus, 
above a foot.in length, without the leaft appearance of a plus 
eleétricity beyond the minus one, as in the other experiment; 
and this minus ele&tricity appeared when the tube was nearly 
cold. In this cafe he judged that the eletric fluid had paffed 
from the glafs to the tourmalin. 

Mr. Witson imagined that the tourmalin, as well as glafs, 
was permeable to the electric fluid, and that the refiftance to 
its entering the fubftance of it was lefs on what he calls the 
negative than on the pofitive fide. ‘Thefe conclufions he drew 
from. the two: following experiments. Rubbing the pofitive 
fide of the ftone flightly, he found both fides electrified plus, 
but rubbing the negative fide in the fame manner, both fides 
_ ‘were electrified p/us more ftrongly than before. * 


* Phil. Tranf. Vol. 51. pt..1. p. 3276 
SEVERAL 


320 Mr. WILSON’s EXPERIMENTS Part L 


SEVERAL experiments led. Mr. Wilfon to conclude that the 
tourmalin. refifted the exit,and entrance, of the eleétric fluid 
confiderably lefs than glafs, or even than amber; and upon 

_the whole he infers, that the tourmalin differs in nothing 
from other electric bodies but in acquiring electricity by heat.* 

EXAMINING a great number of tourmalins, he found that 
aline drawn from the p/us part, through the center of the 
ftone, would always pafs through the minus part. : 

Axmost all thefe tourmalins he greafed over, and whilft 
they were warm enough to. preferve the. greafe liquid, he 
tried each tourmalin feparately,. but found no alteration in 
the virtue of the ftone, except that: it was a little weakened; 
though it is well known, that moifture of any fort readily 
conduéts the electric fluid. If, therefore, the tourmalin had 
not a fixed kind of electricity, the: p/us'and minus ele&ricity, 
obfervable on the two fides of the ftone, muft; by this treat- 
ment, have united, and deftroyed each other. From this 
circumftance Mr. Wilfon concluded, that the tourmalin faf- 
fered the eleétric fluid to pafs through it only in one direction, 
and that in this it bore fome analogy’to the loadftone ; having, 
as it were, two aes poles, which are not oe deftroyed 
or altered. +- a 

Tuts induced him to try sidacthvang like the adfeons, ie 
tourmalin would lofe its virtue after being made-red hot ; but, 
though he kept two of them ina ftrong fire for half an hour, 
he could not perceive the leaft alteration in them ; but plung- 
ing one in water, while it was. red hot entirely deftroyed its _ 


* Phil, Tranf. Vol. 51. pt, 1. p. 329. + Ib. p. 337, 338 
virtue, — 


Pen/X:Sr0.IX. | os THE TOURMALIN, gar 


virtue, and gave it the appearance of having been thiveréd in 
many parts without breaking. * 
-NotwitusTanpine the attention given to this fubjec&t by 
€pinus and Mr. Wilfon, the moft important difcovery re- 
lating to the electricity of the tourmalin was referved for Mr, 
Canton; who, in a paper read at the Royal Society in the 
fame month with that above-mentioned of Mr. Wilfon, viz. - 
December 1759, obferves, that the tourmalin emits and ab- 
forbs the eleétric fluid only by the increafe’ or diminution of 
its heat. For if the tourmialin; he fays, be placed on-a plain 
piece of heated glafS or metal, fo that each fide of it, by be- 
ing perpendicular to the furface of the heating body, may be 
equally heated; it will, while heating, have the electricity 
of one of its fides pofitive, and that of the other negative. 
This will, likewife, be the cafe when it is taken out of boil. 
ing water; but the fide which was pofitive while it was heat- 
ing will be negative while it is cooling, and the fide which 
was negative will be pofitive. - j 
In this paper Mr. Canton refers to the Gentleman’s Maga- 

zine for the month of September before, in which he had 
publithed the refult of fome experiments he had made on a 
tourthalin which he had procured from Holland. The pro-- 
pofitions he there lays down are fo few, and comprife the 
principal part of what is known upon this fabje@ in fo con- 
cife and elegant a manner, that I fhall recite them all in this 
place. ; . 

1, When the tourmalin is not eletrical or attractive, 


* Phil. Tranf. Vol. 51. prt. 1. p. 338. 
Tt heating 


322 Mr. CANTON’s EXPERIMENTS _ Parr h. 


heating it, without friétion, will make it 9; and the elec- 
tricity of one fide of it (diftinguithed by A) will be politives 
and that of the other fide (B) will be negative. 

2. Tue tourmalin not being electrical will become fo by. 
cooling ; bat with this difference, a the fide A will be 
negative, and the fide B pofitive. 

3. Ir the tourmalin, ina non-electrical tate; be sect, 
and fuffered to cool again, without either of its fides being: 
touched; A will be pofitive, and B negative, the whole time. 
of the increafe and decreafe of its heat. 

4. Erruer fide of the’ tourmalin will be ‘pofitive dy fric- 
tion, and both may be made fo at the fame time. 

Tuese, fays he, are the principal laws of the eleétricity of 
this wonderful ftone; and le adds, if air be fuppofed to be 
endued with fimilar properties, i.e. of becoming eleétrical 
by the increafe or diminution of its heat (as is probable, if 
its ftate before and after a thunder ftorm be attended to) 


thunder clouds both pofitive and negative, as well as thunder 


gufts, may eafily be accounted for. 

Tuese capital difcoveries were made before Mr. Canton. 
had received of Dr. Heberden the tourmalins above-mentioned. 
When thofe came to his hands he was enabled to make feveral 
new and curious experiments, which I have leave to publith. 

He put one of the tourmalins, which was of the common. 
colour into the fire, and burnt it white ;, when he found that 
its ele€trical property was intirely deftroyed. The ele€tricity 
of another was only in part deftroyed by the fire. Two other 
tourmalins he joined together, when they were made foft by- 

fire, 


- Per,XiSrc. IX. on THe TOURMALINY — 323 


fire, without deftroying their clerical property. . The. vir- 
tue-of another was improved by its being melted,at one ends 
and he found.(contrary to what Mr. Wilfon had obferved of 
another tourmalin, which he: treated in the fame manner) © 
that! one tourmalin retained its electrical property after-it had 
been frequently: roanan dais and, ia that, ftate, put into 
eold water. 3: U 

Bur the moft curious ae his experiments were made upon 
a large irregular tourmalin, about half an inch in length, 
which he cut in three pieces; taking one part from the pofi~ 
tive, and another from the negative end, Trying thefe pieces 
feparately, he found the outer fide of the piece which he cut 
from the end that was negative. when cooling was likewife 
negative when cooling, and that the outer fide of that piece 
which was cut from the end that was pofitive when cooling 
was likewife pofitive when cooling ; the oppofite fides of both 
pieces being, agreeable to the general law. of the electricity of 
the tourmalin, in a contrary ftate. 

Tur middle part of the fame tourmalin was affected jutt as 
it had been when it was intire ; the pofitive end remained po- 
fitive, and the negative end continued negative. The fame 
he had alfo obferved of two other tourmalins, each about the 
fize of this, which were alfo cut out of a large one. 

‘On January the 8th. 1762, Mr. Canton took the Doétor’s 
large tourmalin (the fame of which Mr. Wilfon has given.a 
drawing and defcription, in the 51ft.vol, of the Philofophical 
Tranfactions, p. 316) and having placed a fmall tin cup of 
boiling water on one end of his electrometer, which was fup- 
ported-by warm glafs, while the pith balls were fufpended at the 

Tetra other 


324 Mr. CANTON’s EXPERIMENTS . Parr I: 


other end ; he dropped it into the water,{‘and obferved, that 
during the whole time of its being heated, and alfo while it 
was cooling in the water, the balls were not at all electrified. » 

Tue refult of this experiment was contrary to one of a 
fimilar nature made by Mr. Wilfon on the fame tourmalin ; 
who fays, as has been related above, that when the tourmalin 
was covered over with liquid greafe, it fill retained its elec- 
tric virtue. 

Tixt the year 1760 it had been fuppofed, that, of all elec- 
tric fubftances, the tourmalin alone, pofleffed the property 
of being excited by heating and cooling, but in the beginning 
of that year, Mr. Canton having had an opportunity of ex- 
amining a vatiety of gems, by the favour of Mr. Nicolas Crifp 
a jeweller in Bow church yard, firft found the Brazil topaz to 
have the eleétrical properties of the tourmalin. The largeft 
he met with he put into the hands of Dr. Heberden, who re- 
turned it November the 27th. 1760, and fent with it the 
tourmalins above-mentioned. 

In September 1761, Mr. Wilfon (who had been informed 
of Mr. Canton’s difcovery) met with feveral other gems, of 
different fizes and colours, that refembled the tourmalin with 
refpect to electrical experiments. The moft beautiful of 
them were fomething like the ruby, others were more pale, 
and one inclining to an orange colour. In point of hardnefs 
and luftre, they were nearly the fame with the topaz. 

From all his experiments upon thefe gems he thought it 
was abundantly evident, that the diretion of the fluid did not 
depend upon the external figure of the gem, but upon fome 

particular 


Per. X. Sec. IX. © on THe: TOURMALIN. 325 


icular internal make and. conftitution thereof... And that 
there’is fome fuch natural difpofition in all gems affording 
thefe appearances may be collected, he fays, from another 
curious fpecimen of the tourmalin kind, which is green, -and 
formed of long flender chryftals with feveral fides ; many. of 
which are found raster begets) and are Pharoah "ate 
South America. i 
_ 'Tuese gems, stubs of white were Senta him vy 
Mr. Emanuel Mendes Da Cofta, he found not only, like the 
~ tourmalin, in regard to eleGtric appearances; - but. that! the 
direction of the electric fluid moving therein was always a- 
long the grain or thootings of the chryitals, one end thereof 
being electrified p/us, and the other end minus. And that 
‘the fluid is more difpofed to pafs in that diré¢tion than in a- 
nother, he thought, might be farther colle&ted from what 
has been obferved on the grain of the load ftone by Dr. 
_ Knight; who found that though the magnetic poles of the 
natural loadftone might be varied in any direétion, yet that 
the fame loadftone admitted of being made much more mag- 
netical along the grain than acrofs it. 

From thefe experiments and obfervations Mr. Wilfon in- 
ferred by anology, that the electric fluid, flowing through all 
thefe ftones and gems, moves in that direction in which the 
grain happens to lie; and that the reafon of this is, that 
the refiftance the fluid meets with in pafling through the gem 
is lefs in that dire€tion than in any other. * 

In a fubfequent paper of Mr. Wilfon’s, read at the Royal 


* Phil. Tranf. Vol. 52. pt. 2. p. 443. 
Society 


326 EXPERIMENTS or tur, FRENCH Part Re 


Society December the 23d. 1763,' and Marcas 147645. he jre- 
cites feveral curious experiments on the effects of removing 
the tourmalin from one room to\another, in which there was 
fome difference of heat ; the refult of which exadly confirms 
Mr.-Canton’s difcovery, that the fide which is pofitive when 
heating. is: negative when- cooling, and wice verfa... Upon a 
very nice examination, and during fome favourable circum+ 
ftances; Mr. Wilfon, fays-he has obferved the tourmalin to 
be feebly electrified, when the seas ein varied. up and 
carla aie Serie 16 Sixféslo oi brag siterertued 

7. MUI 5 : i Jt} toi fsoril 


» 2ehiyins 2 ; itooth 0 ‘cit rade a ; 
® Phil Tank; Voly2. pt. 2:/p- 4575 


e t 


SECTION 


| Per. X.Sec.X. © on LIGHTNING) 427 
nsesit pedi id roo! is bi adigttord ses - did Ao zt) 
ger, HoyShEe 4 sjlichss 
5 aged ! 


Ate nitty! sti i Eup 
> 4 1? 7 . 
‘goorntt hea 4s Siok ottoh-bensytad Wstenid ctl 


e heeeee ender as AY ate le 4 - _ d 
Pees wits A to stro ‘otis bD101> 13th ¢ SDAA 


bie , Awied a >! : n> 
Diecovenres THAT HAVE BEEN MADE SINCE THOSE OF 
Dr. FRANKLIN, WITH RESPECT TO wae SAMENESS 


i) LIGHTNING AND D SRSCTRI CITY 
Di « 


“HE year, 1752 makes an aera in electricity. no lefs fa- 
i mous ‘than the year 1746,, in which the Leyden phial 
tah difcovered. In the year 1752s. was yerified the hypo- 
thefis of Dr. Franklin, of the identity of the matter of 
* lightning, and of the cleétric fluid; and his great project 
of trying the experiment, by real lightning actually brought 
‘down from the clouds,. was carried into execution. 
_ Tue French philofophers were the firft to diftinguith them- 
felyes upon this memorable occafion,, and the moft active 
‘perfons in the fcene were Mr. Dalibard and Delor, both zea- 
‘lous partifans (as Mr.. Nollet. calls them) of Dr. Franklin. 
“The former prepared his apparatus at Marly La Ville, fituated 
five or fix leagues from Paris, the other at his own houfe, on 
fome of the higheft-ground in that capital. Mr. Dalibard’s 
machine confifted of an iron rod forty feet long, the lower- 


extremity 


328 EXPERIMENTS® oF tut FRENCH © Parr I. 


- extremity of which was brought into a centry box, where 
the rain could not come; while, on the outfide, it was 
faftened to three wooden pofts by long filk ftrings defended 
from the rain. This machine happened to be the firft that 


was favoured with a vifit from this ethereal fire. The phi- 


lofopher himfelf happened not to be at home at that time, 
but, in his abfence, he entrufted the care of his apparatus to 
one Coiffier a joiner, a man who had ferved fourteen years a- 
mong the dragoons, and on whofe underftanding and courage 
he could depend. This artifan had all proper inftructions 
given him both how to make obfervations, and alfo to guard 
himfelf from any harm there might be from them; befides 
being exprefily ordered to get fome of his neighbours to be 
prefent, and particularly to fend for the curate of Marly 
whenever there fhould be any appearance of the approach of 
a thunder ftorm. At length the long expected event arrived. 


On wednefday the roth. of May 1752, between two and 
three o’clock in the afternoon, Coiffier heard’a pretty loud | 
clap of thunder. Immediately he flies to the machine, takes’ 


a phial furnifhed with a brafs wire, and prefenting one end 
of the wire to the rod, he fees a fmall bright {park iffue from 
it, and hears the fhapping that it made. Taking a fecond 
{park ftronger than the former, and attended with a louder 
report, he calls his neighbours, and fends for the curate. 
The curate runs with all his might, and the parifhoners feeing 
the precipitation of their fpiritual guide, imagine that poor 
Coiffier had been killed with lightning. The alarm {fpreads 
through the village, and the hail which came on did not 
prevent the flock from following their fhepherd. The honeft 

ecclefiaftic 


Pex. X.Sec. XS oN -LIGHTNING.© 29 


ecclefiattic arriving at ‘the machine, ‘and: feeing ‘there was no 
danger, took the wire into his own hand and immediately 
drew feveral ftrong fparks, which were moft evidently of an 
eleétrical nature, and compleated the difcovery for which the 
machine was ereéted. The thunder cloud was not ‘more than 
a quarter of an hour in paffing over the zenith of the machine, 
and there was no thunder heard befides that fingle clap. As 
foon as ‘the ftorm was over, ‘and no more fparks could be 
drawn from the bar, the curate wrote a letter to Mr. Dali- 
bard, containing an account of this remarkable experiment, 
and fent it immediately by the hands of Coiffier himfelf. 

He fays, that he drew {parks from the bar of a blue colour, 
an inch and a half in length, and which fmelt ftrong of ful-- 
phur, He repeated the experiment at leaft fix times in the 
{pace | of abot four minutes, in the prefence. of many perfons, 
each experiment taking up the time, as he, in the’ ftyle of a 
prieit, exprefleth himfelf, of a pater and an. ave. In’ the 
courfe of thefe experiments he received a ftroke on his arm, 
a little above the elbow, but he could not tell whether it 
came from. ‘the brafs wire inferted into the phial, or from the 
iron bar. _ He did not attend to the ftroke at the time he re- 

ceived it, but, ‘the pain continuing, he uncovered. his arm 
when” he went home, in the prefence of Coiffier ; and a 
“mark was perceived round his arm, fuch as might have been 
made by a blow with the wire on his naked fkin ; and after- 
wards feveral perfons, who knew nothing of what had hap- 
pened, faid that they perceived a {mell of fulphur when he 
came near them. 


Uu CoIFFIER 


339 EXPERIMENTS, or tat FRENCH.. Parr. 
Corrrier told Mr, Dalibard, that for, about..a quarter of : 


an hour before the curate arrived, he-had, in the prefence of 
five or fix perfons, taken much sees {parks em 
which the curate mentioned. *._,, 

Eicur days after Mr. Delor,faw the prow shin at eranong 
houfe, although only a cloud. paffed. Over yi without either. 
thunder or lightning. + vn sedi bas 

Tue fame experiments were afterwards repeated, by Mr. 
Delor, atthe requeft of the king of France; who,, itis, faid, 
faw them with the greateft fatisfaction, and exp ed agus 
fenfe of the merit of Dr. Franklin. Thefe. applaufes, fs ine 
king, excited i in Mr. De Buffon, Dalibard, and Delor, ad 
of verifying Dr, Franklin’s hypothefis more. completely, end 
of purfuing his {peculations upon the fubject.. sisi 

Mr.. Deor’s apparatus in Paris. confifted. of a bar of iron 
ninety_nine feet high, and anfwered rather better hen abet gk Ais 
Mr. Dalibard, which, as was obferyed | before, Pea 
forty feet high. But as the quantity of ee: ich 
they could procure from the clouds, in thefe f Beh AP 
ments, was but {mall, they added to this appara’ 9 
they called a magazine of electricity, confifting of er 
of iron infulated, and communicating with the “pointed i iron 
rod. This magazine contained more of the elegtric. matt t, 
and gave a more fenfible fpark, upon the APRON ° fila 
ger, than the pointed bar. ae seh. sibiaen 

A MaAGazine of this kind Mr, 9 Bee had in.an | 
room of his houfe, into which he brought the fea 


pei 


xperi- 


* Dalibard’s Franklin, Vol. 2. p. 109, &c. + Nollet’s Létters, Vol. ni peysAD 
means 


Per sX!SreciKil 1. 1 om LIGHTNING.) 331 


miedns ofa wooden pole projecting out of his window, at the 
extremity;of which,a glafs-tube, filled with irofin,. received a 
pointed! iron-rod,: twelve feet-long. : But all: this while the 
eleétrics; which they made ufe of) to: fupport theft. iron rods, 
were too:much expofed to the open air, and confequently 
were liable to:be wet,, which, would infallibly defenatbeieas 
teeniub gebO, sdo-noqu: holdem I> tba, btel 
Tue: moft saccurate experiments, made with, thefe i imper- 
fec»inftruments, were thofe of Mr. Monnier,. He was con- 
vinced that the high fituation in which the bar of iron had 
commonly been. placed was not abfolutely neceflary for this 
purpofe: for he obferved a common {peaking trumpet, fuf- 
pended upon filk, five or fix feet from. the ground, to exhibit 
very evident, figns of electricity. . He alfo found that a man 
placed upon. cakes of rofin, and holding in his hand. a wooden 
pole, about ¢ightcen feet long, about which an iron wire was 
twifted,| was.fo well clestrified when it; ithandered; that. very 
lively, fparks: were drawn from him and that another man, 
pipe oo emai in) the. middle» ofa garden, 
and ‘only holding up one of his hands-in the air, attracted, 
withthe other hand, thavings of was whichin were heldito 
him. 

«» He fays;, that she’ obferved a continual, rtetlerticg of the 
éleGricity when the rain came on, though’ the thunder was 
ftill very loud, and though: the cake of rofin which fupported 
his: conductor was not wet, But he afterwards found, that 
fhis’was not univerfally true. 

~He,once obferved,, that when the conducting wire was fur- 
rounded with drops of rain, only fome of them were clectri- 
Uu2 fied ; 


432 EXPERIMENTS oF rae ENGLISH. Parr Ii 


fied; as was evident from the conic figure they had, while 
the reft remained round as before. . It-was alfo- perceived, 
that the eleétrified and non+ele@trified “drops generally ‘fic« 
ceeded: each: other alternately; which made Mr. Monniér 
Call to. mind a fingular phenomenon, which happened fome 
years before to five peafants who were pafling through a corn 
field, near Franckfort upon the Oder, during a’ thunder 
ftorm; when the lightning» killed: the firft, the third, and 
the fifth of them, without injuring the fecond, or the fourth.* 
Ir was not owing toany want of attention to this’ fubje@ 
that the Englith philofophers were not the firft to verify the 
theory of Dr: Franklin. They happened to have few oppor+ 
tunities of trying experiments. ‘In the few they had, they 
were difappointed by the rain wetting their apparatus, which 
was not better conftruéted than that of the French. «(| 
Ar length fuccefs crowned the affiduity and happier con- 
trivance of Mr. Canton, who, to the lower end of his con= 
du&ting wire, had had the precaution to ‘faften’a tin cover, 
to keep the rain from the glafs tube which fupported it. By 
this means, on the 2oth. of July 1752, he got {parks at the 
diftance of half an inch, but the whole appearance ceafed in 
the {pace of two minutes. + I 
Mr. Witson, who took great pains in 'thefe purfaits,’ as 


he did in every thing elfe relating to eleétricity, perceived - 


feveral eleétrical fnaps, on the 12th. of Auguft following, 
from no other apparatus than an iron curtain rod ; one end of 
which he put into the neck of a glafs phial;. which hevheld 
in his haiid, while the other was’made to’point into the air. 


* Phil. Tranf. Vol. 47. p. ssi. + Ib. p. 568. 
Dr. 


PERK) SEA KNIOMS cow DIGHTNING/IX( — 434 


~ Dr. Bevis'alfo, at/this time, ‘viz. oni the 12th. of Auguit) 
obferved'inearly the fame! appearances that Mr.) Canton had 
Gohe befSre!® eave (Sto 7d Sd? Lo midor yrovs ni Piva od os 
_ | Mri CAN ron -afterwards, ‘refuming his inca on 

lightning,” with | the ‘affiduity” ‘arid accura¢y with which he 
obferves everything, found, by'a great Humhber-‘of experi- 
ments, that *fome ‘clouds ‘were in‘a’ pofitive; ‘and fome ina 
negative ftate’ of eleGtricity! “And'that, by thismeans, the 
cleatricity ‘of his conductor would fometimes change from one 
ftate to the other five: or fix! times inplefs thanshalf an hour.-- 
2 Tuts! obfervation of Mr. ‘Canton;2on thedifferent eleétri- 
city of the clowds was’ made, “arid the*account of it publithed 
in’ England, before’ it’ was known” o, oDrw Franklin had 
magetthe fame ‘difcovery i invAmerité. .1 .2oitonp 

‘Wuen ‘the air was’ dry, the Slatetvod that the sppialaeds 
would continue electrified for ten minutes, or a quarter of an 
hout after’ the ‘clouds: had paffed' the zenith, :and fometimes 
till they were’more than half way towards the horizon; that 
rain, efpecially when the.drops ‘were large, generally brought 
down the electric fire; and hail, in fummer, he believed, 
never failed.) The Jaft. dbfervation| he had made before the 
time of his writing this paper, \his apparatus had been elec- 
trified: by a fall of thawing fnow. » This wasion the: 12th. of 
November 1753, which, he fays, was the 26th. day, and the 
fixty firft time, it had been ele@trified fince it was firft fet up 
viz. about the middle of the preceding May. 
©) Onry two thunder ftorms had-happened at London during 
that whole fummer, and his apparatus was fo ftrongly elec- 
trified by one of them, that the ringing of the bells (which 


*Phil. Tranf. Vol. 47. p. 569. + Ib. Vol, 48. pt. 1. p. 356. 
he 


334  EXPERIMENTS/ar rue ENGLISH»? Parr 


he,fufpended to his apparatus, to fignify when,the electrifica~ 
tion was begun; and which were frequently rung;{o loud:as 
to be heard in every room of the houfe) was *ttifled. by, the 
almoft conftant 4tream of .denfe, electric fire-between leach 
belljand, brafs_ ball, which would not) fuffer ititodtrike, , vednil 
Upon, a, farther occafion,: he obferyes,: that,..in the. fac; 
ceeding .monshs..of January, February,/ and, March, his ap- 
paratus - was. electrified.;no lefs than, twenty; five,times,;, both 
pofitively and negatively, byifnow as well.as, by-hail and-rain ; 
and:almoft to ds great a'degree when Fahrénheits thermome+ 
tériwas between twenty eight:and thirty four; as he had éver 
known it in fummer; except)in aithunder,ftorms * yf; jo wits 
beMri! Canon Concludes his paper with: propofing the two 
following queries. 1. May not air: fuddenly- rarefied. give 
electric: fire, to, and may not air faddenly condenfed. receive 
eleGrie: fire, from, -clouds: and vapours /pafling. throngh it 2 

2.crlis not! the:autora)boréalis'the flathing. of eledtric.fire froni 
pofitive:towards negative clouds ata gréat, diftancey through 
the:-upper ee af othe atmofphere, where the. scGRaacalls 
leaft? + » aoot iad Das: ; 510) sitsloo oer Wiviob 
oo Mr. @asizouin ‘not only -obferved the different. Rates of po- 
fitive and’ negative electricity .in) the clouds, /:but alfoonoted 
‘the proportion: that the one bore to. the other for a confider= 
able time.’ In the firft period he had obferved the clouds had 
been pofitively eleGrical 83 times, and negative 101. In this 
period he had punétually: fet: down ‘how often the! powers had 
shifted; and the whole delat ip continued to 


iy] b su) stothw Pty 
7 Phi rant Vo. 48. pp 785, Mb perp as 


an 


Per, Xi SeciX) (44 om LIGHTNING. (335 


be-electrified, \but-he-hadjintirely negle€ted,to note .the, time 
thatjeach power, lated... But this laft ‘Sicbtimiarice be-afters 
wards carefully attended to, for about twa months, viz. from 
the. 28th. .of| June tothe 23d. of Augaft 1754s and’ found 
; the apparatus, to: che.-ele&trified: pafitively.-thirty one times) 
which taken together lafted.thrée:Hours thirty five minutes; 
and negatively forty. five timesy: the: whale: duration, of. which 
‘was ten hours)thirty nine minutes, ..He alfo, obferved that 
the, pofitive power, was, generally | the: pasar Fhe ace 
count he wrote the, gift. of, Auguit 1754... 
»jEitese,gbfervations, which, Mr.,Canton jay ame yet to 
make public, are, extremely, curious,,.and-muft haye, required 
” great attentions, but they are ioe fafficient to authorize 
any general,conclufione) 2 9h 21) 
» One of the effects of lightaio gmp mleciricitgiin the melts 
ing. of metals...,/This was, firft thought to be-ajcold fufions 
but. that, opinion, ix rete, ina very, fenfible| manner, by 
Dr. Knight, in a paper read,at the Royal Society. Novem- 
ber 2 22d, 3759 » He obferves, that, the, inftances. moft) ge- 
nerally given of cold fufion are, two; . viz. that. of .a- fword 
being, melted injits,feabbard, .and that of money being melt- 
edin. a bag, both, the fcabbard/and the bag remaining unhurt, 
LA GREAT numberof authors, he: fays,, have mentioned 
both the facts, but without giving either their awn teftimony; 
of that)ofany-one ¢lfe-for the truth, of them,:i or defcribing 
any.of the other, concomitant ciroumftances. ..And it feémed 
to,him yery poflible, that lightning might: produce effects fi- 
milar to thofe above-mentioned, without! our) being obliged 
to,iave recourfe to a cold fufion to account for them. 
Ir, 


336 EXPERIMENTS or’ rue’ ENGLISH >*~ Part’l. 


cule, fays he, the edge or external’ furface vof a*fword ‘had 
been melted, whilft the main part of the blade remained ’en- 
tire, it would have afforded fufficient ground to” ‘affert, in 
general terms, that the fword was melted, and yet-the {cab- 
bard might have remained unhurt; becaufe either ‘the ‘edge 
or furface of a fword might be inftantly melted by lightning 
and cooled fo fuddenly, as'to make no impreflion of burning 
upon the feabbard. Metals, as well as other’bodies, ‘he ob= 
ferves, will. both heat and cool fooner, ‘in proportion as| they 
are thin and flenders that “very fmall- wire “will “inftantly be- 
come red hot,’ and even'melt, “and run into'@ round globule 
in the flame of 'a cémmion’candle ;. though’it is no fooner ré- 
moved out of the flame, but it is inftantly cold. He there+ 
fore concludes, that the edge of a fword, or-even its furface, 
might bé inftantly melted by lightning; and being in contact 
with, or rather ftill united to the reft ‘of the blade} ‘which 
might be cold, it would part with its heat too ‘faddenly" to 
produce any appearance of burning. “14 *.4) dae 4 
He was confirmed in this reafoning, by examihing fomie 
fragments and ‘particles of wire melte by lightning, which 
were fent him by Mr. Mountaine. » Amorigtt’ them “appeared 
globules of various fizes, which had undergone very different 
degrees of fufion. The largeft of them had not’ been fluid 
enough to put on a fpherical figure, but they approached 
nearer to it, in propottion as they were finaller°forthat) in 
the fmalleft granulz,: the fufion was moft:perfe@p the globus 
les being very round and finooth,’ Their fizes continued 'di> 
minithing till they became invifible to the naked eye, and 
fome 


Peri X.SrevX. «ons LIGHTNING. 337 


fome of them, ‘when viewed with a’microfcope, required a 
third or fourth magnifier: to fee them diftin@ly. 

*. Some of the bits of wire were rough and fcaly, like burnt 
iron, and were {welled in thofe places where they were be- 
ginning to melt. Others continued ftraight, and of anequable 
‘thicknefs ; but their outward furface feemed to have under- 
gone a perfect fufion, fo that there were two or more: pieces 
adhering together, ‘as if joined bya thin folder. 

“In the Philofophical Tranfa@tions, Dr. Knight fays, there 
are two or three relations which feem at firft to favour a cold 
fufion, ‘but when duly . confidered’ prove cra con- 
clufive. * 

Bur that there is really no fuch thing as cold fafion,: ate: 
by electricity or lightning, ‘was moft clearly demonftrated by 
Mr. Kinnerfley, ina letter to Dr. Franklin, dated Philadel - 
phia’March'the rath. 9761.0 ol @ bot oto als 

He fufpended a piece of finall -brafs'wire, boat scvtady 
four inches long, with a pound weight at the lower end ; and, 
by fending through iit the charge of a cafe of bottles, containing 
above thirty feet of coated glafs, he difcovered what he calls a 
hew method of wire drawing. | The wire swas ‘red .hot, the 
whole length well annealed, and above:an inch longer than 
before!’ A fecond ‘charge melted it fo'that it: parted near the 
middle, ' and’ meafured, when the aus were put together, 
four inches longer than at firft. 

© ours ‘experiment,’ he ‘fays, was phéputed to'him by Dr. 
Franklin; ‘in order to find whether the eleétricity,: in pafling 


"© Phil. Tranf. Vol. 51. pt. 1. p. 294, &c. 
; DF: through 


338 EXPERIMENTS or rus ENGLISH © Parti. 


through the wire; would fo;relax the’ cohefion of its conftitu= 
ent particles, as that the weight might: produce a feparation ; 
but neither of them had the leaft fufpicion that.any eat 
would be produced. 

Tuart he might have no doubt of the wire being hot, as 
well as red, he repeated the experiment on another piece of 
the fame wire, encompafied with a goofe quill, filled with 
loofe grains of gun-powder ; which took fire, as readily as if 
it had been touched with a red hot poker. Alfo tinder, tied 
to another piece of the wire, kindled by it; but when he 
tried a wire about twice as big, he could produce no fuch 
effects. a it 

Hence, fays he, it appears, that the electric fire, though 
it has no fenfible heat when ina ftate of reft, will, by its 
violent motion, and the refiftance it’ meets with, produce 
heat in other bodies, when paffing through them, provided 
they be {mall enough. A great quantity will pafs through a 
large wire, without producing any fenfible heat; when the 
famé quantity, paffing through a very fmall one, being there 
confined to a narrower paflage, the particles crowding clofer 
together, ‘and meeting with greater shhrreeey Peer imake it 
red hot, and even:melt it. sft 

Hence; he concludes, that lightning delhi not alin aah} 
by a cold fufion, as Dr. Franklin and’ himfelf had formerly 
fuppofed; but that, when it’ pafled through the blade of a 
fword, if the quantity was not very great, it might heat\the 
point fo as to melt it;: while the broadeft and the thickeft 
part might not be fenfibly warmer than before. 

Wuen trees or houfes are fet on fire by the dreadful quan- 

tity, 


Per. X. Sec. X. on LIGHTNING. 339 


tity, which a cloud, or fometimes the earth difcharges, muft 
not the heat, fays he, by which the wood is firft kindled, be 
generated by the lightning’s violent motion through the re- 
fitting combuftible matter ? 

Ir lightning, by its rapid motion, produced heat. in itfelf 
as wellasin other bodies (which Mr, Kinnerfley imagined was 
evident from fome experiments made with his electrical ther- 
mometer, mentioned before) he thought that its fometimes 
fingeing the hair of animals killed by it might eafily be ac- 
counted for; and that the reafon of its not always doing 
fo might be, that the quantity, though fufficient to killa 
large animal, might not be great enough, or not have met 
with refiftance enough, to become by its motion burning 

We find, fays he, that dwelling houfes, fttuck with light- 
ning, are feldom fet on fire by it; but that when it paffes 
through barns, with hay or ftraw in them, or ftore houfes 
containing large quantities of hemp, or fuch like matter, 
they feldom, if ever, efcape a conflagration. This, he 
thought, might be owing to fuch combultibles being apt to 
kindle with a lefs degree of heat than was neceflary to kindle 
wood. * 

Att that was done by the French and Englith eleftaiciai, 
with refpe& to lightning and ele@tricity, fell far fhort of 
what was done by Srcnior Beccaria at Turin. His atten- 
tion to the various ftates of the atmofphere, his affiduity in 
making experiments, his apparatus for making them, the ex- 


® Phil, Tranf. Vol. 53..p. 92, &c. 
Xx 2 tent 


440 S. BECCARIA’s EXPERIMENTS. Part! 


tent of his views in making them, the minute exaénefs’ with 
which he has recorded them, and his “judgment © in applying 
them to a general theory, far exceeded every thing that had 
been done by philofophers before him, or that has been done 
by any perfon fince. And though I thal give-a confiderable 
fcope to my account of his experiments and obfervatidns, F 
fhall be able to give my reader but a faint idea of the extent, 
variety, and value of his labours in this great field. © 
He made ufe both of kites, and pointed rods, and: of .a 
great variety of both, at the fame’ time,.and in different 
places. Some of the ftrings of his kites had wires in them, 
and others had none. Some of them flew to a prodigious 
height, and others but low ; and he had a_great number of 
affiftants to note the nature, time, and deen of appearances, 
according as his views required, f ball aw, 
To keep his kites conftantly infulated, and: at the:fame to 
give them more or lefs ftring, and for many other! purpofes, 
he had the ftring rolled upon a reel, which was fupported by 
pillars of glafs; and his conductor had a communication wit 
the axis of the reel. * dit sdaows 


_ To diftinguith the pofitive and negative ftate of the clouds, — 


when the electricity was vigorous, with more certainty, and 
with more fafety than it could be done by prefenting an ex- 
cited ftick of glafs, or fealing wax to threads diverging from 
his conduétor ; he inclofed a pointed wire and a flat piece of 
lead oppofite to.it within a cylindrical glafs veffel, wrapped 
in pafteboard, fo that the infide could haveno communication 


* Lettere dell’ clettricifmo, p. 112, 


with 3.) 


per.X. Sec. X- ox LIGHTNING. | 348 


with the external light. Into this cover, and oppofite to the 
point of the wire, he inferted a very long tube of pafteboard 5 
through which he could look from a confiderable diftance,. 
and fee the form of the electric light at the end of the wire 5 
which is the fureft indication of its quality. * 
“From Signior Beccaria’s extremely exact: and circumftan- 
tial account of the external appearances of thunder clouds, 
_ which he prefixes to his obfervations on their probable caufes, 
[ hall 'draw a general outline of the moft remarkable parti- ” 
eulars}in'the ufual progrefs of a thunder ftorm. 9 

“Px firft appearance of a thunder ftorm (which generally 
happens: when there is little\or no wind) is one denfe cloud, 
or more, increafing very faft in fize, and rifing-into the higher 
regions of the air. The lower furface. is black, ,and_ nearly 
level; but the upper finely arched, and well defined. Many 
of thefe clouds often feem piled one upon another, all arched 
in the fame manner; but they keep continually uniting, 
welling, and extending their arches.. © 

Ar the time of the rifing of this cloud, the atmofphere is 

generally full of a great number of feparate clouds, motion- 
lefs, and of odd and whimfical thapes.. All thefe, upon the 
appearance of the thunder cloud, draw towards it, and be- 
come more uniform in their fhapes as they approach ;_ till, 
coming very near the thunder cloud, their limbs mutually 
ftretch towards one another; they immediately coalefce, and 
together make one uniform mafs. Thefe he calls adfcititious 
clouds, from their coming in, to enlarge the fize of the 


* The p. 107- 
thunder 


342 '$. BECCARIA’s EXPERIMENTS Part I. 


thunder cloud. But, fometimes, the thunder cloud will 
fwell, and increafe very faft without the conjunction of any. 
adfcititious clouds, the vapours in the atmofphere forming 
_themfelves into clouds wherever it pafles. Some of the ad- 
fcititious clouds appear like white fringes, at the fkirts of the 
thunder cloud, or under the body of it, but they keep con- 


tinually growing darker and darker, as they approach to 


unite with it. 

Wuen the thunder cloud is grown toa “great fize, its low- 
er furface is often ragged, particular parts being detached 
towards the earth, but {till connected with the reft. Some- 
times the lower furface {wells into various large protuber- 
ances, bending uniformly towards the earth. And fome- 
times one whole fide of the cloud will have an inclination to 
the earth, and the extremity of it will nearly touch the 
earth * When the eye is under the thunder cloud, after it 
is grown large, and well formed, it is een to fink lower, and 
to darken prodigioufly; at the fame time that a number of 
{mall adfcititious clouds (the origin of which can never be 
perceived) are feen in a rapid motion, driving about in very 
uncertain direétions under it. While thefe clouds are agitated 
with the moft rapid motions, the rain generally falls in the 
greateft plenty, and if the agitation be exceeding great, it 
commonly hails. + 

Wuite the thunder cloud is {welling, and extending its 
branches over a large tract of country, the lightning is feen 
to dart from one part of it to another, and often to illuminate 


* Lettere dell’ elettricifmo, p. 151. + Ib. p. 155. lu 
its 


Per. X. Sec. X. on LIGHTNING. 343 


its whole mafs. When the cloud has acquired’ a fufficient 
extent, the lightning ftrikes between the cloud and the earth, 
in two oppofite places, the path of the lightning lying through 
the whole body of the cloud and its branches. The longer 
this lightning continues, the rarer does the cloud grow, and 
the lefs dark is its appearance; till, at length, it breaks in 
different places, and fhows a clear fky. When the thunder 
cloud is thus difperfed, thofe parts which occupy the upper 
regions of the atmofphere are equally fpread, and very thin; 
and thofe that are underneath are black, but thin too; and 
they vanifh gradually, without being driven away by any 
wind. * 

Havine feen what this philofopher obferved abroad, and 
in the air, let us fee what he took notice of at his apparatus 
within doors. This never failed to be electrified upon every 
approach of a thunder cloud, or any of its branches; and the 
ftream of fire from it was generally perpetual, while it was 
dire€tly over the apparatus. - b 

Tuar thunder clouds were fometimes in a pofitive as well 
as negative ftate of electricity, Signior Beccaria had difcoyer- 
ed, before he heard of its having been obferved by Dr. Frank- 
lin, or any other perfon. { The fame cloud, in paffing over 
his obfervatory, electrified his apparatus, fometimes pofitive- 

ly, and fometimes negatively.* The ele@tricity continued 
longer of the fame kind, in proportion as the thunder cloud 
was fimple, and uniform in its direction; but when the 
lightning changed its place, there commonly happened a 


* Lettere dell’ ellettricifmo, p. 146, 176. +Ib.p.167, qIb.p.138. |{ Ib. p. 172. 
. change 


344. S$. BECCARIA’s EXPERIMENTS Part I. 


change in the ele€tricity of his apparatus. It would’ change 
fuddenly after a very violent flath of lightning, but the change 
would be gradual when the lightning was moderates; and the 
progrefs of the thunder cloud flow. 

Ir was an immediate inference from his pliierwationl of die 
lightning abroad, and his. apparatus within, that the quantity 
of ele€tric matter, in an ufual ftorm of thunder, is almoft in- 
conceivably great; confidering how many pointed bodies, as 
trees, {pires, &c. are perpetually drawing it off; and what a 
prodigious quantity is repeatedly aan to, or from the 
earth. * | 

Arrer this fummary view of appearances, I thal, in the 
fame fucciné&t manner, reprefent the manner in which this 
excellent philofopher accounts for them, and fome other prin- 
cipal and well known phenomena of thunder. ftorms. 

Consiperinc the vaft quantity of electric fire that appears 
in the moft fimple thunder ftorms, he thinks it impoffible that 
any cloud, or number of clouds fhould ever contain it all, fo 
as either to difcharge or receive it. Befides, during the pro- 
grefs and increafe of the ftorm, though the lightning frequently 
ftruck to the earth, the fame clouds were the next moment 
ready to make a ftill greaterdifcharge, and his apparatus. con- 
tinued to be as much affected as ever. The clouds muft, con- 
fequently, have received at one place, the moment that a dif= 
charge was made from them in another. + In many cafes, 
the electricity of his apparatus, and confequently of the clouds, 
would inftantly change from one kind to another feveral timtes; 
an effect which cannot be accounted for by any fimple dif- 


* Lettere dell’ ellettricifmo, p. 180. + Ib. p. 183, 188. 
charge, 


Per. X. Sec. X. ~ on LIGHTNING. 345 


charge or recruit. Both muft have taken place in a very quick 
fucceffion. * | 

Tue extent of the clouds doth not leffen this difficulty : for, 
be it ever fo great, ftill the quantity ought to be leflened by 
every difcharge: and, befides, the points, by which the filent 
difcharges are made, are in proportion to the extent of the 
clouds.-+ Noris the difficulty leffened by fuppofing that freth 
clouds bring recruits; for befides that the clouds are not ripe 
for the principal ftorm, till all the clouds, toa great diftance, 
have a€tually coalefced, and formed one uniform mafs, thofe 
recruits bear no fort of proportion to the difcharge, aad what- 
ever it was, it’ would foon be exhautfted. 

Tue fact, therefore, muft be, that the electric matter is 
continually darting from the clouds in one place, at the 
fame time that it is difcharged from the earth in another. And 
it is a neceffary confequence from the whole, that the clouds 
ferve as conduétors to convey the electric fluid from thofe pla- 
ces of the earth which are overloaded with it, to thofe which 
are exhaufted of it. t 

To afcertain this fact in the moft complete manner, he 
propofes that two obfervatories be fixed, about two leagues 
afunder, in the ufual path of the thunder clouds; and that 
obfervations be made, whether the apparatus be not often po= 
fitive at one place, when it is negative at the other. || 

THAT great quantities of electric matter do fometimes ruth 
out of particular parts of the earth, and rife through the air, 
into the higher regions of the atmofphere, he thinks is evi- 


* Ib. p. 220. + Ib. p. 185. t Ib. p. 193. I] Tb. p. 194. 
Yy dent 


346 S. BECCARIA’s EXPERIMENTS Part I 


dent from the great quantities of fand, afhes, and other light 
fubftances, which have often been carried up into the air, 
and {cattered uniformly over a large tract of country. * No 
other known efficient caufe of this phenomenon can be aflign- 
ed, except the wind; and it has been obferved when there 
was no wind ftirting ; and the light bodies. have even been 
¢arried againft the wind. + He fuppofes, therefore, that thefe 
light bodies are raifed by a large quantity of electric matter, 
iffuing out of the earth, where it was overcharged with it, 
and (by that property of it which he had demonftrated) at- 
tracting, and carrying with it every fubftance that could ferye 

as aconduttor in its paflage. All thefe bodies, being pofteff- 


‘ed of an equal quantity of the electric fluid, will be difperfed 


equally in the air, and confequently over that part of the earth 
where the fluid was wanting, and whither they ferve to con- 
vey it.{ Had thefe bodies been raifed by the wind, they 
would have been difperfed at random, and in heaps. 

Tuis comparatively rare phenomenon (but of which he 
had been more than once a {pe¢tator) he thinks exhibits both 
a perfect image, and demonftration, of the manner in which 
the vapours of the atmofphere are raifed to form thunder 
clouds.. The fame eleétric matter, wherever it iffues, attracts 
to it, and carries up into the higher regions of the air, the 
watery particles that are difperfed in the atmofphere. The 
electric matter afcends to the higher regions of the atmofphere, 
being folicited by the lefs refiftance it finds there than i in the 
common mafs of the earth; which, at thofe times, is generally 


* Lettere dell’ elettricifmo, p.199. + Ib.p. 225. Ib. p. 202, 
very 


Per. Xi Sec. X. ox LIGHTNING. 347 


very dry, and confequently highly eleGtric. The uniformity 
with which thunder clouds {pread themfelves, and fwell into 
arches, muft be owing to their being affected by fome caufe 
which, like the eléétric matter, diffufes itfelf uniformly 
wherever it acts, and to the refiftance they meet with in 
afcending through the air. * As a proof of this, fteam, rifing 
from an eleétrified eolipile, diffufes itfelf with the fame uni- 
formity, and in fimilar arches, extending itfelf apeiords any 
conducting fubftance. + 
_. Tue fame caufe which firft raifed a cloud, from vapouts 
difperfed in the atmofphere, draws to it thofe that are already 
formed, and continues to form new ones ; till the whole col- 
leéted maf extends fo far, as to reach a part of the earth 
where there is a deficiency of the eleétric fluid. t Thither 
too, will thofe clouds, replete with eleétricity, be ftrongly 
attracted, and there will the ele&tric matter difcharge itfelf 
upon the earth. A channel of communication being, in this 
manner, found, a freth fupply of eleétric matter will be raifed 
from the overloaded part, and will continue to be conveyed 
by the medium of the clouds, til) the equilibrium of the fluid 
between the two places of the earth be reftored. When'the 
clouds are attracted in their paflage by thofe parts of the earth 
_ where there is a deficiency of the fluid, thofe detached frag- 
ments afe formed, and alfo thofe uniform depending protube= 
rances, which will be fhown to be, in fome cafes, the caufe 
of water-{pouts, and hurricanes. || 
Tuar the eleGtric matter, which forms and animates the 


*Ib.p.205, +Ib.p. 206. pIb.piziz. jj Ib. p. 214. 
¥y"2 thunder 


348 §. BECCARIA’s EXPERIMENTS Parti. 


thunder clouds, iffues from places far below the furface of 
the earth, and that it buries itfelf there, is probable from the 
deep holes that have, in many places, been made by light- 
ning. *  Flafhes of lightning have, alfo, been feen to arife 
from fubterraneous cavities, and from wells. -- Violent inun- 
dations have accompanied thunder ftorms, not occafioned by 
rain, but by water burfting from the bowels of the earth, 
from which it muft have been diflodged by fome internal 
concuffion. Deep wells have been known to’ fill fafter in 
thunder ftorms,{ and others have a — turbid at 
the approach of thunder. || pot eay 
Tuis very rife, as well as the whole progrefs of eiienidet 


clouds, has fometimes been, in a manner, vifible. Exhala- _ 


tions have been frequently feen to rife from particular caverns; 
attended with a rumbling noife, and to afcend into the high- 
er regions of the air, with all the phenomena of thunder 
ftorms deferibed above, according to the defcription of perfons 
who lived long before the connection between etic and 
lightning was fufpected. § ; : 

Tue greateft difficulty attending this chines of the origin 
of thunder ftorms relates to the colle@tion, and infalation of 
electric matter within the body of the earth. | With refpe& 
to the former, he has nothing particular to fay. Some ope- 
rations in nature are certainly attended with.a lofs of the equi. 
librium in. the eleétric fluid, butino perfon has yet affigned a 
more probable caufe of the redundancy of the electric ‘matter 
which, in faét, often abotinds in the clouds, than what’ we 


® Lettere dell’ ellettricifmo, p.227. + Ib. p. 228. ft Ib. p. 233. Ib. p. 360. 
: § Ib, p..231. = 
may 


Per. X. Sec. X20 ‘on’ LIGHTNING: ~ 349 


‘may fuppofe poffible to’ take place in the bowels of the earth. 
And fuppofing the lofs of the equilibrium poffible, the fame 
caufé that produced the effe& would prevent the reftoring of 
it ; fo that not being able to force a way, at leaft one fuffici- 
ently ready, through the body of the earth, it would iffue at 
the:moft.convenient vent into the higher regions of the air, as 
the better paflage..' His electrical apparatus, though commu- 
‘nicating with the earth, has frequently, in violent thunder 
ftorms, given evident {parks to his finger. * 
+> In ‘the’ enumeration. of the effe&ts of thunder ftorms, he 
obferves that a wind always blows from the place from which 
the thunder cloud proceeds ; that this‘is agreeable to'the ob- 
fervations of all-mariners, and that the wind is more.or lefs 
violent in proportion to the fuddennefs of the appearance of 
-the thunder cloud, the. rapidity of its expanfion, and the ve- 
locity with which the adfcititious clouds join it. The fud- 
-den;condenfation of {uch a prodigious quantity of vapours 
-muft difplace the air,’ and repel it on all fides. + 
HE, infome meafure, imitated even this effect of thun- 
der, at leaft produced a citculation of all the air in his room, 
by the continued electrification of his chain. {+> . 
_ Among other effects of lightning, -he mentions the cafe of 
aman rendered exceeding ftiff, prefently after he was ftruck 
dead in a ftorm of thunder. But the moft remarkable cir- 
-cumftance, in this cafe, was the lightning (chufing the beft 
»eonductor) having’ ftruck one particular vein, near his neck, 
and followed it through its minuteft ramifications; fo that 


* Ib. p.236. + Ib. p. 339, 340. ¢ ‘Ib. p. 343. 
the 


350 S. BECCARIA’s EXPERIMENTS Parr T. 


the figure of it appeared through the fkin, finer than any 
pencil could have: drawn it. * 

He cautions perfons not to depend upon the neighbour. 
hood of a higher, or, in all cafes, a better conductor than 
their own body; fince, according to his repeated obfervations, 
the lightning by no means defcends in one undivided track ; 
but bodies of various kinds conduct their thare of it, at the 
fame time, in a to their quantity and conducting 
power. + 

‘A GREAT sedind of obfervations, relating to the defcent 
of lightning, confirm his theory of the manner of its‘afcent : 
for, in many cafes, it throws before it the parts of conducting 
bodies, and diftributes them along the refitting | medium 
through which it muft force its paffage. ¢ 

Upon this principle it is, that the longeft flathes of light. 
fing feém to be made, by its forcing into its way part of the 
vapours in the air. {| “One of the principal reafons why thofe 
flathes make fo long a rumbling, is their being occafidned by the 
vaft length of a vacuum; made by the paflage of the eleétric 
matter. For though the air collapfes the moment after it 
has paffed, and the vibration: (on which the found depends) 
commences at the fame moment, through the whole length 
of the track; yet, if the flath was directed towards the per- 
fon who hears the report, the vibrations excited at the nearer 
end of the track will reach his ear much fooner than thofeex- 
cited at the more remote end ; — the found spine without - 

bereralluk brit 
© Lettere dell’ ellettricifmo, Pp 242. + Ib. » 446 t Ib. p. 247. |] _ Ib. p. 851, 
ayy: 


por.X.Sec.K,.. ov. LIGHTNING. - 35r 


any repercuffign or.echo, continue till all the vibrations have 
fuccefliyely reached him, * 

One of the moft remarkable effedts of lightning is that it 
gives polarity to the magnetic needle, and to all bodies that 
have any thing of iron in them, as bricks, &c; and by ob- 
ferving which way the poles of thefe bodies lye, it -may be 
known, with the utmoft, certainty, in. what dire¢tion the 
ftroke. pafled. + In one cafe he actually afcertained the di- 
rection of the lightning in this manner. $ 

| Since a fudden. ftroke of | lightning gives. polarity to, 
smagoets,- he conjectures, that a regular.and conftant circula= 
‘tion of the whole mafs.of the. fluid, from North to South, 
may be the original caufe of magnetifm in general. | 
This is a truly great thought ; and, if juft, will introduce 
greater fimplicity into our conceptions of the laws of nature. 
©) THat: this ethereal . current is infenfible to us, is no proof 
of its non-exiftence, Gince we ourfelves are involved in it. .He 
had feen birds fly fo near a thunder cloud, as he was fare 
they would not have done, if they had been affected by its 
atmofphere. § 

Tuts current he would not fuppofe to arife from: one 
Hess but from feveral, in the northern hemifphere of the 
earth. The aberration of the common center of all thefe 
currents from the North point may be the caufe of the vari- 
ation sof the needle, the period of this declination of the cen- 
ter of the currents may be the period of the variation, and 
the obliquity with which the currents ftrike into the earth 


*Ib.p. 252- ¢ Ibs p. 262. } Ib. p. 263, Ib. p, 268. § Ib, 


may 


a 


352 S. BECCARIA’s EXPERIMENTS Part I. 


may be the caufe of the dipping‘ of the needle, and alfo why 
bars of iron more eafily receive the magnetic virtue in one 
particular direétion. * 

He thinks that the Aurora Borealis may be this eleétric 
matter performing its circulation, in fuch a ftate of the at- 
mofphere as renders it vifible, or approaching nearer to the 
earth than ufual. ‘Accordingly very vivid appearances of this 
kind have been obferved to occafion a flu@uation in the mag- 
netic needle. + ay 

Stones and bricks ftruck by lightning are 5 sateata vitrified. 
He fuppofes that fome ‘ftones in the earth, having been {truck 
in this manner, firft gave oecafion to the vulgar Orta 4 
the thunder bolt. ¢ 

Srcnior BeccaRia was very fenfible that heat onsiibual 
much to the phenomena of thunder, lightning, and-rain;. but 
he could not find, by any experiment, that it tended*to 
promote eledtricity. He, therefore, rather thought that heat 
operated, in this cafe, by exhaling the moifture of the ‘air, 
and thereby cutting off the communication of the el 
fluid between one place and another, particularly between the 
earth and the higher regions of the air, whseebait effets 
were more vifible. || WO 


Havine entertained my reader with the ebipbintions of ; 
this great Italian genius, I muft once more conduct him to. 


France, where he will fee feveral experiments well be 4 
notice. In this country we have feen that Dr. Fran 
theory of the identity of eleftricity and the matter of igh © 


® Lewtere dell’ elettricifmo, p. 269. + Ib. p. 272. Ib. p. 263. Ib. p. 359. 
ning 


Per. X. Sec. X. on LIGHTNING. 353 


fing was firft Verified, and we thallnow fee it werified in-the 
gtandeft'and moft confpicuous manner. 
oc'THp(greateft quantity of clectricity that was ever i brdeghe 
from the clouds, by any apparatus prepared for that purpofe, 
was by Mr. De Romas, affeflor to the prefideal of Nerac. 
This gentleman’ was" the firft who made ufe of a wire inter- 
woven in thé hempen. cord of an’ eleétrical. kite, which he 
made feven feet and a half high, and *three feet wide, fo:as 
to have eighteen fquare feet of furface. This cord was found 
to condué the electricity of the clouds more powerfully than 
an hempen cord would do, even though it was wetted; ands 
being terminated by a cord of dry filk, it enabled the obferver 
(by a proper management of his apparatus) to make whatever 
experiments he thought proper, without danger tochimfelf, 
~ BY the help of this kite, on the 7th. of June 1753, about 
“one in thé afternoon, when it’was raifed 550 feet from the 
ground, and” had taken 780 feet of ftring, making an angle 
of near forty five degrees with the horizon; he drew fparks 
from his conductor three inches long and a quarter of an inch 
thick, the fnapping of which was heard about 200 paces. 
Whilft he was’ taking thefe fparks, he felt, as it were, a 
cobweb: on “his’ face, though he was-above three feet from 
the ‘fring lof the ‘kites! after'which he did not think. it fafe to 
ftand fo near, and called alotd'to all the company to retire, 
as he did himfelf about two feet. 
'THinkine himfelf now fecure ‘enough, and not being in- 
‘ eémmoded by any body very near him, he took notice of what 
pale among the clouds ‘which were immediately over the 
kite; but could perceive no lightning, either there, or any 
Zz where 


354. EXPERIMENTS or rue FRENCH. Parr Iy 


where elfe, nor featce the leaft noife of thunder, and. there, 

was no rain at all. The wind was Weft, and pretty ftrong, 

which raifed the kite 100: rem iate nea sh ns 

other experiments. > at 
ArreRwarps, cafting his eyes, on dai tin ia G 

was faftened to the ftring ofthe kite, ,and, about ‘three on 

from the ground, ‘he faw. three ftraws, one of Which was.a> 

bout one foot long, a fecond four or five inches, and the 

third three or four inches, all ftanding erect, and performing , 

a circular dance, like puppets, under the tin tube,,without 

touching one another. bivow- Bras symnsd a3 ' 

- Tuts little {pectacle, which voneh delighted feveral of the 

company, lafted about a quarter of an hour; . after, which, 

fome drops, of rain falling, he again. perceived the fenfation 4 

of the cobweb on his face, and at the fame.time heard, a con- if 

tinual ruftling noife, like that of a {mall forge bellows. Thts 4 

was a further warning of the increafe of electricity ;, and from 

the firft inftant that Mr..De Romas perceived the,dancing 

ftraws, he thought it not advifable to take, any more, Aparks - 

even with all his precautions; and he again intreated, the 

company to fpread themfelves to a ftill greater. diftance. |. tw 
IMMEDIATELY after this came;on the laft actof the enter- 

tainment, which Mr. De Romas acknowledged made. him 4 

tremble. The longeft ftraw|,was. attracted, by the, tin tube, a 

upon which followed three explofiens;,, the noife ;of which . 

greatly refembled that..of thunder. Some of | the, company bal 

compared it to the. explofion. of; rockets; and others, to. the © i 

violent ini “0 vate earthen j ais aati a ) REVERED At iW 


tad . a2. 


PervX/Sec)X. 7 1 cow LIGHTNING: ©” 358 


is ‘certain that it was heard into the heart af = citys, not 
Withttandinig the vatious moifes there. Hind 
‘Tur fire that was feen at the inftant of the eefflatton had 
the —_ ‘of a fpindle eight inches long and five lines in dia- 
peices ‘But the moft aftonithing and diverting circumftance 
produced by the'ftraw, which had occafioned the explo- 
pet ‘following the’ ftring’ of the kite. Some of the company 
faw it’at forty five-or fifty fathoms diftance,’ attracted ahd re- 
pelled alternately, with this remarkable circumftance, that 
every ‘time it was attracted by the ftring, flathes of firé were 
_ feenj and* cracks were heard, Meroe mat fo ete as at Abe 
time of the former\explofion.) «+ 
‘Ir is remarkable, that, from the time: of ie dels to 
the end of the experiments, no lightning at all was feen, 
nor fearce any thunder heard. A fell of fulphur was per- 
ceived,’ much like that of the luminous electric -effluvia iffu- 
ing out of the end of an electrified bar of nietal.. Round the 
{tring appeared a luntinous cylinder of light, three or four 
inches in diameter; and this being in the day time Mr. De 
Romas did not queftion but that, if it had been in the night, 
that electric atmofphere would have appeared to be four or 
five feet in diameter. Laftly, after the experiments were 
over, a hole was difcovered in the ground, perpendicularly 


under the tin tube,°an inch deep, and half an inch wide, 
which was probably made by the large flathes that accom- 


panied the explofions. 

An end was put to thefe remarkable experiments by the 
falling of the kite, the wind being fhifted into the Eaft, and 
rain mixed with hail coming on in great plenty. Whilft the 

Zz2 kite 


356 EXPERIMENTS of tue FRENCH Part i 


kite was falling, the ftring camé foul of a penthoufe; and it 
was no fooner difengaged, than the perfon who held it felt 
fuch a ftroke in “his hands, and fuch a commotion® through 
his whole body, as obliged ‘him inftantly tolet it go;> and 
the ftring, ‘falling on the feet of fome other perfons,. “gave 
them a fhock alfo, though much moreitolerable.* »... ., 
Tue quantity of electric matter brought bysthis kite from 
the clouds at another time is really aftonithing. On the 26th. 
of Auguft 1756, the ftreams of fire iffuing from it were ob. 
ferved to be an inch thick, and ten feet long... This amazing 
flath of lightning, the effect of which on buildings ‘or animal 
bodies, would perhaps have been equally deftruétive. with 
any that are mentioned in hiftory, was fafely conduétedi by 
the cord of the kite to a non-electric body placed near it, and 
the report was equal to that of a piftolh = 
Mr. Romas had the curiofity to place a pigeon in a.cage 
of glafs, in a little edifice, which he had purpofely placed, fo 
as that it fhould be demolifhed by the lightning brought 
down by his kite. The edifice was, accordingly, fhattered 
to pieces, but the cage and the pigeon were not ftruck, + | — 
Tue Abbé Nollet, who gives this account, adds, that if 
a ftroke of this kind had gone through the body of Mr. De 
Romas, the unfortunate profeffor Richman had not probably 
been the only martyr to eleétricity,. and advifes, that great 
‘caution be ufed in conduéting fuch dangerous experiments. 
Wuen we confider how many fevere fhocks the moft cau- 
‘tious and judicious ele@tricians often receive Metron 
* Gent. Magaz. for Ase ade Vai gs: + Nollet’s Letters, Vol. Sy Pp 29 


pte 1. Ps 342. 
tence, 


Per.X.Sec.IX. -» on LIGHTNING, 357 


“tence, we’ thal riot be furprifed, that when philofopliers firtt 
‘began to colleé&t and make experiments upon feal lightning, 
-it thould fometimes have proved a little untra@table in their 
haiids, aiid that they were obliged to give one another fret 
cautions how’to proceed with it. 
»\Tue Abbé Nollet, as early as the year sam525 advifes that 
_ thefe experiments’ be made with circumfpection ; as he had 
been informed, by letters from Florence and Bologna, that 
thofe who had made them there had had their curiofity more 
than fatisfied, by the violent (hocks they had fuftained in draw- 
_ ing {parks from an iron . bar electrifed by thunder.’ One of 
his: correfpondents ‘informed him, that once, as he was en- 
deavouring to faften a fmall chain, with a copper ball at one 
of its extremities, to a great chain, which communicated 
- with the bar at the top of the building (in order to draw off 
- the eleétric {parks by. means of the ofcillations of this ball) 
there came a flath of lightning, which he did not fee, but 
which affeéted the chain with a noife like wild fire. At that 
inftant, the electricity communicated itfelf to the chain of 
the copper ball,, and gave the obferver fo violent a commo- 
tion, that the ball fell out of his hands, and he was {truck 
backwards four or five paces.» He:had) never been fo much 
fhocked by the experiment of Leyden. * 

Mr. Romas received a fevere ftroke when he firft raifed 
his kite: and Mr. Dalibard fays, that Mr. Monnier, a phyfi- 
cian of St. Germain en Laye, member of the academy of {cien- 
ces at Paris; and Mr. Bertier of the oratory at Montmorency, 


* Phil, Tranf. Vol. 48. pt. 1. p. 205. 


358 Tue HISTORY of Part I. 


a correfpondent of the academy, were both ftruck down by 
ftrokes of lightning, as they were taking a from: theit 
apparatus. * 

Bur thg greateft fufferer by experiments with lightning; 
fince mankind have introduced fo dangerous a fubject of 
their inquiries; was profefior Richman of Peterfburgh before 
mentioned. He was ftruck dead, on the 6th. of Auguft 1753, 
by a flath of lightning drawn by his apparatus into his own 
room, as he was attending to an experiment he was making 
with it. .There were two accounts of this’ fatal accident 
communicated to the Royal Society, one by Dr. Watfon who 
had it from the. beft authority ;+ and the: other tranflated 
from the'High Dutch.{ From both thefe the ct 
extracted. 

Tue profeflor had» provided himfelf with an: indies 
which he called an ele@rical. gnomon,, the ufe of which was 
to meafure the ftrength of eleétricity. It confifted of a rod 
of metal terminating in a fmall glafs veffel, into which (for 
what reafon I do not: know) he put fome brafs filings. At 
the top of this rod, a thread was faftened, which hung down 
by the fide of the: rod when it was not electrified; but when — 
it was, it avoided. the rod, and ftood at a diftance from it, 
making an angle at the place where it was faftened. To 
meafure this angle, he had the arch of a quadrant faftened to 
the bottom of the iron rod. 

He was obferving the effect of the ele&tricity of the eniadll o 
at the approach of a thunder ftorm, upon this gnomon; and, 


* Dalibard’s Franklin, Vol. 2. + Phil. Tranf. Vol. 48. pt. 2. p. 765- 
rik. sap pry pt. 1. p. 61. ~ 
of 


Per. X.\Src.X. ©» PROFESSOR RICHMAN. 359 


of courfe, ftanding with his head inclined towards it, accom- 
‘panied by Mr. Solokow (an engraver, whom he frequently, * 
took. with him, to bea joint obferver of his electrical expe-~ 
riments, in order to reprefent them the better in cuts) when 
~ this. gentleman, who was ftanding clofe to his elbow, ob- 
feryeda globe of blue fire, ashe.called it, as big as his fit, 
jump from the rod of the, gnomon towards the head of the 
profeflor, which was, at that inftant, at about a foot diftance 
from the rod. . This flath killed Mr. Richman: but Mr, So- - 
_ lokow couldigive no account of the particular manner in which 
he was immediately affected by it : for, at the fame time that 
the profeffor was ftruck, there arofe.a fort of fteam, or vapour, 
which intirely benumbed him, and made him fink down up- 
on the ground; fo, that he could not remember even to have 
heard the clap of thunder, which was very loud. 
: ‘Tue globe of fire was attended with a report as loud as that 
of a piftol: a wire, which, brought the ele¢tricity to his ‘metal 
rod, was broken to pieces, and its. fragments thrown upon 
Mr. Solokow’s:cloaths. » Half of the glafs veffel in which the 
rod of the gnomon ftood was: broken off, . and) the eset of 
metal that were in it'were thrown about the room. ©): 

» Upon: examining the effects of the lightning ‘in the sprofells 
or’s chamber, they found the door cafe half {plit through, 
the door torn offand thrown into-the room. * | They opéned 
a veinof the breathlefs body twice, but no blood:followed, and 
endeavoured torecover fenfation by violent chafing, butin-vain. 
Upon turning the corps with the face downwards, during the 
a dat * Ib, Vol. 48. pt. 2. p. 763. 

' ‘ rubbing, 


360 © Tue HISTORY or, Paarl. 


rubbing, an inconfiderable quantity of blood fan ‘out of the 
mouth, . There appeared a red fpot on the forehead, from 
which fpirted fome drops of blood through the pores, ‘with- 
out wounding the fkin. The fhoe belonging to the left foot 
was burft open, and, uncovering the foot at that place, they 
found a blue mark ; from which it was concluded, that the 
electrical force of the thunder, having entered the head, made. 
its way out again at that foot. 

- Upon the body, particularly on the left fide, were fevers 
red and blue fpots, refembling leather fhrunk by being burnt. 

Many more blue {pots were afterwards vifible over the whole 
body, and in particular on the back. That upon the fore- 
head changed to a brownith red, but the hair of the head was 
not finged, notwithftanding the fpot touched fome of it. In 
the place where the fhoe was unripped, the ftocking was in- 
tire ; as was the coat every where, the waiftcoat only being 
finged on the foreflap, where it joined'the hinder ; but there 
appeared on the back of Mr. Solokow’s coat long narrow 
ftreaks, as if red hot wires had burned off the mee and neta 
could not be! well accounted for. 

Wuen the body was opened the next day, 't twenty iialesios 
after he was ftruck, the cranium was very intire, having no 
fiffure, ‘nor crofs opening ; the brain as found as it poflibly 
could be, but the tranfparent pellicles of the windpipe were 
exceflively tender, gave way, and eafily rent. »\There was 
fome.extravafated blood in it, as likewife in the cavities: below 
the lungs; thofe of the breaft being quite found, but -thofe 
towards the back of a brownifh black colour, and filled with 


more of the above-mentioned blood: otherwife, none of the 
‘ entrails 


Per, X. Sec.X.\ PROFESSOR RICHMAN. = 361 


entrails were touched; but the throat, the glands, and the 
thin inteftines were all inflamed. The finged leather-colour- 
ed {pots penetrated the fkin only. Twice twenty four hours 
being elapfed, the body was fo" far)corrupted that it was 
with difficulty they got it into a coffin. * 


© Phil. Tranf. Vol. 49: pt! 12 p. 67. 


Aaa SECTION 


*62 Tur EFFECTS or ELECTRICITY —° Parr T. 


ly tind 3 ug new lining 

f  esaitining nit 

: ' Ino cigh odt bojituns@ etogk So 
Ss E Cc T I ° NU XI ejb ls gated 


+ yep iy 


OBSERVATIONS ON THE GENERAL STATE OF ELECTRICITY 
IN THE ATMOSPHERE, AND.ITS MORE-USUAL EFFECTS. 


LECTRICIANS, after obferving the great quantity of _ 


eletric matter with which the clouds are charged 
during a thunder ftorm, began to attend to the leffer quanti- 
ties of it which might be contained in the common ftate of 
the atmofphere, and the more ufual effects of this great and 
general agent in nature. Mr. Monnier, whofe obfervations 
on the electricity of the air during a thunder ftorm have been 
already mentioned, was the firft who found that there was 
very often, and perhaps always, a quantity of electric matter 
in the atmofphere, when there was no appearance of thunder. 
This he confirmed by decifive experiments, made at St. Ger- 
main en Laye, and publifhed in a memoir read at the Royal 
Academy of fciences at Paris November the 15th. 1752.% ¢ 
Ki nO ea accurate experiments ypon the electricity | of the 


eC iganriic CGT aaa ae aa: 


Per. X.Sec. XI. In. THE ATMOSPHERE. | 363 


air, were made by the Abbé Mazeas, at Chateau de Maintenon, 

during the months. of June, July, and Oatober 1753, and 

communicated to the Royal Society, in a,letter to Dr. Ste- 
phen Hales. : * abils esi aii 

_ Tug, Abbé’s apparatus confifted of an iron rod 370 feet 
long, raifed ninety feet above the horizon. Tt came down 
froma very high room in the caftle, where it was faftened to 
afilken cord fix feet Jong ;_and was carried from thence to the 
fteeple of the town, where it was likewife faftened to another 
filken cord of eight feet Jong, and theltered from rain. i And 
a large key was fulpended, by the end of this wire, in order 
to receive the electric fluid. . Prey ae ct 

On the 17th. of June, when he began his experiments, 
the cleétricity of the air was fenfibly felt every day, from fun 
rife till {even or eight in the evening, ‘except in moift weather, 
when he could perceive no figns of clectricity. . In dry wea- 
ther, the wire attracted minute bodies, at no greater diftance 
than three or four lines. He repeated the experiment care- 

- fully every day, and conftantly obferved, that, in weather 
void of ftorms, the electricity of a piece of fealing wax of two 
inches long was above twice as ftrong as that of the air. This 
obfervation inclined him to conclude, that in weather of 
. equal drinefs the electricity of the air was always equal. 

It did not appear to him that hurricanes and tempefts in- 
creafed the cleétricity of the air, when they were not accom- 
panied with thunder; for that, during three days of a very 
violent continual wind, in the month of July, he was obliged 
to put fome duft within four or five lines of the conduétor, 
before any fenfible attra@ion could be perceived. 

Aaaa2 THE 


364 Tue EFFECTS or ELECTRICITY Par? Il 


' Tue direction of the ‘winds, whether Eait, Weft, North; 
or South, made no fenifible alteration in’ o- ae aenie 
air, except when they were moift. 

In the drieft nights of that faramnes; he could difeover na 


figns of eleGtricity in the air; but it returned in the morning, 


when the fun began to appear ‘above the horizon, and vanifh- 
ed again in the evening, about half an hour after fun fet 

Tue ftrongeft. common electricity of the atmofphere, du- 
ring that fummer, was perceived in the month of July, ona 
very dry day, the heavens being very clear, and the’ fun ‘ex- 


tremely hot. The diftance of ten or twelve lines was then _ 


fufficient for the approach of the duft to the conduétor, in i 
order to fee the particles rife in a vertical direction, like the 
filings of iron on the approach of a magnet. 

On the 27th. of June, at two in the afternoon, he’ per- 
ceived fome ftormy clouds rifing above the horizon, and im- 
mediately went up to his apparatus; and, haying applied the 
duft to the key, it was attraéted with a force which increafed 
in proportion as the clouds reached the zenith. When they 
had come nearly over the wire, the duft was fo impetuoufly 
repelled, as to be entirely {catteted from the paper. He 
drew confiderable {parks from it, though there was neither 
thunder nor lightning. When the ftormy clouds were in 
the zenith of his wire, he obferved that the electricity was 
increafed to fuch a degree, that even the filken thread at- 
tracted light bodies at the diftance of feven or eight inches. 

Turse ftormy clouds remained about two hours above the 
horizon, without either thunder or lightning ; nor did a very 

heavy 


Pek. X. ‘Sec. XI. tn THe ATMOSPHERE.” — 365, 


heavy ‘rain ‘diminish’ the’ ele@tricity, ” except ‘about the ead, 
when the clouds began to be diffipated. * © 
‘Mr. 'KINNERSLEY ‘obferved, that when the air was i its’ 


‘drieft ftate, there was always a confiderable fhare of elegtri- 


city 3 in it, and which might be eafily drawn from it. Let a 
perfon; ‘he fays, in a ‘negative ‘ftate, ftanding ‘out of doors, in 
the dark, ‘when the’air is dry, hold, with his arm extended, 
a long fharp needle, ‘pointing upwards, and he will foon be 
convinced that cleétricity may bé drawn out of the air; not 
indeed very’ plentifully, for, being a bad conduétor, ‘it feems 
loth ‘to part with it, yet fome will evidently be colleéted/ 
The air near the perfon's body; having’ lefs ‘than the natural 
quantity, will have none to fpare; but his arm being ex- 
tended, as above, fome will be collected from the remoter 
air, and will appear luminous as it ee to the point of 
the needle. 

Ler a perfon elegtrifed negatively, he fays, prefent the 
point of a needle horizontally, to a cork ball fufpended by 
filk, and the ball will be attracted towards the point, till it 
has parted with fo much of its natural quantity of electricity, 
as to be in a negative ftate, in the fame degree’ with the per- 
fon who holds the needle; then it will recede from the point, 
being, as he fuppofes, attracted the contrary way by the elec- 
tricity of greater denfity in the air behind it. But as this 
opinion, he pleafantly fays, feems to’ deviate from eledfrical 
orthodoxy, he would be glad to fee thefe phenomena better 
accounted for by the fuperior and’ more penetrating genius of 
his friend Dr. Franklin, to whom‘he is writing. 


* Phil. Tranf. Vol. 48: pt. 1. p. 377, &c. 
WHETHER 


366 Tue EFFECTS or ELECTRICITY Parr lL. 


Wuerner the electricity.in the airy in clear dry, : weather, 
be of the fame denfity at the heighth of 200 or, 300 yards, as 
near the furface of the earth, he thought might be fatisfac- 
torily. determined by .Dr,..Franklin’s old expe RS of the 
kite. 

‘Tue twine, he fays, thould have uioaditea a very, ‘Gall 
wire in it, and the ends of the wire, where the feveral lengths 
are united, ought to be tied down with a waxed thread, to 
prevent their acting in the manner of points: 

Wuen he wrote this letter, he had tried. the cexperi- 
ment twice, when the air was .as dry as it ever is in that 
country, and fo clear that not a cloud had been. feen, and 
found the’ twine each time in a {mall degree electrifed po- 


fitively. * 
Tue preceding obfervations of Mr. Monnier, Mr. Mazeas, 


and Mr. Kinnerfley, fall far thort of the extent and accuracy 
of thofe of Signior Beccaria; whofe obfervations on pes _ gene- 
ral ftate of electricity in the atmofphere I have referved for 
the laft place of the fection, becaufe they. are the. moft con- 


fiderable, though they were all made independent o of, Ane 


many of them, prior to thofe mentioned before. 

_ He obferved that, during very high winds, sis apparatus 
gave no figns of being cleétrified.-+ Indeed he found that 
in three different ftates of the atmofphere, he could find no 
electricity in the air. 1. In windy and clear weather. 2. 
When the fky was covered with diftin& and black clouds, 
that had a flow motion. 3. In moft moift weather, not ac= 


* Phil. Tranf. Vol. 53. pt. 1. p. 87. + Lettere del? elettricifmo, p..106. 
tually 
) 


Per, Xi SecuXL.))/)1N ‘Tur ATMOSPHERES 367 


tually raining, * --Inya clear fky, whem the weather was calm, 
he always perceived figns of a .moderateielectricity, but inter- 
rupted... In rainy.weather, without:lightning, his apparatus 
was always electrified a little time before the rain fell, and 
during the time of the rain, but it ceafed tobe affected a little 
the rain, was over. JevsouaDimuoioles Vol 2300 3H 
‘HE ‘higher his sads reached,,or his kites flew,’ the tronger 
Seudign camofsbaeheinesleriiak'h Al longer ftrings 
or cords, extended and ipfulated in the open air, acquired elec- 
tricity, fooner than thofe.which were fhorter. ) A cord , ngd0 
Paris Fect,long;, ftretched.over ithe river Po, ;wasias ftrongly 
elerified during a thower, without thunder, as a.metalic rod, 
heey mane \into,his houfe,, ra been in. a thunder 
PR S3isiwevlo ‘lo’ ysl off fal alti 
Having, two ntlahonbeicigiag the fh tele hishoate, 
4140 feet.afunder, he-obferved;) that’ ifithe took\a {parki from 
the higher 1. of them, ithe: {park from the:other, which was 
thirty, feet lower, was' at that inftant leffenedy but, what is — 
remarkable, »\is that its power revived again, eet he a 
hishand. pon:the former. {| to Gish alo oclt turis 
omzsimagined that the, eleetridity, opinivaiasaiaelel eeobilee ai 
might, fometinies. furiiith-fmall fparks’ to his apparatus 5. \fince 
the-air-parts with the/ele@ricity it! has» received very flowly, 
and therefore; the equilibrium of'the ele@tric matter inthe air 
will not:be teftored fo foon dstin| theearth,and clouds." 
hoAMoncethe-effecteof a moderate eledtricity in the’ atmo 
Pheres Signion Beceatia reckons'rain, bail’and row. |’ 
Ficweat a $ Ib.'p. 165. 


oe del? Th = 166 
176; bf “guid " 


Yio CLoups 


368 Tue EFFECTS or ELECTRICITY © Parrl. 


Crouns that»bring rain) he thought, were produced in the 
fame! manner as thunder‘clouds, only’by a more moderate €lec- 
tricity.» He defcribes them at large, “andi‘the refemblance 
which all their phenomena bear to telaodes of thunder rset is 
indeed very ftriking. * 

HE notes feveral circumftances atteting! rain iithdatighel 
‘ning, which make it very: probable, that it is’ produced by 
the fame caife'as when it is accompanied with: lightning. 
Light has been feen among the clouds by night in rainy weas 
ther ; and even by’day rainy clouds are’ fometimes feen’ to 
Have a brightnefs ‘evidently’independent of the fans 4+ ‘The 
uniformity with which the clouds ate{pread, and with which 
the rain falls, he thought were evidences of an uniforin caufe, 
like that of electricity. { The intenfity of electricity in his 
apparatus generally correfponded very nearly, to the quantity 
of rain that fell in the fame time: {| “Nor is any thing to be 
inferred to the contrary of this fappofition'from the apparatus 
not being always electrified «during rain. It» has fometimes 
failed during thunder. Indeed it follows from his general the> 
ory, that the electricity of his apparatus could! not always cor-- 
refpond to the eleétricity of the clouds ; fince it :muft in fome 
meafure depend. upon the’ fituation of the obfervatory, with 
refpect to thofe parts of the earth or clouds which are giving 
or taking electric fire. -This'was confirmed by anobfervation 
which he made upon one thunder cloud, which:paffed over 
his obfervatory. » At its approach his apparatus was eleétrified 
pofitively, when it was direétly over him all figns of eleétri- 


* Lettere dell’ ellettricifmo, p. 284.  Ibvp.288. > pI. priagg.” 
IIb. p. 307, ; 
city 


- .* - ¢ 
* 


PersX:iSec. XI... Nn THE ATMOSPHERE. | 369 


city ceaféd, and, when jit, was: paffed, ‘his apparatus, was elec+ 
trified negatively. *... This obfervation very much favours his 
_ general:theory of thunder-clouds..{5 )) 4) becods i eg 
_/Sometimesall the phenomena of thunder, lightning, hail, 
rain, fnow, and wind, have been obferved at one time ;, which 
thows the conneétion they all have with fome common caufe. + 
_Srontor Beccarta, therefore, ,fuppofes that, previous to 
rain, a quantity of electric matter efcapes out of the.carth, in 
fome place,where there was a redundancy of. it; and,, in its 
afcent to the higher regions, of the air,| colleéts.and conducts 
into its. path a great quantity of vapours... The. fame caufe 
that collects, will condenfe them, more and. more::, till, in the 
places of the neareft intervals, they come almoft into contact, 
fo as to form.{mall drops ;. which uniting with others as. they 
fall, come down, in rain, .. The rain, will be heavier,in pro- 
portion as the electricity is more vigorous, and. the cloud ap- 
proaches more nearly to.a.thunder,cloud. f,,;... ini nsvs aki 
| He imitated the, appearance of clouds that bring rain by, 
infulating himfelf between ,the ;rubber and conductor of his 
clectrical machine, and with one hand dropping colophonia in- 
to a fpoon faftened to the conductor, -and holding a burning 
coal, while his other, hand communicated with. the rubber. 
_In thefe circumftances, jthe (moke {pread, along his arm, and, 
by degrees, .all over his body ;+ till.it came to the other hand 
that communicated ;with the rubber.,’, The lower furface of 
this {moke was every. where parallel to: his,,cloaths,..and the 
upper furface was) fwelled and arched like clouds replete with 


SAD: Pe 520.5 1) | ot ba p..2905 34502. cot lbu pe g05- 
Bbb thunder 


a . a. o 


PS ~~ 
976 ‘Tw EFFECTS or ELECTRICITY. “Pant f. 


thanider aria rainy’® <lTh die eaanner,’ he fopsotes, thivelouds 
that bring rain diffufe themfelves from over thofe parts of the 
earth which abound with eleétric fire, to thofe parts that are 
exhaufted of it; and, by letting fall their = reftore the 
equilibrium between them. : 
" Si1cNior BeceArra thought that thi eed eosin 
cated to the air, which both receives and parts with it flowly, 
would account for the retention of vapours in a clear tky 5 for 
fall disjoined clouds, not ‘difperfed into rain; forthe {mall- 
er and lighter clouds inthe higher’ regions of the air, which 
are but little-affected’ ‘by eleairicity5” “and ‘alfo’ for the dark~ 
ér, heavy, and fluggith clouds in’ the lower regions,’ which 
retain more of it. The degree of ele@ricity which he could 
communicate 'to the air of his room, ‘notwithftanding its be- 
ing in’ conta& with the floor, the walls, &c! made’ this ap 
pear tochim both poffible, and probable: t 

He even imagined, that’ fome ‘alteration ‘in ‘the weight of 
the air might be made by this eleétricity of it. || He obferved 
his barometer to fall a little immediately upon a flath of light- 
nings but he acknowledges that this circamftance is no fufi- 
cient foundation to fuppofe that eleéricity will account for 
much variation of the height of the barometer. § But he thought 
that the phenomena of rain favoured the fuppofition, that the 
eleGric matter in the air’ did; in fome’ meafure, Teffen its 
preffure. For when the electric matter’ is adtually in’ the air, 
collecting and condenfing the vapours, ‘the barometer is low- 
eft. « When’ the: comimunication “is made ‘between the earth 


* Lettere dell’elettricifmo, p. 2944 + Ib. p. 348,349. tb. psg50. if Ib. § Ib. p. 353. 
: : and 


Per.X.Sre.XI. 1v Tie ATMOSPHERE. 37 


and the’clouds by the rain, the ‘quickfilver begins to rife; the’ 
electric matter, which fupported part of the prefflire, ‘being 
difcharged." And this, he shows, will-be the'cafe whether 
the eleétricity in the air be pofitive or negative.*®) 
Haz, this ingenious philofopher fuppofes to be'formed:in 
the higher regions! of |the air, ' where the cold is/intenfe, and 


" where the eleétric'matter is very.copious. ‘In thefe cireum- 


» ftances, a great number of particles of water are brought near 
together, where they are frozen, and in their defcent colleé& 
other particles: ‘fo that the'denfity ofthe fubftance jof the 
hail ftone grows lefs and lefs from the center; this. being 
formed firft, in the higher regions, and the furface being col- 
leéted in the lower. Agreeable to this, it is obferved, that, 
in mountains, hail-ftones, as well as drops of rain, are 
ry fmall; there being but fthall {pace through which to fall, 
ak chatty increafe their bulk. Drops of rain and hail agree 
alfo in this circumftance, that the more intenfe is the elec- 
tricity that forms them, the larger’ they are. Motion is 
known to promote freezing, and fo the rapid motion of the 
electrified clouds may promote that effet in the air. t 
Croups of fnow differ in nothing from clouds of rain, but 
in the circumftance of cold, which freezes them. Both the 
regular diffufion of fhow, and the regularity in the ftructure 
of the parts of which it confifts (particularly fome figures of 
fnow or hail, which he calls ratte, and which fall about 
Turin) fhow the clouds of fnow to be actuated by fome uni- 
form caufe like eleétricity. || He even endeavours, very par- 


* Ib.p. 354. + Ib. p. 314. t Ib. p. 318. ll Ib. p. 320, 322, 325. 
Bbba2 ticularly, 


372 SETHe CTHEORYvior [x Pani: 


ticularly, to fhow ‘in what manner certain configurations of 
{now are made, by the uniform action of electricity, *), All 
thefe conje€tures about the caufe of hail and fnow were con- 
firmed by obferving, that his apparatus: never failed to be 
ele&trified by fhow,.as well'as by rainsioige oni edt .2r 4 
A More intenfe electricity unites the)particles of hail more 
clofely than the more moderate -electricity does thofe. of fhow. 
In like manner, we fee thunder clouds more denfe than thofe 
which merely bring rain, and the drops of. rain: are larger 
in’ proportion, ners or sawn si not aaa — 
height. ss in i ol z inc 


Ont 


«Satire delPellericiino, p 3255 33%, 333... t Took $48 3, 


SECTION 


Per: Xi Sec. XI METEORS. 373 


ote 09 qo: dtset Basist & Ctiw geist ois sno enw od aA 
Sigel “onlial? pe bslles: a tare wat gorlt” at Ger te anod nn 
niwoig nung tesgA per) poi swo! shigd is nisib 
nodW. pened mow In 3 ath yaiall 
has wey otly SECTION. xn 
2 eGiv .botantmilli, yinebhus wo 3 
jie Ie Bios, O11. £ 5} ¥, bobartis : 


oot aA ETN auth us 


THe ATTEMPTS (‘THAT HAVE BEEN MADE To EXPLAIN 


ai some OF THE MORE UNUSUAL APPEARANCES IN 
Aa THE EARTH AND HEAVENS By ELECTRICITY. 


aay y it oft 

N est two piectding’ feétions of this period, relatiag: to the 

_ eledtricity of the atmofphere, the experiments and ob- 
fervations of Signior Beccaria have made a principal figure ; 
and the materials I have collected from him make.a no lefs 
confiderable part of this. They who may have thought he 
indulged. too much to imagination before, will think him 
abfolutely extravagant here; but his extravagancies, if they 
be fuch, are thofe of a great genius ; “and had he a thoufand 
more fuch extravagancies, I fhould, with pleafure, have fol- 
lowed him though them all. 
- Tue meteor ufually called a falling flar has hitherto 
shitadel all philofophers. Signior Beccaria makes it pretty 
evident, that it is an eleétrical appearance; and the fact 
which he relatesas a proof of it, is exceeding curious and 
remarkable. 

As 


374 Tur THEORY or Parr I. 


As he was one time fitting with a friend in the open air, 
an hour after fun fet, they faw what is called a falling ftar - 
direCting its courfe towards them, and apparently growing 
larger and larger, till it difappeared not far from them 3 when 
it left their faces, hands, and. cloaths, with the earth, and 
all the neighbouring objects, fuddenly illuminated, with a 
diffufed and lambent light, attended with no noife at all. 
While they were ftarting up, ftanding, and looking at one 
another, furprifed at the appearance, a fervant came runni 
to them out of aneighbouring garden, and afked them if they 
had feen nothing; for that he had feen a light fhine faddenly 
in the garden, and efpecially upon the ftreams which he was 
throwing to water it. * : 

Aut thefe appearances were evidently electrical ; and Signior 
Beccaria was confirmed in his conjecture, that eleétricity was 
the caufe of them, by the quantity of ‘cleric matter'which, 
as was mentioned before, hehad {een gradually advancing to- 
wards his-kite ; for:that, he fays, had very:much the appear- 
ance of a falling ftar... Sometimes »alfo he'faw a kind -of glory 
round the kite, which followed it when it changed its place, 
but left fome light, fora fmall {pace of'time, in ithe place 
which ithad quitted, + 

Tuat appearances, ‘which bear evident marks of electricity, 
have-a very fenfible:progreffive motion, ‘is demonftrated from 
a variety of meteorological obfervations. I ‘fhall ‘relate one 
made by Mr, Chalmers, when he was on board the Monta- 
gue under the command of Admiral Chambers. The account 


* Lettere dell’ clettricifmo, p.111. + Ib. p. 130. 


* 


Pra.X.Sec.XIl. METEORS. a5 


of it was read at the Royal Society March the 22d. 1749. 


‘On the 4th. of November 1749, in lat. 429. 48, long. 
9°. 3» he was taking an obfervation on the quarter deck,, a- 


bout ten minutes before twelve, when one of the quarter- 
matters defired’ he would look to the windward ;, upon which 
he‘obferved a large ball of blue fire rolling on the furface of 
the water, at about three miles diftance from them. They 
immediately lowered their top fails. &c. but it came down 
upon them fo faft, that’ before they could raife the main tack, 


‘they obferved the ball to rife almoft perpendicular, and not a- 
~ bove forty or fifty yards from the main chains; when it 


went off with an-explofion as if hundreds of cannon, had been 
fired at one time, and left fo great a fmell of brimftone, that 
the thip feemed to be nothing but fulphur. After the noife 
was over, which, he believed, did not. Jaft longer than half 
a fecond, they fourid.their main top-matt fhattered into above 
a hundred pieces, and the main maft rent quite down to, the 
heel. There were fome of the fpikes which nail the fith of 
the main maft drawn with fuch force out of the maft, and 


‘they ftuck fo faft in the main deck, that’ the carpenter was 


obliged to take an iron crow to get them out. There were 
five: men knocked down, and one'of them greatly burnt by 
the explofion. They believed, that when the ball, which 
appeared to them to be of the bignefs of a large mill-ftone, 
rofe, it took the middle-of the main top matt, as the head of 


‘the matt above the hounds was not fplintered. They had a 


hard gale of wind from the N, by W. to the N. N. E. for 
two days before the accident, with a great deal of rain and. 
hail, and a’ large fea. From the northward they had no 

thunder 


376 Toe THEORY orf Part I. 


cealiies or lightning, neither before nor after the explofion. 
The ball. came down from the North Eaft, and wont to the 
South Weft. 6 

Tuar the Aurora Borealis is an electrical peer eel, was> 


I believe, never difputed, from the time that lightning was_ 
proved to be one. To the circumftances of refemblance which — 


had before been taken notice of between this phenomenon and 
electricity ; Signior Beccaria adds, that when the aurora bo- 
realis has extended lower than ufual into the atmofphere, 


various founds, as of rumbling, and hiffing, have been 


heard. * stich 
Mr. Beroman fays, he has often obferved the magnetic 


needle to be difturbed by a high aurora borealis, but that he : 


could never procure any electricity from them, either vie 
pointed metallic rods, or by means of a kite. +. ‘ 

Mr. CanTon  (befides his conjecture, mentioned before, p 
334, that the aurora borealis may be the) flahhing of electric 


fire from pofitive towards negative clouds at a great diftance, t 


through the upper part of the atmofphere, where the refiftance 
is leaft) fuppofes that the aurora borealis, which happens ; at 
the time that the needle is difturbed by the heat of the earth, 
is the electricity of the heated air above it; and this, he. fays, 


will appéar chiefly in the northern regions, as the alteration ; 


in the heat of the air in thofe parts will be the greateft.. Chis 
hypothefis, he adds, will not feem improbable, if it be ; con- 

fidered, that electricity is now known to be the _ caule of 
thunder and lightning, that it has been extracted from, the 2 + 


® Elettricifmo artificiale and naturale, p, 221. + Phil. Tranf. Vol. 52. pt. 2 Pe ie 


a 


Per.X.Sec.XIl.. WATER SPOUTS. © 377 


-at the time of an aurora borealis; that the inhabitants of the 

northern countries obferve the aurora to be remarkably ftrong, 
when a fudden thaw happens after fevere cold weather; and 
that the curious in thefe matters are now acquainted with a 
fubftance that will, without friction, both emit and abforb 
the electric fluid, only by the increafe or diminution of its 
heat ; 3 meaning the tourmalin, in which he had difcovered 
that property. * 

In a paper dated November the 11th. 1754, he fays he has 
fometimes known the air to be electrical in clear weather, but 
never at night, except when there has appeared an aurora bo- 
realis, and then but to a {mall degree, which he had fevera, 
opportunities of obferving that year. How far pofitive and 
negative electricity in the air, with a proper quantity of moift- 
ure between, to ferve as a conductor, will account for this, 
and other meteors, fometimes feen ina ferene fky, he leaves 
to be inquired into. + . 

Sicnior Beccarta takes fome pains to fhow that water 

_Spouts have an electrical origin. To make this more evident, 
he firft defcribes the circumftances attending their appearance, 
which are the following. 

Tury generally appear in calm weather. The fea feems 
to boil, and fend up a fmoke under them, rifing in a hill 
towards the fpout. At the fame time, perfons who have been 
near them have heard a rumbling noife. The form of a wa- 
ter fpout is that of a fpeaking trumpet, the wider end being 
in the clouds, and the narrower end towards the fea. The 


* Phil, Tranf, Vol. 51. pt. 1. p. 403. Ib. Vol. 48. pt. 2. p.. 784. 
Cicc fize 


378 Tue THEORY or Part i. 


fize is various, even in the fame fpout. The colour is fome- 
times inclining to white, and fometimes to black. Their 
pofition is fometimes perpendicular to the fea, fometimes ob- 


lique; and fometimes the fpout itfelf is in the form of a _ 


curve. ‘Their continuance is very various, fome difappearing 
as foon as formed, and fome continuing a confiderable time. 
One that he had heard of continued a whole hour. But they 
often vanifh, and prefently appear again in the fame place. * » 

Tue very fame things that water {pouts are at fea are fome 
kinds of whirlwinds and Surricanes by land. They have been 
known to tear up trees, to throw down buildings, make ca- 
verns in the earth; and, in all thefe cafes, to (catter earths 
bricks, ftones, timber,. &c. to a great diftance in every di- 
rection. + Great quantities of water have been left, or raifed 


by them, fo as to make a kind of deluge ; and they have al- 


ways been attended with a prodigious rumbling noife. 

Tuar thefe phenomena depend upon ele¢tricity cannot but 
appear very probable from the nature of feveral of them; but 
the conjecture is made more probable from the following ad- 
ditional circumftances. They generally appear in months 
peculiarly fubjec&t to thunder ftorms, and are commonly pre- 
ceded, accompanied, or followed by lightning, rain, or hail ; 
the previous ftate of the air being fimilar. Whitith or yel- 


lowith flathes of light have fometimes been feen moving with. 
prodigious fwiftnefs about them. And, laftly, the manner. 


in which they terminate exactly refembles what might be ex- 
pected from the prolongation of one of the uniform protube- 


® Elettricifmo artificialee naturale, p. 206, &c. + Ib, p. 210. 
rances 


- on ee 


Per.X.Sec.XI. WATER SPOUTS. 379 


rances of electrified clouds, mentioned before, towards the 
fea; the water and the cloud mutually attracting one another: 
for they fuddenly contract themfelves, and difperfe almoft at 
once; the cloud rifing, and the water of the fea under it fall-. 
ing to its level. But the moft remarkable circumftance, and 


the moft favourable to the fuppofition of their depending up- 


on eleétricity is, that they have been difperfed by prefenting 
to them fharp pointed knives or fwords. This, at leaft, is 
the conftant practice of mariners, in many parts of the world 
where thefe water fpouts abound; and he was affured by fe- 
veral of them, that the method has often been undoubtedly 
effectual. * ; 

Tur analogy between the phenomena of water fpouts and 
electricity, he fays, may be made vifible, by hanging a drop 
of water to a wire communicating with the prime conductor, 
and placing a veffel of water under it. In thefe circum- 
ftances, the drop aflumes all the various appearances of a wa- 
ter fpout, both in its rife, form, and manner of difappearing. 
Nothing is wanting but. the fmoke, which may require a 
great force of electricity to become vifible. 

Mr. Wirxe alfo confiders the water {pout as a kind of great 


- eleétrical cone, raifed between the cloud ftrongly electrified, 


and the fea or the earth. * 
To Signior Beccaria’s theory of water {fpouts and hurri- 


‘ eanes, I fhall add a defcription of a hurricane in the Weft 


Indies, from the Account of the European fettlements in America. 
It was evidently written without the moft diftant view to any 


* Elettricifmo artificiale e naturale, p. 213. + Wilke, p. 142. 


e-¢ 2 philo- 


_ 


380 Tue THEORY of Part I, 


philofophical theory, and leaft of all that of eleGtricity ; and 
yet thofe who are difpofed to favour this hypothefis may per- 
ceive feveral circumftances, which tend to ftrengthen itis 
need not point them out. 


« Ir is in the rainy feafon, principally, in the rennth of 


«* Auguft, more rarely in July and September, that they are 
affaulted by 4urricanes, the moft terrible calamity to 
4* which they are fubje& from the climate. This deftroys, 
«at one ftroke, the labours of many years, and fruftrates 
«« the moft exalted hopes of the planter; and often juft at 
«« the moment when he thinks himfelf out of the reach of 


«* fortune. It is a fudden and violent ftorm of wind, rain, . 


«« thunder, and lightning; attended with a furious {welling 


«© of the fea, and fometimes with an earthquake; in fhort, ~ 


“« with every circumftance which the elements can affemble 
«* that is terrible and deftructive. 
«« First they fee, as a prelude to the enfuing heels 

«¢ whole fields of fugar canes whirled into the air, and f{eat- 
«* tered over the face of the country. The ftrongeft trees of 
«« the foreft are torn up by the roots, and driven about like 
«¢ ftubble. Their wind-mills are fwept away in a moment. 
«« Their works, the fixtures, the ponderous copper boilers, 
« and ftills, of feveral hundred weight, are wrenched from 
«« the ground, and battered to pieces. Their houfes are no 
** protection. The roofs are torn off at one blaft, whilft the 
«rain, which in an hour rifes five feet, ruthes in upon them 
«¢ with an irrefiftible violence. 


«* Tuere are figns, which the Indians of thefe iflands 


- 
* 


taught our planters, by which they can prognofticate the 


approach | 


} 


Per. X. Sec. XII. HURRICANES. 381 


approach of a hurricane. It comes on either. in the 
quarters, or at the full or change of the moon. If it 
comes at the change, obferve thefe figns. That day 
you will fee the fky very turbulent. You will ob-| 
ferve the fun more red than at other times. You 
will perceive a dead calm, and the hills clear of all 
thofe clouds and mifts which ufually hover about them. 
In the clefts of the earth, and in the wells, you will hear 
a hollow rumbling found, like the rufhing of a great 
wind. At night the ftars feem much larger than ufual, 
and furrounded with a fort of burs. The North Weft fky 
has a black and menacing look, and the fea emits a ftrong 
fmell, and rifes into vaft waves, often without any wind. 
The wind itfelf now forfakes its ufual fteady Eafterly 
ftream, and fhifts about to the Weft; from whence it 
fometimes blows, with intermiffions, violently and irre- 
gularly, for about two hours at a time. You have the 
fame figns at the full of the moon. The moon itfelf is 
furrounded with a great bur, and fometimes the fun has 
the fame appearance.” * 

Tue firft perfon who advanced that earthquakes were 


probably caufed by electricity, was Dr. StuKkeLery, upon 
occafion of the earthquakes at London, on February the 8th. 
and on March the 8th. 1749; and another which affected 
various other parts of England, the center being about Da- 
ventry in Northamptonhhire, on the 3oth. of September 1750. 


* Account of the European Settlements in America, Vol. 2. p. 96, &c. 


The 


382 Tue THEORY or Part I. 
The papers which the Doctor delivered to the Royal Society 


on thefe occafions, and which were read March the 22d. 1749, 


and December the 6th. 1750, are very valuable, and well 


deferve the attention of all philofophers and electricians. I. 


fhall here give the fubftance of both; only RE sy and 
differently arranging the materials of them. 


Tuar earthquakes are not owing to iitairsineins winds, | 


fires, vapours, or any thing that occafions an explofion, and 
heaves up the ground, he thought might eafily be concluded 
from a variety of circumftances. In the firft place, he 
thought there was no evidence of any remarkable cavernous 
ftruéture of the earth; but that, on the contrary, there is 
rather reafon to prefume, that it is, ina great meafure, folid; 
fo as to leave little room for internal changes, and fermenta- 
tions within its fubftance ; nor do coal-pits, he fays, when on 
fire, ever produce any thing refembling an earthquake. 

In the fecond earthquake at London, there'was no fuch 
thing as fire, vapour, fmoke, fmell, or an eruption of any 
kind obferved, though the. fhock affected a circuit of thirty 
miles in diameter. This confideration alone, of the extent 
of furface fhaken by an earthquake, he thought was fufficient 


to overthrow the fuppofition of its being owing to to the ex+ _ 


panfion of any fubterraneous vapours. For it could not pofs 
fibly be imagined, that fo immenfe a force, as could a& upon 
that compafs of ground inftantaneoufly, fhould never break 
the furface of it, fo as to be difcoverable to the fight or fmell 5 
when fimall fire balls, burfting in the air, have inftantly pro- 
pagated a fulphureous fmell all around them, to the diftance 
of feveral miles. 


BEsIpEs 


Per. X. Sec. XII. HURRICANES. 383 


' Besrpes,’ the operation of this great fermentation, and 
production of elaftic vapours, &c. ought to be many days in 
continuance, and not inftantaneous; and the evaporation of fuch 
a quantity of inflammable matter would require a long {pace 
of time. : 

He thought that if vapours and fubterraneous fer- 
mentationr, explofions, and eruptions were the caufe of 
earthquakes, they would abfolutely ruin the whole fyftem of 
fprings and fountains, wherever they had once been: which 
is quite contrary to fact, even where they have been frequently 


' repeated. Mentioning the great earthquake which happened 


A. D. 17, when no lefs than thirteen great cities of Afia 
Minor were deftroyed in one night, and which may be reck- 
oned to have thaken a mafs of earth 300 miles in’ diameter, 
he afks; How can we poflibly conceive the action of any 
fubterraneous vapours to produce fuch an effe@ fo inftanta- 
neoufly? How came it to pafs, that the whole country of 
Afia Minor was not at the fame time deftroyed, its moun- 
tains reverfed, its fountains and fprings broken up, and ruin- 
ed for ever, and the courfe of its rivers quite changed? Whereas, 
nothing fuffered but the cities. There was no kind of alter- 


ation in the furface of the country, which, indeed, remains 


the fame to this day. 
To make the hypothefis of fubterraneous vapours, &c. be- 
ing the caufe of earthquakes the more improbable, he ob- 


‘ ferves, that any fubterraneous power, fufficient to move a 


furface of earth thirty miles in diameter, as in the earthquakes 
which happened at London, mutt be lodged at leaft fifteen or 
twenty miles below the furface of the earth, and therefore 
muft move an inverted cone of folid earth, whofe bafis is 

thirty 


384. Tue THEORY of Parr I. 


thirty miles in diameter, and axis fifteen or twenty miles; an 
effect which, he fays, no natural power could produce. 

Upon the fame principle, the fubterraneous caufe of the 
earthquake in Afia Minor muft have moved a cone of earth 
of 300 miles in bafe and 200 in the axis; which, he fays, all 
the gunpowder which has ever been made fince the invention 
of it would not have been able to ftir, much lefs any vapours, 
which could be fuppofed to be generated fo far below the 
furface, 

Ir is not upon the principles of any fubterraneous explo- 
fion that we can, in the leaft, account for the manner in 


which fhips, far from any land, are affected during-an earth- — 


quake; which feem as if they ftruck upon a rock, or as if 
fomething thumped againft their bottoms. Even the fithes 
are affected by an earthquake. This ftroke, therefore, mutt 
be occafioned by fomething that could communicate motion 


‘with unfpeakably greater velocity than any heaving of the 


earth under the fea, by the elafticity of generated vapours. 
. This could only produce a gradual fwell, and could never 
give fuch an impulfe to the water, as would make it feel like 
a ftone. 

Comparine all thefe circumftances, he fays, he had al- 
ways thought, that an earthquake was an electrical thock, of 
the fame nature with thofe which are now become familiar 
in eletrical experiments. And this hypothefis he thought 
was confirmed by the phenomena preceding and attending 
earthquakes, particularly thofe which o¢cafioned this publi- 
gation, 

THE 


q 
> 


Per. X. Sec. XII. © EARTHQUAKES. 385 


' ‘Tue weather, for five or fix months before the firft of 
thefe earthquakes, had been dry and warm to an extraordinary 
degree, the wind generally South and South Weft, and that 


- without rain; fo that the earth muft have been in a ftate of 


eleétricity ready for that particular vibration in which ele@tri- 
fication confifts. On this account, he obferves, that the 
Northern regions of the world are but little fubject to earth- 
quakes in comparifon with the Southern, where the warmth 
and drynefs of the air, fo neceflary to electricity, are common. 
All the flat country of Lincolnfhire before. the earthquake in 
September, though, underneath, it is a watery bog, yet, 
through the whole preceding fummer and autumn, (as they 
can have no natural fprings in fuch a level) the drought had 
been fo great on the furface of the earth, that the inhabitants 
were obliged to drive their cattle feveral miles to. water. 
This, he fays, fhows how fit the dry furface was for an elec- 
trical vibration ; and alfo, which is of great importance, that 
earthquakes reach but very little below the furface of the 
earth. 
Berore the earthquake at London, all vegetables had been 
uncommonly forward. “At the end of February, ‘in that 
year, all forts of garden ftuff, fruits, flowers, and trees were 
obferved to be as forward as, in other years, about the middle 
of April ; and eleétricity is well known to quicken vegetation. 
Tue Aurora Borealis had been very frequent about’ the 
fame time, and had been twice repeated juft before the earth- 
quake, of fuch colours as had never'been feen before. It had 
alfo removed to the South, contrary to what is common in 
Ddd England ; 


386 Tue THEORY or .. Partlh. 


England ; fo that fomerItalians, and peopleifrom’ other. places 
where earthquakes are frequent, obferving thefe lights, ,and 
the peculiar temperature of the air, did actually, foretell .the 
earthquake. For a fortnight before the‘earthquake in Sep_ 
tember, the weather was. ferene, mild, and calm; ,and,, 
one evening, there was a deep red Aurora Borealis, covering 
the cope of heaven, | very terrible to, behold. 05.52 gypsy A 

Tue whole year had: been exceedingly eee itle for 
fire balls, thunder, lightning, and corufcations, almoft 
throughout all England... Fire balls were more thanjonce 
{een in Ireland, and Lincolnfhire, ‘and particularly. obferved, 
And all thefe kinds of meteors, the Doétor fays, are rightly 
judged to proceed from the electrical ftate of the atmofphere. 

In thefe previous circumftances of the ftate of the earth 
and air, nothing, he fays, is wanting to. produce; the wonder- 
ful effect of an earthquake, but the touch .of fome non-elec- 
tric. body ;, which muft neceffarily, be had a extra, from the ~ 
region of the air, or atmofphere. Hence, he infers that, if 
a non-electric cloud difcharge its contents upon any part of 
the earth, in that highly electrical ftate, an, earthquake muft 
neceflarily. enfue. As the difcharge from an excited tube. 
produces a commotion in the, human body, fo the difcharge 
of electric, matter from. the compafs of many miles of folid 
earth muft needs be an. earthquake, and the fnap from the 
contaét be the horrid-uncouth noife\attending it. ie : 

Tur Door had been informed, , by, thofe who were up, 
and abroad the night preceding the earthquake, and early, 


in the morning, that corufcations in,the air were extremely, _ 


frequent ; 


Pex. XuSec.XI. | EARTHQUAKES, 387 


_ frequent ; and. that, a little before the earthquake, a large 
and black ‘cloud: fuddenly covered’ the atmofphere, whicli 
probably occafioned ‘the thock, by the difcharge of a thower. 

Dr. Childrey, he fays, obferves, that earthquakes: are always 
preceded by rain, and fudden Abie of rain in times of 
great draught. 

A souND) was hbbebeed to roll Selen ae tiver Thames to- 
wards Temple Bar, before the houfes ceafed to nod, juft as 
the eleétrical {nap precedes the fhock. This noife, an ob- 
ferver) faid, was much greater than any he had ever heard. 
Others, who write upon earthquakes,’ commonly. obferve, 
that the noife precedes the fliock : whereas it muft have been 
quite the contrary, if the concuffion had depended upon a 
_ fubterraneous eruption. This noife attending earthquakes» 
the Dogor thought, could not be accounted for, but upon the 
principles of electricity... The earthquake in September was 
attended with a rufhing noife, as if houfes were ‘falling, and 
people, in fome plates, were fo univerfally frighted, as'to 
runout of their houfes, imagining that their own, and thofe 
of their neighbours were tumbling: on their heads.: In fome 
villages, ithe people, being at divine-fervice, were much a- 
larmed. with the noife 3) which they faid, beyond: all compari 
fon, exceeded all the thunder: they had ever heard. 

Tue flames and fulphureous fmells, which are fometimes 
obferved during earthquakes, the Doctor thought were more 
eafily accounted for, from the fuppofition of their being elec- 
trical. phenomena, than from: their being occafioned by the 
eruption of any'thing from the bowels of the earth. 

Dddz2 Tue 


i 


. 


388 2 Tae UPHEORY: or JI oo'Pkatof 
THe impreffion made by an earthquake upon land and wa- 


ter, ‘to the greateft diftances.is, as was obferved before, inftan- 
taneous ;, which could only be effected by eleGtricity. In 
the earthquake in September, the concuflion-was felt through 
a {pace of 109 miles in length, and forty in breadth ;\ and, 
as far as could be judged, at the fame inftant of time. |) That 
this tract of ground, which amounted to 4000 fquare miles 
in farface, fhould be thrown into fuch agitation in a moment; 
is fuch a prodigy, the Doctor fays, as we could never believe, 
or conceive, did we.not know it to be fa@ from our fenfes. 
But if we feck the folution of it, we cannot think. any natu-~ 
ral power equal to it, but that of electricity ; which acknow- 
ledges no fenfible tranfition of time, no bounds. ip 

Tue little damage generally done by earthquakes, the 


Doétor thought to be an argument of their being occafioned - 


by a fimple vibration, or tremulous motion of the furface of 
the earth, by an eleétrical fuap. This vibration, he fays, 
imprefled on the water, meeting with the folid bottoms of 
fhips, and lighters, occafions that thump which is faid to be 
felt by them: yet, of the millions of ordinary houfes, over 
which it paffed, not one fell. A confideration which fafti- 
eiently points out what fort of a motion this was not; alfo 
what fort of a motion it was, and whence derived; not a 
convulfion in the bowels of the earth, but an uniform vibra- 
tion along its furface, like that of a mufical ftring, or what 
we put a drinking glafs into, by rubbing ‘one’s finger on the 
edge; which yet, being brought toa certain pitch, breaks 
the glafs ; undoubtedly, he adds, an electrical repulfion of its 
parts. 

Tuar 


\ 

, 
é 
r 


Per(XJSec. XI. “> EARTHQUAKES. 389 


< Twat earthquakes are eleCtrical phenomena, is further. evi- 
dent from their: chiefly affecting the fea coaft, places along 
rivers, and; I-may iadd, eminences.’ The earthquake in 
September {pread: moftly to the North and South ;, which the 
Doétor fays-is the dire¢tion! of the Spalding river; whereby it 
was conveyed to the fea fhore, where it»was particularly:fen- 
fible ; thence up Bofton channe];: and fo up “Bofton’ river to 
Lincoln. The greateft part of thisearthquake difplayed its 
effects along, “and between the two rivers’ Welland, and 
Avon, and thatefromtheir fources down to their mouths. It 
likewife reached» the ‘river, Witham;’ which» dire&ted’ the 
electrical ftream that: way ialfo-to Lincoln: for which reafon, 
meeting the fame coming from Bofton, ‘it was moft: fenfibly 
felt there. It reached, likewife, to the- eet at sae 
ham, which conveyed it to:Newark. » # 2o9achonw 

. Tue firft electrical ftroke in this ichthicabes foemaled: to ‘de 
Doétor ‘to have been made on the high ground-about Daventry 
in Northamptonfhire... From thence: it defcended chiefly 
Eaftward, and along the river Welland, from Harborough, 
to) Stamford;: Spalding, and the fea; and alongithe ‘river 
Avon and Nen to Northampton, Peterborough, Wifbich, and 
the fea: It fpread ‘itfelf all over the vaft level of the ifle of 
Ely, promoted by a great number of canals; natural and artifi- 
cial, made for draining that country. It was {till condu@ed 
Eaftward; by Mildenhall river in Suffolk, to Bury, and the 
parts adjacent. All thefe circumftances duly confidered were 
to hima. confirmation ‘of ‘the :doétrine he advanced on this 
fubject. 

Last Ly, 


390 » Tue THEORY or (0. Parr h 


Lastxy; the Doétor adds, as a further argument in,favour 
of his hypothefis, that pains in the back, theumatic, hyfteric, 
and neryous cafes; headaches, cholics, &c. were felt by 
many people of ‘weak. conftitutions,''for 4 day or two after 
the earthquake ;" juft as they: would aca aan CINS: a 


to fome, 'thefe diforders proved fatali #2) 21) 0) )s,s 
» In what manner the .earth and! a) actahipionee dientont into 
tliat ele&trical and vibratory | ftate, which prepares them to 


give or receive that {nap and fhock, which we call an earth- 
quake,.and whence itis that this electric: matter ¢omes; the 
Doétor does not' pretend to fay ; but thinks it as-difficult, to 
account for as ‘magnetifm, ‘gravitation,’ ere ears me 
many otherrecrets in nature. #00 | io) a 

To thefe. valuable obfervations: of Dr.. Stukeley, Thal add 
fome circumftances which ‘were  obferved yby Di.iHales;) in 
the .earthquake! at’ London,’ on ‘March: the 8th! \1749);\ as 
tending ‘to ftrengthen the hypothefis of its being caufed by 
electricity ;: though the Doctor, ‘who relates them, thought 
that the electric appearances were -only “occafioned by ‘the 
great -agitation which the:electric: fluid was put intos: by the 
thock! of fo’ great aomafs of thecarthaivio! oF noV bus inavA 

Ar the*time of the earthquake, about twenty athinutés bé+ 
fore fix.in the morning, the Doctor, being awake in-bed, on 
a ground, floor, at a houfe near the; church, \of St...Martin’s 
in the: fields, ‘very fenfibly felt his bedtheave, and heard anjob+ 
feure'rnphing noife fin the houfe, which ended .in»aloud exy 
plofien up-in-the air, Jikerthat ofa fmallicannon. , The, whole 

* Phil. Tranf. abridged, Vol. 10. p. 526, 535, and p. 541, 551+ . 

duration, 


Pex’ X. Sec. XI.° EARTHQUAKES. 391 


_ehilledeeaa e Dapbetig’ es hie cia Retin Ww BEABCA 


fou? Reonds. bne:etis.ods ofni.yow: atic gaisnd biok ods. yi 


Paid gread olfes the Dodtor” conjectured, ‘was owing’ to 


the ‘rothing, “ot ‘ilden exparfion of the aeGtric Avid at the 
top ‘of St.’ Mirtin’s fpite,'wliere “all the ‘electric ‘eMluvia, 
which afdetited™ along’ the large “Body ‘of the” tower, "being 
ftrorigly Conideiifed, “and! accelerated’ at’ the poitit of the wea. 
thercock, as they rufhed off, made fo much the louGee ee 


paative explotion. 2". B ovadl oo ; 
ac a ee the foldiers, who were upoa 
ality in! SE 'Jainies's” pale, ahd other” perfons whb'wete then 
‘up, fiw a’blackifh’ Goud, and’ a°confiderable lightning, jut 
before the earthquake began. * ofits to 249 ainans siaed 
© ‘My ‘reader, who has feen to’ how great an extent Signiot 
Beccaria has ‘already carried the principles’ of eleétricity, will 
have no doubt but that he’ fuppofes earthquakes to Be derived 
from ‘that caufe. And indeed,’ without ‘any knowledge of 
what Dr. Stukéléy had done, he did fiippofe thetn t6 be elec 
trical’ phenomena ; but, contrary to the Doétor, imagined 
the eleétric' matter which occafioned them to be lodged deep 
in the bowels of the earth, ‘agreeable to his hypothefis ¢on- 
cerning the origin of lightning. ©" 
Ir is certain that if Signior Beccaria’s account of the origin 
of thunder clouds’ be admitted, there-will Be little difficulty 
in admitting further, that earrbzuakes are to be reckoned a- 
mong the effedts of ele@tricity. For if the equilibrium of 
the electric matter can, by any means, be loft in- the bowels 


WA ST 


* Phil. Tranf. abridged, Vol. 10. p. 540, 541. c 
+2) 


392 pa Fae; TREORY ‘or; . Parr 


of the earth; fo that the beft method of reftoringit thall, be a 
by the fluid burfting its way into the air, and traverfing fe- 

veral miles of the atmofphere, to come to the place where it 

is wanted; it may eafily be imagined, that violent concuffions 

may be given to the earth, by the fudden paffage of this 

powerful agent. And feveral circumftances attending earth- 

quakes he thought rendered this bron by no means im- 


probable. tr 
Vorcanos are known to have a near ceaaiuntiteen: with éf 
earthquakes ; and flathes of light, exactly refembling light- fl 


ning, have frequently been {een to ruth from the top of mount 
Vefuvius, at the time that afhes and other light matter have 
been carried out of it into the air, and been difperfed uni- 
formly over a large tract of country. Of thefe he produces a 
great number of inftances, from the beft authority.* 

A RUMBLING noife, like thunder, is generally heard during 
an earthquake. At fuch times, alfo, .flafhes of, light have 
been feen rifing out of the ground, and darting up into the 
air. Real lightning hath fometimes occafioned {mall thakings 
of the earth, at leaft has been attended by them, . But the 
ftrongeft circumftance of refemblance which he obferved is 
the fame that Dr. Stukeley lays fo much ftrefs on, viz. the 
amazing, fwiftnefs with which the earth is thaken i in earth- 
quakes. An earthquake, fays he, is by no means a gradual ; 
heaving, as we might*haye expected from other caufes, sate iene 
an inftantaneous concuflion, fo that the fluidity of the w 
is no fecurity againft the blow. The very thips, many | ai 
gues off the coaft, feel as if they itruck rien a rock. 


* Lettere dell’ ellettricifmo, p. 226, i &e. 


Per.X.Sec,.X0y 9 EARTHQUAKES. 393 


) > Tuas. admirable philofopher, having imitated! all the great 
_ phenomena of /natural electricity in his own room, doth not 
let ;the. earthquake efeape: him. He fays, that if two pieces 
_ of glafs;_ inclofing a thin piece of metal, be held in the hand, 
_ while large thock,is fent through them, a ftrong: vibration, 
_ or concuffion will, be felt; which ee as inyDr. Ror: 
lin's $ experiments, | breaks them to pieces. » hy ? 

Sicwior Beccarta thinks, that. here at are traces of rn 
“trical operations in the earthquake, that happened at. Julian’ s 
attempt to rebuild the temple of Jerufalem. * | 

ie ‘Tuan, the eleétric fluid. is fometimes collegted. in ‘the 

bowels of the earth, he, thought was probable from. the -ap- 
_Pearance’ of igues.fatui.in mines, which, fometimes, hap- 

_ pens ;,,and is very probably an jeleCtrical phenomenon, + 
. Wuicu, of thefe two iphilofophers. haye advanced the more 
Deeheele Opinion concerning the feat of the eleétric matter 
»which  occafions'earthquakes, I fhall notpretend to decide. 
I fhall only obferye that;: perhaps, a more probable general 
hypothefis than either of them may |be formed out of them 
both. , Suppofe the ele@tric matter to be, fome way-or other, 
_accumulated on one. part of the.furface of the earth, and, on 
account of the drynefs of the feafon, not eafily to diffule it- 
felf; it may, as Signior Beccaria fuppofes, force itfelf a way 
into the higher regions of the air, forming clouds in its paf- 
fage out of the vapours which float.in the atmofphere, and 
occafion a fudden fhower, which may further promote the 


* Lettere dell’ clettricifmo, p. 363. + Dell’ Elettricifino artificiale e naturale, p. 223. 
; «Beye paflage 


394 ANCIENT ELECTRICAL Pacer: 


paflage of the fluid. The whole furface, thus unloaded, will 
receive a concuffion, like any other conduéting fubftance on 
parting with, or receiving a quantity of the eleétric fluid, 
The rufhing noife will, likewife, {weep over the whole ex- 
tent of the country. And, upon this fuppofition, alfo, the 
fluid, in its difcharge from the country, will naturally follow 
the courfe of the rivers, and alfo take the advantage of any 
eminencies, to facilitate its afcent into the higher regions of 
the air. ; 

I suaxt clofe this account of the theory of lightning, and 
other phenomena of the atmofphere, with an enumeration of 
the principal appearances of natural eledtricity obferved by 
the antients, and which were never underftood before the 
difcovery of Dr. Franklin. It will be very eafy for me to do 
this, as I find them already collected to my hands by Dr. 
Watfon. * 

A LuMINoUs appearance, which muft have been of an 
cle@rical nature, is mentioned by Plutarch in his life of Ly- 
fander. .He confidered it as a meteor. 

Purny, in his fecond book of natural hiftory, bathe thofe 
appearances lars, and tells us, that they fettled not only up- 
on the mafts, and other parts of fhips; but alfo upon men’s 
heads. Ex/ifunt, fays that hiftorian, ffelle et in mari terrif- 
que. Vidi noéturnis militum vigiliis inberere pilis pro vallo ful- 
gorem effigie ea: et antennis navigantium, aliifque navium par- 
tibus, ceu vocali quodam fono infiftunt, ut volucres, fedem ex fede 
mutantes. Gemine autem falutares et profperi curfus pra- 


* Phil. Tranf. Vol. 48. pt. 1, p. 210. ‘ 
NUECIA 5 


Per. X.Sec.XIl. APPEARANCES. 395 


nuncia ; quarum adventu, fugari diram illam ac minacem appel- 
Zatamque Helenam ferunt. Et 0b id Polluci et Caftori id numen 
- affignant, eofque in mari deos invocant.' Hominum quoque capiti 
wefpertinis boris, magno prafagio.circumfulgent. _ But, adds he, 
thefe things ate incerta ratione et in nature majeftate abdita. 
_ Srars make their appearance both at land and fea. I 
«© have feen alight in that form on the fpears of foldiers, 
*«* keeping watch by night upon the ramparts. _ They are feen 
¢« alfo on the failyards, and other parts of hips, making an au- 
_« dible found, and frequently changing their places. Two of 
*< thefe lights forebode good weather, and a profperous voyage; 
*« and drive away one that appears fingle, and wears a threat- 
“« ning afpect,. This the failors call Helen, but the fsa they 
** call Caftor and Pollux, and invoke them as Gods. | Thefe: 
** lights do fometimes, about the evening, reft.on men’s 
** heads, and are a great and good cine But thefe are a- 
**; mong the awful myfteries of nature.’ 

Seneca in his Natural/Queftions, chap. I. takes notice 

of the fame phenomenon. Gylippo, Syracufas petenti vifa 
ft fella Supra ipfam lancem conflitifz. In Romanorum caftris 

vifa funt ardere pila, ignibus fcilicet in illis delapfis. 

of AsTAR fettled.on the lance of Gylippus, as he was 

« failing to Space; and {pears have feemed to be on fire'in 

‘*, the Roman camp.” 

In Cefar de Bello Africano, cap: 6. edit. Amftel. 1686. 
We find them attending a violent ftorm. | Per id tempus fere 
Cafaris exercitui res accidit incredibilis auditu; nempe Virgili- 
arum figno confecto, circiter vigilia fecunda noétis, nimbus cum 

Ep cit 2 Jaxea 


396 ANCIENT “BLECTRICAL >: Parrl 


Jaxea grandine fubito eft coortus ingens. »Eadem mee! legionis Ve : 
pilorum cacumina fua fponte arferunt. 02 sooo, aye \. 
«« AzourT that time, there-wasia viyennbetileed appear 
«-aneé in the army of Czfar. In the month of February,’ 
«« about the fecond watch of the night, there fuddenly arofé) 
“¢ a thick cloud; followed -by a thower of oftones ; “and the 
‘+ faine night, the points of the {pears belonging to thefifth’ 
“* legion feemed to'take fire! ju 859 (8 Cove gniqeed » 
Livy, cap. 32; mentions two fimilar facts. In Sicilia mi 
Iitibus aliquot fpicula, in Sardinia muro circumeunti vi mgt wi ie 
ti, feipionem, i ia manu widaside aefifes et ris, 
ignibus fulfffe. ; RO YOWE gird hoe ** 
«Tue {pears pe fohie! foldiers ie Sicily and a walking’ 
“© ftick, which a horfeman in Sardinia was holding in’ his 
«« hand, feemed tobe on fire. The thores were alfo luminous’ 
«« with frequent fires. 0 Soy Lae boy 6 oe Une ohne 
Tues appearances are called, both by the French and Spani-’ 
ards, inhabiting the coafts of the Mediterranean, St. Helne’s, 
or St. Telme’s fires; by.the Italians the fires of St.Peter;'and’ 
St.\-Nicholas 5+ and ‘are Reiner taken’ notice of, by» the: 
writers of voyages: ©) ss OA hig Helles Lain? ee i 
Tr fome late accounts’ eet France, adds the’Do@or, ‘dre. 
tobe depended upon, this phenoménon; has been obferved at’ 
Plauzet for time immemorial, and Mr. Binon, the curéiof 
the place, fays, that for twenty feven’ years;! hich: Helis’ ray, 
refided theré, in‘greatdtorms pata etic Re 
and frequent lightnings, the three pointed extremities of 
crofs of the fteeple of ‘that place appeared furrounde 
body of flame ; and that when this aetesncusiat has Heal feen 5 


Pen Kee. 3 XU, APPEARANCES. 397- 


: ¢ ftorm was no longer to be dreaded, ery weather re- 
f Yosh off pact] nods Be secu! dag pay der my agaz rines, 


i oe ‘pinned ed metallic bodies, 
Beas: : 1 2 taken of thefe, 
while the cau Fe disia’ lneshidwn ¥¢ but fince their near 
te ae has been dteovered, they have been 
on t, 5 id re 

Se aM §o ‘au ae: Wa vnoutaweanO ; 
‘ak. RUT. HOA, he Aaniauus fayoge oT, PROF 


+ 


=* = 


om “Re Hits) she lit 


ee cats bofiangeah “el Roe 2aoi st rack aH? 
SSRN HP test ows stbenk WisiPele to esd? 
Sk j Ohi ostse eit gaivubet ebvawos snob tread and turkw 
“Sai os Sti9e8 Me E{ooele! MH oes wi (bn .s9i7 
»  Oh6ee ‘Gillie’ 137A oir gaiferier-obam sod ovorl: sect 
+ Siento po te aicadgil ciott egnibliud 21039) of nofub 
toni eenber ils aa mow neds mite aoRonnbs: 5) 
ROE STe oA Ee: D0 fs ig .gribaaeig 
ni in dots ‘ot bse enrerice wT a 
> YO sataatn! sears on lyd- sow geimedgif to eBsPahibasth 
‘ eee bapttireae doidw aft Qtialivh Inrove2 -.ysogdd2 nant 
|| Sa@ilite eiPesainodioh (qnisseeme] doisdw to beiteq oct 
ser ‘Silla ster ‘libsor wodtl worl! cnoiensatdo taaa nau ane 
) Ler o conn hdii'n seit wort ban Yetiintdgil Arbaos yileuh » 
+#9 AME, U8 40 poititnnup-meiy | Sqindi ot rnsivilu) at Isr 


rt ad-ot adhe W. 1 0 beilqas ebtevnoig: BQ’ T. LONI 
bocmot 


a 


SEC tT ON Sn. 
von Tifa sont tad: ¢ awondnn esw mda) Ao issp ia. oh 
sd yods. bsisyoslib aced: esd) enimdsd daw yaiath 
; bsRolfad baa .6f babasits oor 
OBSERVATIONS ON THE vse or METALLIC CONDUC- 
TORS To sEcuRE BUILDINGS, &c. FROM THE EFFECTS 
OF LIGHTNING, 


HE former fections of this period relate chiefly to the 
theory of electricity. In the two next I fhall confider 
what has been done towards reducing this {cience into prac- 
tice. And, in the firft place, I fhall recite the obfervations 
that have been made refpeGting the ufe of metallic con- 
duétors, to fecure buildings from lightning, as having the near- 
eft connecton with the fubje& of the fections immediately 
preceding. 

Dr. FRANKLIn’s propofal to preferve buildings from the 
dreadful effects of lightning was by no means a matter of 
mere theory. Several ftriking facts, which occurred within 
the period of which I am treating, demonftrate its utility. 

INNUMERABLE obfervations fhow how readily metallic rods 
actually conduct lightning, and how fmall a fubftance of me~ 
tal is fufficient to difcharge great quantities of it. Mr. Ca- 
lendrini, | who afterwards applied to Dr. Watfon, to be in- 

formed 


Ww 


Per. X. Sec. XIII. METALLIC CONDUCTORS. 399 


formed of the beft methods of fecuring powder magazines, 
-fays that he himfelf was an eye witnefs of the effect of a flath 
of lightning, where he obferved it had ftruck the wire of a 
bell, and had been completely conducted by it, from one 
room of a houfe to another, through a very {mall hole in the 
partition. This obfervation was prior to the difcoveries of 
_Dr, Franklin, but was recollected and recorded afterwards.* 
Dr. Franktin himfelf, in a letter to Mr. Dalibard, dated 
Philadelphia, June the 2gth. 1755, relating what had been 
fhown him of the effects of lightning on the church of New- 
bury in New England, obferves; that a wire, not bigger than 
a common knitting, needle, did in fact conduc a flath of 
lightning, without injuring any part of the building as far as 
it went; though the force of it was fo great that, from the 
termination of the wire down to the ground, the fteeple was 
exceedingly rent and damaged, fome of the ftones, even in 
the foundation, being torn out, and thrown to the diftance 
of twenty or thirty feet.. No part of the wire, however, 
could be found, except about two inches at each extremity, 
the reft being exploded, and its particles diflipated in {moke 
and air, as the Doétor fays, like gunpowder by .a common 
. fire. It had only left a black fmutty track upon the plaifter 
of the wall along which it ran, three or four inches broad, 
darkeft in the middle, and fainter towards the edges... From 
the circumftances of this fact it was very evident, that, had 
the wire been continued, to. the foot of the building, the 
whole fhock would have been conduéted without the leaft in- 
Jury to it, though the wire would have been deftroyed. * 


* Phil. Tranf. Vol. 54. pt. 1. p. 203. 
Bur 


goo. Tue USE or Part I, 


Burithe moft complete ‘demonftration of the ‘real'ufe of Dt. 
Franklin's method of fecuring buildings from ‘the effets: ‘of 
lightning, ‘is. Mr. ‘Kinnerfley's account of what happened to 
the houfe of Mr. Weft, a ‘merchant of Philadelphia i in Penfil- 
“vania, -which'was guardédiby an appatatus conftruéted accord_ 
ing to the direétions of Dr. Fravklin:  Itconfifted of an’ iton 
rod): which-extended: about? nine feet “ahd an half above ‘a 
‘ftack-of chimnies, to which it was fixed. | It-was more than 
half an inch in diameter in the thicket, party and went ta- 
pering to the upper end, in’ which there was ai hole that're- 
ceived a brafs wire about three ‘lines thick ‘afd ‘teh’ inches | 
long, terminating in’a Very acute ‘point. \'The lower ‘part of i 
- the apparatus tig to an inom fakes driven four or five feet +. dm 
into'the ground. | L oils guests gan ial 

“MR West jedgtng, by the dreadful flath’ ‘oP Iightniivgrand 

© inftant crack of thunder, thatethe condudtor ‘had \been: firack, 
» got’ itexamined 5 when:it appeared that the:top: of the point- 
ed rod‘was melted, and the {mall brafs wire reduced ‘to feven 
inches and a half in length, with its \top) very-blunt.)\'The 
- flendereft part of the wire, he fufpeéted, had) ‘been diffipated : 
infmoke; but fome of it, where the! wire was 4 little thick-_ 
et, being only melted by the lightning,” funk down (while in’ 
‘a fluid -ftate) and formed a rough irregular cap,' lower-on one 
fide than on the’other, round the upper end of what remain- _ 
-ed,.and becaine intimately united withits»Itisiremarkable, 
that," notwithftanding the iron ftake,\in which the apparatus ie 
sedtaihvanbds was is driven three: or tout feet into the ground, met ae 


Sor 5 eu 


é 


* Phil ‘Trt Vol. 49 Pe 1, ee 309. 


Prk. X. Sec. XIII. METALLIC CONDUCTORS. 4or 


the earth’ ‘did not condué the lightning fo fait, but that, in 
thunder ftorms, the lightning ‘would be feen diffufed ‘near 
the ftake two, ‘or ‘three’ yards’ over the aatrag though o 
= time very ‘wet with’ rain. * 

“Iw order to fecure fhips from faftaining diintsige by light. 
ning,” Dr. Watton, ina letter to Lord Anfon, read at the 
Royal Society, December the 16th. 1762}° advifes, that a 
rod of copper, about the thicknefs of a goofe quill, be con- 
negted with the fpindles and iron work of the maft; and, 
being’ continued down to the deck, be from thence, in any 
convenient direétion, {6 hr sit as <b to touch the fea 
water. Per a 

Wirn refpect to senaes magazines, Dr. Wation advited 
Mr. Calandrini above-mentioned, that the apparatus to con- 
dué the lightning from themy be detached from the eres 
themfelves, and- conveyed to the next water. 

Wear lately happened to St. Bride’s church in London is 
a fufficient proof of the utility of metallic éonduétors for light- 
ning. | Dr. Watfon, who’ publifhed an account of this fac in 
the Philofophical Tranfactions, obferves, that the lightning 
firft’ took ‘a weathercock, which was fixed at the top of the 
fteeple’; “and was conduéted without injuring the metal, or 
any thing’ elfe, as low as'where the large iron: bar ‘or {pindle 
which fupported it (and which came down feveral feet into 
the top of the fteeple) terminated. “There, the metallic 
coimmiunication ceafing, eae of the lightning exploded; 


* Phil Trapf. Vol. 53. pt. 1,p.96. + Ib. Vol. 52. pt.:z. p. 633. 
Ba ft cracked» 


402° THe USE, orn; yyy 5.-Part 


cracked, and fhattered the; obelifk, : which. terminated t the 
{pire of the fteeple, in its whole diameter, and. threw off at 
that place feveral large pieces of Portland ftone, of which the 
fteeple was built. Here it likewife, removed,a ftone from, its 
place; but.not far, enough) to be thrown down. From. thence 
the lightning feemed to have rufhed upon two horizontal iron 
bars, which’ were placed within the. building crofs,each.o+ 
ther, to give additional ftrength to the obelifk, almoft,at the 
bafe of it, and'not much above the upper ftory, At the end 
of one of theft iron bars, on the Eaft and North Eaft. fide, it 
exploded again,: and threw off a confiderable quantity. of ftone: 


Almoft all the damage done to the fteeple, except near the top, - 


was confined to the'Eaft and North Eaft fide, and generally, 


where the ends of the iron bars had been inferted into the 


ftone, or placed under it; and, in fome places, by its vio- 
lence in the ftone, its paflage might be traced from one iron 
bar to another. rig AR ORL: 

Ir is very remarkable, that,, to lefien the quantity ¢ ‘of ‘ftone 
in this beautiful fteeple, cramps of iron had been employed 
in feyeral parts of it; and) upon thefe, ‘ftones, of, no) great 
thicknefs had been placed, . both by way of ornament, and to 
cover the cramped joint. In feveral places thefe ftones had 
on account of their covering the iron, been quite blown off 
and thrown away. A great number of ftones, fome, of them 
large ones, were thrown from the fteeple, three of which fell 
upon the roof of the church, and did great damage. to.its and 
one of them broke through the large timbers Mir Yikes 
the roof, and lodged in the gallery.» 


Urox ji 


| 
a | 


PER. X. Sec. XIII. METALLIC CONDUCTORS. 403 


Upon the whole, ‘the was found, on a furvey, to 
be *fo ‘much "damaged in {everal of its-parts, that eighty five 
feet weretaken down, in ordet to teftore it fubftantially ; and’ 
the manner in’ which ‘this’ fteeple was damaged completely 
indicated, as Dr: Watfon-obferves, the’ great danger of in- 
falatedtaffes of metal'from lightning; and; on the contrary; 
evinced the utility and importance of maffes of metal conti- 
nued, ‘and properly“ conduéted, “in defending them from its 
direfal effects. The iron‘and lead employed in this fteeple, 
in order to’ ftrengthen‘ and) preferve it, did almoft ‘occafion its’ 
defttuétion ; though, ‘after’ itwas’ fruck’ by the lightning, 
had°it not been for: thefe° materials keeping the remaining 
parts together, a great part of the fteeple ‘muft have fallen. 
Tunis building Suffered the more, on’account of the thunder 
ftorm having’ been preceded by feveral very warm days. The 
nights /hadi{earte furnithed any dew; the ait was quite dry, 
and in'aftate-perfedly’ unfit’ to’ part°with its highly accumu~ + 
lated cle@tridity’ without violent efforts: “This great drynefs 
had» made! the ftones “of “St. ‘Bride’s fteeple, and: all other 
buildings “under the “like cireuniftances, far lef fit, than if 
they had'been'in’ a’moitt ftite, to condud the lighthing; “and 
prevent the mifchief.. For, though this ‘thunder! ftorm ended 
in’ aheavy fhower of rain, none, except a few very” large 
drops, fell till after the church was ftruck. And Dr. Watfon: 
had ‘Ho doubt} ‘but that'the fiicteeditig rain prevented ‘many 
accidents of a fimilat Kind, by? bringing down; ‘with every 
drop of'it,’ part'of’ the electric matter, and thereby reftoring 
the equilibrium between the earth and ‘clouds. 

Ir is frequently obférved, he fays, that, in attending to 

Fff. the 


404 Tue USE. or Part, Iv 


the apparatus for collecting the ele¢tricity of the .clonds, 
though the fky is much darkened,» and;there have been feve- 
ral claps of thunder, at no great. diftance, yet, the appa- 
ratus will fcarcely be affected by it; ,but.that, .as foon-as 
the rain begins and falls upon fo much of the, apparatus asiis. 
placed in the open air, the bells belonging. to, it) will)ring, 
and the eleétrical {naps faucceed each other ina very exttaordi~ 
nary manner. This, as he obferves, demonftrates, that every 
drop of rain brings down part of the eleétric matter of a thun- 
der cloud and diffipates it in the earth,and water, thereby: 
preventing the mifchiefs of its, violent and fudden explofion:, 
Hence when the heavens have.a ROE RENE ARPS RY a fhow-' 
er of rain is much to be withed for, , Fe sarsehe tdi 


_ From all thefe confiderations, Dr. Watfon had no doubt, - 


but that the mifchief done to St. Bride’s fteeple'was owing to- 
the efforts of the lightning, after it had. poffefied the appara- 
,tus of the weathercock, endeavouring to force itfelf a paflage 
from thence to the iron work employed in the fteeple. | As 


this muft be done per faltum, as he exprefies it, there being 
no regular metallic communication, it was no wonder, when’ 


its force was vehement, that it rent every thing which was 
not metallic that obftructed its eafy paflage ; and that, in this 
particular inftance, the ravages increafed, as the lightning,. to 


acertain diftance, came down the fteeple. 4), > hee. 


Tur Doétor advifes that, in order,to. have ocular demon- 


{tration when thefe metallic, condndiens do really ‘difcharge the. { 
lightning, that they be difcontinued. for -an inch or ‘two, in 


fome place convenient for obfervation ; in which cafe the. fire 


will be feen to jump from one extremity, of the wire to the. 
other. 


Per. X:Sec. XIN. METALLIC CONDUCTORS. 405 


other. If any danger be apprehended from this difcontinu- 
ance of the metallic conduétor, he fays that a loofe chain may 
be ready to bang on, and complete 'the communication. * | 
- Mr. Deravat, who. alfo. gives an account of the fame 
accident, obferved, that, in every part of the building that 
was damaged, the lightning had aéted as an elaftic fluid, en- 
deavouring to -expand itfelf where it was accumulated in the 
metal; and that the effects were exactly fimilar to thofe which 
would have been produced by aanpowrier ee "P in she fe 
places, and exploded. 

\oIy the fame paper Mr. Delayal gives it as his opinion, that 

_awite, or very {mall rod of metal, did not feem to have been 

a canal fufficiently large to conduct fo great a quantity, of 
lightning as ftruck this fteeple; efpecially if any part of it, or 
of the metal communicating. with it; was inclofed in the 
ftone work; in which: cafe, he thought, the application of 
it would tend to increafe its bad effects, by conducting ‘it to, 
parts of the building which it might otherwife not have 
reached.) » Is 

-Uron the whole, he’ thought that a conductor of metal, 
lefs than fix or eight inches in breadth, and a quarter of an 
inch in thicknefs' (or an equal quantity of metal in any other 
form that might be found more convenient) cannot with 
fafety be depended on, where buildings are) expofed to the 
reception of a great quantity of lightning. + 
; Mr. Witson,) ina, paper written upon the fame occafion, 
advifes, that pointed. bars or rods of metal be avoided in all 
conductors of lightning. 


* Phil. Tranf. Vol. 54. p. 201, &c. + Ib. Vol. 54. p. 234. 
; As 


406 Tne USE or = © Part I. 


As the lightning, he fays, muft vifit us fome’ way or other, 
from neceffity, there can be no reafon to invite it at‘all ; but, 
on the contrary, when it happens to attack our buildings,'we 
ought only fo to contrive our apparatus, as to be’able to carry 
the lightning away again, by fuch fuitable conductors, as 
will very little, if at all, promote any increafe’of its quantity: 

To attain this defirable end, in fome degree’ ‘at! ‘leatt, ‘he 
propofes, that the feveral buildings remain as the ne at the 
top; that is,’ without having any metalabove | » either 
pointed or not, by way of conduétor ; but’that, on vibe infide 


of the higheft part of the building, within’ a/foot or'two of | 


the top, a rounded bar of metal be fixed, and continued down 
along the fide of the tresane to any kind e erp isc mee 
ground. * naidtedéy 

SIGNIOR™ Beevitncai whiofe obvlernatioan sini spitlagie 
with refpect to lightning give a weight toy his opinion fwpe+ 


rior to that of any other man whatever; feems! torthink very _ 
differently from Mr. Wilfon on this fubje@. “He: fays that _ 
no metallic apparatus can attrac&t more lightning thamit.can 
conduct. And fo far is he from thinking one*conduétor, - 


rounded at'the top, and a foot ortwo under the roof: fuffici+ 
ent; that ifi the building be of any extent, he advifes to have 
feveral of the ufual form; that: is, pointed, and higher than 
the building. » One conductor he thought fufficient for‘one | 
tower, fteeple, or fhip; but ‘he? ‘thought, two neceffary for 
the wing of a building 200 feet long;jone at each extreniity 

three for two fuch wings, the third being’ reccimairsiesia 


* Phil. Tranf. Vol. 54. Pp rg 


i 


Sigh io ied “pada 


ee ee ee gr 


Peri X!Sec. XIII. METALLIC CONDUCTORS. 407 


dle; and four for a fquare palace of the fame front, one at 
each corner. * feck 

My readers at a diftance from London will hardly believe 
ame, when I inform them, that the elegant {pire which has 
been the fubject of a great part of this fe€tion, and which 
has been twice damaged by lightning (for it is now very pro- 
bable, that a damage it received in the year 1750, was owing 
to the fame caufe) is now repaired, without any metallic 

- conduétor, to guard it in cafe of a third ftroke. 


* Lettere dell’ ellettricifmo, p. 278. 


SECTION 


408 MEDICAL ~~ Paarl 


SEO Ti1 0 N26 XIWasi apse am, 


; chon 
¥R-GUS SRG ICR + 


Or MEDICaE PLECTRICITY. 


4 “8 


HE fubject of medical electricity falls almoft wholly 
within the period of which I am now treating. For, : 
though fome effects of electricity upon animal bodies had ok 
been noted by the Abbé Nollet, and a few difeafed. perfons — 
had faid they had received benefit from being electrified ; _ 
yet very little had been done this way, and phyficians had ~ 
fcarcely attended to it, till within this period; whereas elec- 
tricity is now become a confiderable article in the materia 
medica. ey 
TueRrE is, however, one celebrated inftance of the cure. al 
a palfy before this period ; which is that performed by Mr. | 
Jallabert, profeffor of Philofophy and Mathematics at Geneva, 
on a lockfmith, whofe right arm had been paralytic fif- 
teen years, occafioned by a.blow of a hammer. He was | 
brought to Mr. Jallabert on the 26th of December 1747, 
and was completely cured by the 28th of February 1748. In 
this 


PersX/Sec.XIV. ELECTRICITY. 409 


this interval he was frequently eleétrified, {parks being taken 
from the arm, and fometimes ssh eleatric fhock fent through 
iG. *.3 

Tue report of thie: cure performed at Geneva engaged Mr. 
Sauvages of the Academy in Montpelier to attempt the cure 
of paralytics, in which he had confiderable fuccefs. In one 
cafe it occafioned a falivation, and in another a profufe fweat. 

-Many paralytics, however, were electrified without any fuc- 
cefs. Indeed the prodigious concourfe of patients of all kinds, 
which the report of thefe cures brought together, was fo 
great, that few of them could be electrified, except very im- 
perfeétly. For two or three months together, twenty different 
patients were electrified every day. It is not furprifing to 
find, that the neighbouring populace confidered- thefe cures as 
an affair of witchcraft, and that the operators were obliged to 
have recourfe to their priefts to undeceive them. + In the 
courfe of thefe experiments it was found, by very accurate 
obfervations made with a pendulum, that electrification in- 
creafes the circulation of the blood about one fixth. 

Ong of the firft who attended to electricity in a medical 
way was Dr. Bohadtch, a Bohemian ; who, in a treatife upon 
medical electricity, communicated to the Royal Society, gave 
it as his opinion, after the refult-of much experience, that of 
all diftempers, the hemiplegia feemed to be the moft proper ob- 
ject of electricity. He alfo thought it might be of ufe in 
intermitting fevers. { 

Tue palfy having happened to be the firft diforder in which 


* Hiftoire, pt. 3. p.36. tb. p.97- Phil. Tranf. Vol. 47. P+ 351+ 
Ggeg electricity 


410 MEDICAL . Parrl 


ele&tricity gave relief, there, was a confiderable.number of 
cafes publithed pretty early, in which paralytics were faid:to 
have found benefit from this new method of treatment. In 
the year 1757, Mr. Patric Brydone performed a. complete: cure 
of a hemiplegia, and, indeed, an almoft univerfal paralytic 
affection, in, about) three days... The patient was a woman, 
aged thirty three, and, the palfy, was of|about:two:years con= 
tinuance. *,, And John Godfrey Tefke, very nearly:cured’a 
young man, of, the age of twenty, of a paralytic arm, of 
which, he ‘had not had. the leaft ufe from the age of five’years.- 
_ Tus. Abbé.Nollet’s experiments upon paralytics had no per= 
manent good effect, {) He obferves however that, during fifteen 
or, fixteen years that he had electrified all forts: of perfons,, 


he had known no one. bad effect to have arifen from. ‘it to 


any, of them. ||, ; fh 
Dr. Hart, ina letter to Dr. Watfon, dated Salop March 
the. 2oth. 1756, mentions,.a cure: performed by: eledtricity 
upon a woman of twenty three years-of age, whofe handiand) 
wrift had for fome. time been rendered ufelefs. by a. violent’ 
contraétion of the mufcles. . She was not fenfible of the: firft 
fhock that was. given her ;. but, as the (hocks were repeatedy 


the fenfation increafed,. till the was perfedtly well. She was: 


alfo, cured a fecond.time, after a relapfe oceafioned: by:acold: §i 
Bur perhaps, the moft remarkable cafe that has yet: occur. 


red of the ufe of electricity i in curing a! diforder of this hall yeh 


and indeed of any that is # incident to the human. 


ing n't 
* Phil, Trant. ve 50. pt. 1. p. 9, +Ib. Vol. ¢ Pe P. 179. hese aes || 
Ib. ol 4 


Js Ps 416. yt « 9+ Pte 2. p. 558. hen 


wae Rie 


kaif! 


7? 
Per. X: See. XIV. ELECTRICITY. arr 


that’ dréadful diforder, an univerfal ¢eranus. It is related ‘by 
Dr.) Watfon in the Philofophical Tranfaétions; ‘and the’ ac- 
count wag read at the Royal Society ‘the roth. of February 
1763. The patient was a girl belonging to the Foundling 
hofpital, about feven years of age, who was firft {eized with 
a diforder occafioned: by the worms, and at length by an uni- 
verfal rigidity of her mufcles;, fo that her whole body felt 
more like that of a dead animal than a living one. She had 
continued in this difmal condition above a month, ‘and about 


the! middle of November 1762, after all the ufaal "medicines 


had failed, Dr. Watfon began to cleétrify her; and continued 
to'do it, by intervals, till the end of January following ; when 
every mufcle’of her body was perfectly flexible, and fubfer- 
vient ‘to her will, fo that the ‘could not only ftand upright, 
buti¢ould walk, and even fub like other children of herage.* 

Tur ele&tricity may be hortful, and even in fome cafes. 
in which analogy would lead us to promife ourfelves it might 
be of ufe, is evident from many cafes, and particularly from 
ohe related by’Dr. Hart of Shrewfbury, in a letteF to Dr. 
Watfon, which was read at the per Society November the 
r4th. 1754. 

A youne girl about fixteen, whofe right arm was paraly- 
tic, and greatly wafted in comparifon of the other, on being 
electrified twice, became univerfally paralytic, and remained 


‘fo above a fortnight; when the new palfy was reitioved by 


proper medicines, though the firft difeafed arm remained as 
before. However Dr. Hart, notwithftanding this bad acci- 


* Phil. Tranf. Vol. 53. p. 10. 
Ggg2 dent, 


412 MEDICAL |. | + Paarl’ 


dent, had a mind to try ele@tricity again. The girl fubmitted 
to it; but after having been electrified about three or four 
days, fhe became a fecond time univerfally paralytic, and 
even loft her voice, and the ufe of her tongue ; fo that it was 
with great difficulty the could fwallow.’ She was relieved of 
this additional palfy a fecond time by a proper courfe of me= 
dicines, continued about four months; but was difcharged 
out of the hofpital as incurable of her firft palfy. It is faid that 
the Doétor would have tried electricity a third time ; but the | 
girl, being more nearly concerned in the experiment than 
_ her phyfician, thought proper to decline it.* =~ : 

Dr. Franklin’s account of the effeéts of electricity, in the 
manner in which he applied it, is by no means favourable to 
its ufe in fuch cafes. He fays, ina letter to Dr. Pringle, 
read at the Royal Society January the 12th. 1758, that fome 
years before, when the news papers made mention of great 
cures performed in Italy and Germany by electricity, a num- 
ber of paralytics were brought to him, from different parts of 
Penfilvania and the neighbouring provinces, to be eleétrifed, 
and that he performed the operation at their requeft. | His 
method was, firft to place the patient in a chair, or upon ane- - 
le&tric ftool, and draw a number of large ftrong {parks from all 
parts of the affected limb or fide. He then fully charg-) 
ed two fix gallon glafs jars, and fent the united thock of. 
them through the affected limb or limbs, repeating the ake, 
commonly three times each day. 

Tue firft thing he obferved was an immediate patent 


* Phil, Tranf. Vol. 48. pt. 2. p. 786. \ 
fible 


Per.X.Sec.XIV. ELECTRICITY. 413 


fible warmth in the affeéted limbs, which had received the 
ftroke, than in the others; and the next morning the pa- 
tients ufually faid, that, in the night, they had felt a prick- 
ing fenfation in the fleth of the paralytic limbs ; and would 
fometimes fhow a number of {mall red {pots, which they fup- 
pofed were occafioned by thofe prickings. The limbs too 
were found more capable of voluntary motion, and feemed 
to receive ftrength. A man, for inftance, who could not, 
the firft day, lift his lame hand from off his knee, would the 
next day raife it four or five inches, the third day higher ; 
and on the fifth was able, but with a feeble languid motion, 
to take off his hat. Thefe appearances, the Doétor fays, 
gave great fpirits to the patients, and made them hope for a 
perfeé cure; but he did not remember that he ever faw any 
amendment after the fifth day; which the patients perceiving, 
and finding the fhocks pretty fevere, became difcouraged, went 
home, and ina fhort time relapfed; fo that he never knew 
_. any permanent advantage from electricity in palfies. 
Pernaps, fays he, fome permanent advantage might be 
-obtained, if the eleétric fhocks had been accompanied with 
proper medicine and regimen, under the direétion of a fkilful 
phyfician. He thought too, that many fmall thocks might 
have been more proper than the few great ones which he 
gave; fince, in an account from Scotland, a cafe was men- 
tioned in which 200 fhocks from a phial were given daily, 
and a perfeé& cure had been made. * 
Tuar there is an intimate conneétion between the ftate of 


* Phil. Tranf. Vol. 50. pt. 2. p. 481, 4% 
eletricity 


414 NY MBEDICAL Vi Parrali 


electricity inthe air and the human -body;, is evident.front 
feveral fas,, particularly. a-yvery. remarkable.one.related by the 
Abbé Mazeas, in.a letter to Dr. Hales. | He was electrifying 
a perfon who was fubject, to epileptic, fits, by Pipacsabnnys 
mofpliere. At firft this, perfon. bore the. vad very well, 
but in two or three minutes, the Abbé, perceiving his counte. | 
nance to change, begged he would retire, left any accident 
fhould happen;) and. he was no fooner, returned home, than 
his fenfes failed him;, and he was feized_ with a moft violent 
fit, _ His convulfions were taken. off with {pirits of harthhorn, 
but his reafon did not return in an; hour,,and.an‘vhalf,.-He 
went up and down the ftairs like one who walks injhis fleeps 
without {peaking to, or knowing any, perfon, fettling his pa~ 
pers, taking, fnuff, and offering chairs) to: all who. came.in« 
When he was fpoken to, he in ene 
_which had no connetion: 154 ah dd ei enor 
WueEn this poor man ;recoyered his adie he. fellinte 
another: fit; and his friends told the Abbé, he was more affect- 
ed with that diftemper ;when it thundered thamjat ‘any o-- 
ther time; andif it, ever happened, . which, it) rarely: did, 
that he then efcaped; his ,eyes, his countenance, and the — 
confufion of his expreffions,. fufficiently demonftrated the! 


weakne(S of his reafon, fit aan saan! , 


_TueE next day, the Abbé learned PB the perfon himfelf, 
that the fear of thunder was not the caufe of his difeafe 5. but. 
that, however, he found a fatal connection between that phe- 
nomenon and his diftemper. He added, that when the fit 
{eized him, he perceived a vapour rifing in his breaft, with 


mye 
We 
“: 


‘J 
4 


Pers Xi Sec. XIV. JELEICTRICITY. 415 


fo. much rapidity that = albhis:fenfes: before ‘he could. 
call for help. * odtrinits sdysniin 8, gig 
s MreWiison seein woman: eee, poldchfnetbief detentken 
years itanding. He alfo obferves, that fhe had a very great 
cold when the began to beceleétrified; but that the:inflamma- 
tion. ceafed, the firft time,. and the cald was quite:gone when 
emphodinn had: been performed: again the! fecondiday. But 
he acknowledges,’ that he: had: tried: the:fame-experiment: ap 
on fix other:deaf perfons:without, any fuccefs. +» 
. Tue fame perfon obferves: that-one gentleman, near Sesion 
ty years old; could: never-be: made to: receive a fliockiexcept 
inthis: wrifts: | He fays that!hel himfelfccould ohvechave-borrie 
very: great thocks without:i inconvenience;:°but'*thathe —— 
Ft bear them at the time that he wrote. 
~ Mepicat ¢leSricity is very much obliged! to the lntaria 
pri obfervations» of Mr. Lovet, Laysclérc ofithe cathedral! 
church at Worcefter, :who has:for many years’ been indefati~ 
" gable in the application of electricity to w great variety of dif~ 
eafés.' His: fuccefs has: been very confiderable, and i the 
cafes‘he: haspublithed feem to:be-welliauthenticateds« : 
Accorpine to Mr. Lovet, electricity isialmoft wfpecifie: 
in all cafesiof violent: pains,» of However Jong: continuance, -in 
every: part ofthe; body 5. assin:obftinate héad~aches,) the {cia-. 
ticd, the cramp,and.diforders refembling the gout. ©: He hadv 
noi trials:of:the proper: gout; . buts onlyy.on»thofec who were} 
flightly attacked, ) andiwhoureceivedcimmediatesrelieflec i) bis 
- Tux tootheach,, he fays; isgenerally’ cured :inftantly,: and: 


* Phil Tranf Voli 48.pth1. pio38g) 4} Wiloh's; Effiy,-p: 207 * 
is} c 


ee MEDICAL ()% 0? Parrh 


he fcarce ever remembered any one who compe of its 
raging a minute after the operation. * : oak ii Alex 

Ir has feldom failed, he: fays, to cure ipa or a 
wafting of the mufcles, and hyfterical diforders, particularly 
if they be attended with coldnefs in the feet. According to 
him, it cures inflammations, it has ftopped a mortification, 
cured a fiftula lachrymalis, and difperfed extravafated blood.++ 
He alfo fays it has been of excellent ufe in bringing to a fups 
puration, or in difperfing without fuppuration, obftinate 
fwellings of various kinds, even thofe that were fcrophulous. 
In his hands it cured the falling ficknefs, and fits of various 
kinds; though the patients had been fubje& to them for 
many years, and one cure he mentions of a hemiplegia. + 
Laftly, he relates a well attefted cafe, from Mr. Floyer, 
furgeon at Dorchefter, of a complete cure of what feemed to 
bea gutta ferena. "The fame Mr. Floyer, he alfo fays, cured 
with it two young women of obftructions, one of whom had 
taken medicines a year to no purpofe. || ati , 

In the rheumatifm, Mr. Lovet candidly confeffes, it ie 
failed; but fays it was feldom in the cafe of young perfons, if 
they were taken in time. 

Tue manner in which eleGtricity operated in thefe cures, 


Mr. Lovet imagined to be, by removing fecret obftruCtions;’ 


which are probably the caufe of thofe diforders. In all his 
practice he never knew an inftance of harm being done by it, 
and thinks that, in all the cafes in which it has done harm, 
the manner of adminiftering it has been injudicious. «In ge- 


© Lovet’sEffay, p.1iz, fiIb.p.76. gb. p. sor jf Ib, p. 119. 
neral, 


A 


s. i sl i ie Se 


‘Per. X/Sec. XIV. - ELECTRICITY.  4i7 


neral, he thinks the thocks have been made too great. This 
he imagined to have been the cafe of the patient before men- 
tioned of Dr. Hart, who was made more paralytic by elec- 
tric fhocks:. Mr. Lovet advifes to begin, in general, with 
fimple electrification, efpecially in byfterical cafes; then to 
proceed to taking fparks, and laftly to giving moderate tiocks, 
tr hardly ever any that are violent, or painful. 

» ‘Tue account of the application of ele&tricity by Dr. Zet- 
r. of Upfal, which may be feen in Mr. Lovet's treatife, a- 
grees in the main with the refult of his own practice ; and 
where there is any difference between them, Mr.’ Lovet 
thinks there are evident marks of unfairnef$ in the Swedith 
account. Anda fubfequent account from Sweden mentions 
feveral cures being made in thofe very cafes, in which Dr. 


- Zetzel fays that no relief was to be had from ele@ricity. 


Tue Rev. Mr. J. Wefley has followed Mr. ‘Lovet in the fame 
ufeful courfe of medical electricity ; and recommends the ufe 
of it to his numerous followers, and to all people. Happy it is 
when an afcendency over the minds of men is employed to 
purpofes favourable to the increafe of knowledge, and to the 
beft interefts of mankind. Mr.-Wefley’s account of cures 
performed by eleétricity agrees very well with that of Mr. 


“_ Lovet, whom he often quotes; He adds, that he has fearce 


ever known an inftance in which fhocks all over the body 
have failed to cure a quotidian or tertian ague. * He’menti- 
ons cafes of blindnefs cured or relieved by it; and fays that 
he has known hearing given by it to a man that was born 


**Wedfley’s Defideratum, p. 3, 
Hhh deaf, 


418 MEDICAL - Parr k 


deaf. * He mentions cures in cafes of bruifes, running fores,. 
the dropfy, gravel in the kidnies (caufing the patient to part 
with it) a palfy in the tongue, and laftly in the genuine con- 
fumption, . But Mr. Boiffer fays it is of differvice. in. phthi- 
fical complaints.-++ scirbipsen desc vole ttieh 
Mr. Westey candidly fays, he has not known any inftance 
of the cure of an hemiplegia ; and though many paralytics have. 
been helped by electricity, he fcarcely thinks that any. palfy 
of a year’s ftanding has been thoroughly cured’ by it... He 
afferts, however, that he has never yet known any perfon,, 
man, woman, or child, fick orwell, who has found (what 
Mr. Wilfon fays, that fome perfons complained of), an_ 
unufual pain fome days after the fhock. Mr. Wefley had on 
ly known that rheumatic pains, which were afterwards per=- 
feétly cured, had increafed on the firft or fecond application. t 
_ Mr. Westey direéts the fame method of adminiftration 
with Mr. Lovet. In deep hyfterical ‘cafes, he advifes that 
the patients be fimply eleétrified, fitting on cakes of rofin, at 
leaft half an hour morning and evening; when, after fone 
time, , fmall {parks may be taken from them, and afterwards. — in 
fhocks given to them, ‘more or lefs ftrong, as their diforde “a ye) 2 
requires ; which, he fays, has feldom failed of the po at 
effect. || call ene eS Ore 
Tus account of the medical ufe of eleGtricity by Mr. 
and Mr,-Weiley is certainly liable to an. objection,; 


© Welley’s Defideratum, ri 48.” + Carmichael ‘Teneamén inaag 
Paralyfi, p. 34. €x AG. Up.  t Welley’s Defideratum, p. 50, 


Pix.X.$ec.XIV. ELECTRICITY. — 49% 


will always lie againft the accounts of thofé perfons who, not” 
being of the faculty, cannot'be idee capable of aiftingith . 
ing with accuracy either the nature of the aeyere? or the’ 
confequences of a feeming cure. But, on tlie other hand, 
this very circumftance of theit ignorance of the nature of 
diforders, and confequently of the beft method of applying. 
electricity to them, fupplies the ftrongeft argument in fayour. 
of its innocence, at leaft. If in fuch unfkilful hands ‘it has" 
produced fo much good, and fo little harm ; how much t more. 
good, and how much lefs harm would it probably have pro~" 
duced in more fkilful hands. 

Bur whatever weight there be in this objection againt ‘the’ 
laft mentioned writers, it certainly’ cannot be urged againit’ 
Antonius de Haen, one of the moft eminent phyficians of the’ 
prefent age; who, after fix years uninterrupted ufe of it, 
reckons it among the moft-valuable affiftances of the medical’ 
art; and exprefily fays, that though it has often been applied! 
in vain, it has often afforded relief where no other application 
would have been effe€tual: But I fhall recite in a fummary’ 

manner from his Ratio Medendi, the refult of all “his ® aye 

vations on this fubject. 
Wire refpeé to’ partial palfies, in particular, ‘he cays it 
“never did the leaft harm; that one or two perfons who had 
received no benefit from it in fix entire months, were yet’ 
much relieved by perfevering'in the ufe of it. That fome 
perfons difcontinuing it, after having received fome benefit, 
relapfed again; but. afterwards, by recurring to the ufe.of 
electricity, recovered, though more flowly than before. Some 
perfons, he fays, were relieved who had been paralytic one, 
Hhh2z -three, 


420 MEDEhCAL. 5-;..Partt 


three, fix, nine, and twelve years, and fome onger ‘but 
that in one or two of thefe cafes, the patients. had received 
Jefs relief, and more flowly than was ufual in recent cafes. 
In fome cafes, he fays, a moft unexpected benefit had been 


found by thofe who had been paralytic in their tongues, eyes> 
fingers, and other particular limbs. A paralyfis and tremb- — 


ling of the limbs, from whatever caufe it arofe, he fays, never 
failed to be relieved by it; and he relates one inftance of a 
perfect cure being performed in a remarkable cafe of this na- 
ture, after receiving ten fhocks. * : 


De Haen’s cuftom was to apply the operation for half an 


hour together at leaft. He feems to have ufed gentle thocks, 
and he joined to eleétricity, the ufe of other remedies, which, 
however, would not have been effectual without it. + 


’ Sr. Virus’s dance, he fays, never failed to be cured by © 


eleétricity. { He always obferved it to promote a more co- 


pious difcharge of the menfes, and to relieve in cafes of 


obftru€tion; but, for this reafon, he advifes that it be not 
adminiftred to women with child. He found it of ufe in 


fome cafes of deafnefs, but it entirely failed in its application 


to a gutta ferena, and to a ftrumous neck. || 


Lastty, he relates a remarkable cafe, communicated. to 


him by Mr. Velfe at the Hague, of the cure of a mucous 
apoplexy. § 


To the cafes which have been mentioned occafionally, in’ 


which harm may be apprehended from eleétrification, may 


* Ratio Medendi, Vol. 1. p. 234, 199. + Ib. i 233 TIb. p. 389. ~ 
} Ib. Vol. 2. p. 200. § Ib. 


perhaps 


bi 


Per. X. Sec. XIV. TEVARIC{TIR UC iMyY. 421 


i perhaps be added the venereal difeafe in which Mr. Veratti 


advifes, that cleétrification be by all meansavoided.* 
Jsuaxer conclude this account of medical eletricity with 
obferving that there are two general effets of electricity on 
the human body, of which, it thould feem, that phyficians 
might greatly avail themfelves. .. Thefe are, , that. it’ promotes 
infenfible perfpiration, and glandular fecretion. The former 
is effected by. fimple eledtrification, and the latter by. taking 
{parks from the glands, or the parts contiguous to them! on 
which it aéts like a ftimulus. Of the former, inftances have 
been given in the experiments of the Abbé Nollet,and/a few 
have been given occafionally of thelatter.1) Yo agenod adi 1c) 
/ "Fo thefe I fhall now. add,. that, .Linneus obferved,, that 
when eleétric fparks have been drawn, from the ear, it has 
inftantly promoted a more copious fecretion of ear-wax5.and 


* that it has alfo been obferved, that, when the eye, or the 


parts about the eye, have been electrified, the tears have 
fldwed copioufly. But the moft remarkable cafe that I have 
met with, is, of its promoting the fecretion of that matter 
which forms the hair; whereby hair has been actually re- 
ftored to a part that had long been bald. + 

Hituerro eleétricity has been generally applied to the 
human body either in the method of drawing fparks, as it is 
called, or of giving thocks. But thefe operations are both 
violent; and though the ftrong concuffion may fuit fome 
cafes, it may be of differvice in others, where a moderate 
fimple ele€trification might have been of fervice. 


*\Carmichael Tentamen, p. 34- + Ib. p. 33- 
THE 


42a TED PERMEABILITY: Panne 
ek 


Tar greit bjetion to this method it the'tedia ef and 
expence of the application|: But am clerical -machine might 
be conv to go by wind nwa anda comes ner 
_ might be annexed “its in» which*a-floor'm ght-be raifed 
upon cleétrics, ee ee ay , 
even’ walle: about daring’ the were. to be 
withed, thiat fomie} anding 
provide shim(elf ‘with’ fach a machine and’ ror 
could poflibly be apprehended from eleét icity, 
pervanred ‘infenfible manner, and geod phiapcend 
poflible, if-not highly probable. It would: ) 
for the honour of the faculty, wereasigtent: 
troduced’ in thismanner, “than: that’dt becleft saat Bh, 
Valetudinarian, who may take” itinto his head, that fuchan 
operation may be of fervice to him. tk botemong ybaetie, vbamiin aie Tint) 
only a0; Syo sds tory seit Suvidido a5ed “Oils ata: ‘St : 
ova extoxods baitinivis -nsed overt! SYP ody thoge ‘ 
oven) E: 28 has) side assist fom oditud “yPocine NF 
oifgm: tant to. nowsps) “sdt Bri Bitkrorey gH WO es ce 
Ulan nood entbaiad Ydois a” cxiast! ott geetat ‘dytclye 
+ .blad asod elt bad? sedy t14q # oF baie! eh 
lies onag toed ail Visits erazan Tit 
nib Yo borisin Saf ai radhiis ‘bor ean 
$qo sors Ie LASSE Bniv is Yoo" Boties bes 
anus. gnowk. silt dgvorls bas + Nhs, ai , 
ha jaredio ni seieisnib w ET chet at i) 
i to dosd oved Ydyitty Koizase ABs salad 


ei wa ““\igipe YS 


94),03°6 nigge 


i dh aa yeobrte 


Rana XiSee. XV) ! Al (9F yGiliA S$ Sor 423 


ci nloailad? » sind pointy tok suey bgitt 4I9v 4 re att 
godiat oybs siflenos ssh abit dsgbasnoyésdgiven ti gnibford 
vila edanel $1 0 Hoe bhi ote bedded od aesw- soa 
iO orth Cotpizsl opp7 ave oP bas egal 

dhediot:siigée tpasdds Shivwldo qd toans I cilt nowt 
vf yd boddpnod obit wac Ut dalgiont ee hiitow AS AG to 

itil otiGelo ons to cinch tet Sderot wouliipse: 37° 23gni 


Miscrrianzovs.- aeons io AND. -DISCOVERIES, MADE : 


ITH we ie PERIOD s 
gute: oft oni bonita BIN TP Quinsup fa ips “ak eldon abe 
delteraste. < sbif ted no teo 31 esvinb bos atl sc) to Sbit 
Da AL capwybniet ech dibdnahs G Sisddtosiis ch ee chanh 


JAVING diftributed into diftine feétons it the ‘fab: 
je s, “under which I had colleéted materials: enow to 
fa “ee te accounts’ I have’ referved’ for’the laft a 
a ate Giles whieh ould iieite with pi pro 
ue soieet ttider ‘the former Heads, n ot were large’ he ee to 
make a feétion themfelves. 
_. Tr has been a great controverfy ainong ea whether 
glats be “permeable | to the elettric fluid. “Mr. Wil n appear 
edi in favour ‘of the permeability, and, in a paper aa at the 
Royal Society ‘December the 6th. 17 59> ‘produced the follow- 
ing. experiments to fupport his ‘opinion ; ; notwithftanding 
he, even afterwards, acknowledged, in a paper read at the 
Royal Society November the 13th. 17663 that, in the Leyden 
experiment, Dr. Franklin had. poe that the fluid did not 
-go cope the glafs, * 


* Phil. Tranf. Vol. 51. p. 2. p. 896. : 
i n° He 


424 THE PERMEABILITY Paarl, 


He took a very large pane of glafs, a little warmed; and, 

holding it upright by one edge, while the oppofite edge refted 

upon wax, he rubbed the middle part of the furface with. his 
finger, and found both fides eleétrified plus. * 

Upon this I cannot help obferving that it ought to be fo 
on Dr. Franklin’s principles. If one fide be rubbed by the 
finger, it acquires from the finger fome of the electric fluid. 
‘This, being fpread on the glafs as far as the rubbing extend- 
ed, repels an equal quantity of that {contained in the other - 
fide of the glafs, and drives it out on that fide; where it 
ftands as an atmofphere, fo that both fides are found plus. If the 
unrubbed fide were in contact with a conductor communica- 
ting with the earth, the electric fluid would be carried away, 
and then that fide would be left apparently in the natural 
ftate. If the eletric fluid found on the unrubbed fide was 
really part of that which had been communicated by and from 
the finger, and fo had actually permeated the glafs, it might, 
when conducted away, be continually replaced by freth per- 
meating fluid communicated in the fame manner; But if 
the effeét is continually diminifhing, while the fuppofed 
caufe, repeated, continues the fame, there feems reafon to 
doubt the fuppofed relation between that caufe and the effect, 
For it appears difficult to conceive how fome electric fluid, 
having pafied through a permeable body, fhould make it more 
difficult for other particles of the fame ele¢tric fluid to follow,. 
till, at length, none could pafs at all, 

Mr, Witson alfo fays, that, holding the fame pane of 


* Phil. Tranf. Vol. 51. pt. 1. p. 314, 
glafs 


Pers XiSec. XV.T 1.) | for 5G LAS Set Mas 


oglafs, within jtwo feet) of, the! prime,-conduftoty which was — 
electrified (plas, that part) of the-glafs which was oppofite to 
-the conductor became electrified minus on both fides; but, in 
-arfew minutes,) the minus electricity difappeared, and the piis 
<ontinuing, diffufed itfelf into the place of the oes, e that 
now,the whole was electrified plus. 9 

_» Tar experiment, fo far,facceeding,. induced him to oie 
‘ufe of a lefs. piece of glafs, that the whole might be electrifi- 
ed minus. Thefe adyances, he ays, led him, to, obferve the 
spower of electrifying that {mall aren of shale at Aigorene 
diftances. Ww JAdinvamod 4a 

He eta the fame finall time oh plat to “ahs prime c con- 

-dugor, at the diftance of two feet, and Lobferued a minus clec- 
tricity at both, farfaces.,.. Pac 

is As he -moved the slefnt NEnrIo toa certain) idiftancen. it was 

‘more fenfibly electrified minus. and, after-that, ‘on moving it 

Mill nearer, the minus,appearance-was,lefs, and -lefy fenfible 5 

till it came within,the diftance of about one one and then. it 

was electrified plus on both fides.. 

) Tuts plus) electricity, inthe glafs, . he, rei panic * 

toa _uiinus, again, | by. removing |the ,.glafs, .. and 
holding: it fora time at.a greater diftance; which he scapscal 
to be a proof of the repulfive power,of that fluid. * 

_ Hayine by, him, a pane of glafs, . one. fide, of which, was 
rough, and the other, fmooth, he rubbed it lightly onjone fide ; 
PHS doing which, both fides were electrified minus, 

{ON, this I muft alfo take the liberty to obferve that, as the 


ol TB. Vol. $1. pe tp 528. 
pode ugizeisi- uodiiwl ith: : osit ins Vveleétrie 


426 Tut: PERMEABILITY Part T. 


electric fluid contained in glafs in its natural Mate, “is kept 
equal in both fides by the common repulfion ; if thequantity 
in one fide is diminithed, the fluid in the other fide, being 
lefs repelled, retires inward, and leaves ean jams cag 


_ minus. 


Sticut changes, plus or mints, may bé ‘died in ining 
furface, that have not ftrength to act on'the other fide, by 
repulfion, or by abating repulfion, through the!glafs; and’ fo 
plus ele&tricity may be given to one furface, and minus to the 
other in fome degree. Both fides may alfo be made plus, and 
both minus, by rubbing, or by communication, onan 
~neceflity of fuppofing the glafs permeable. ath 

Anp yet it is probable that fome glafs, from having a 
greater mixture of non-electric matters in its‘compofition, 
may be‘permeable, when cold;in'fome fmall beer as: all 
glafs is found to be’when warmed. > whdilisgt oven 

Mr. Wi1son treated the other ‘fide of this ‘pline of glafs in 
the fame manner, after which ‘the minus fren Was 
changed into a plus on both fides. EDO RAED PS |) 

Tuovucu Dr. Franklin'was of opinion, thatiglafswhen cold Li 
is not permeable to’ electricity, He’had made no x ‘Tenn 
upon it when hot ;' but Mr. Kintierfley, aftiend of his, “made 
one, which feemed to prove; that it was very’ Aim 
feéted in this’ refpect, inthe different Mates of thot atid cold. 
‘He fouitd, 'that'a coated Flofence flaik(imiade of very 
and full of air bubbles) COREE boiling® patie Ai 
be electrified. The ele@ricity, he “faye; “puffed hots 
through it as through. metal. The charge of a’ three” pint 
bottle went freely through it; |without injuring the flafk in 


Per.X.$c.XV. 4) or GLASS.» aay. 


the leat... When it/became.cold, he could charge it as before. 
This effec he aie to nEneSH settee sc ad pores, of Bale 
by heat* 

Aut Mr. Wilfon’s s hel to Seda, the poahaabuiin 
of glafs were repeated by Mr. oon of Upfal ; and, as he 
fays, with fuccefss fu disinoy vod ow a saat 

. pws, however, was, by no means fatisfied: ‘with Mr.: 
Wilfon’s experiments concerning the permeability of glafs; and 
yet he! brings no other fac in anf{wer to his arguments, but a 
very common one, which thows that a glafs tube both receives 
and lofes its electricity very flowly ; fo that he only afferts a 
difficulty, anda flownefs in the electric fluid pafling. through 
eleGric fubftances,..aswas mentioned before; and confequent- 
lyMr: Wilfon feems to haye a real advantage in the con- 
troverfy.:, for, as he fays,, pafling through, oe ever fo 
geet isa reak pafling through, t rw 39891159 ’ 


ae has ania by a curious experiment, that if ame- 
tallic conduétor and a cork ball be both electrified pofitively, 
fo as to repel, one another; yet, (that, if the ball be forcibly 
brought within, two, three, or four lines of the conductor, it 
will be attraéted by it; and be repelled again, if it be forcibly 
pufhed beyond that limit of attraction, If the ball be confin- 
ed to move within the fame {mall diftance, a moderate elec- 
trification of the conduGor will repel the ball to its utmoft 
limit; but a ftronger electrification of the conduétor will caufe 
it, to be attraéted. He, therefore, limits the general maxim, 
that bodies, poffefling the fame kind of eleGricity repel one 


* Phil. Tranf. Vol. 5° Tine Vol 5 + fb. Va $2. pt. 2. p. 485s 
ol. 53. ps 


i oe another ; 


428° MISCELLANEOUS: ©o*Parrh 


another; and’ afferts, “that this’ will be the cafe, only When’ 


the quantity of electric fluid belongitig to them Beef 
body, is greater, or lefs than that which i is natural to ie! 
This sempre t ed iparticilat attentic pant et ath ae 
PROCS Sipw eheiq' to 
Siduidk Becta - ti etn fo largely to fe=: 
veral of the feétions in this ‘period,*furnithes ‘a few? articles’ 
which well defetve a place’in this) sro Ho ehe gre oe TT 


He thought it was evident, ‘that the ele@tric fluid tended tor. 


move in aright line, ‘becaafe a” longer {park “may be taken” 

in a dire@ line, from the end of a lorig“eonduétor,’ than can” 
be taken from the fame place in any other‘direttion.’ But he» 
thought it’ was ftill more evident, from obferving, both in’ the’ 
air, and ih vacuo’ that,’ prefenting the finger, ora brats ball, 
at a proper diftance, and in a certain afigle with the conduc-’ 


tor (which experience will foon’ find) the electric fpark will a 


make an exact curve, to which the conduétor sie 
bea tangent ! ! as if the electric matter was ated | upon by 


different forces, one its own acquired velocity, urging i it for- rat 


ward in a right line; the other the attragtion of t the ‘body 
prefented to it, “which throws it out of the right line. 

Iw his obfervations on pointed bodiés, he fays, ‘that’ two" 
pointed bodies, equally fharp, in their approach to an eleGtri- 


fied conductor, will appear luminous only at half the diftance 


at which one of them would have done. ae ©; PONS 


Tue fame ingenious philofopher reports a curious, but crus vi 


el experiment which he made on a live cock.” “He detached . 
the belly of one of the mufcles from the thigh of the animal, 
leaving the extremities in their proper infertions, and then 


© Zpini Tentamen, p. 146. + Elettricifmo artificiale, p. 56. 1 Ib. p. 67. 
difcharged 


Per: X/Sec.XVe 0 EXPERIMENTS. 429 
difcharged a fhock through it. At the inftant of the ftroke, 
the leg was violently diftended, and the mufcle greatly inflated ; 
the motion beginning at the tendon, and the extenfion of 
it refembling the opening of a lady’s fan. No- earns 
with a we could make it a& fo ftrongly. * 


; ‘aie ryt pookeliot of Philofophy at the sete 
of Dublin, made a curious experiment with a wire five or fix 
inches long,. finely pointed. at each end.. To the middle of 
this wire he fitted a brafs cap, which refted on the point of a 


_ needle communicating with the conductor. Half an inch at 


each extremity of this wire he bent, in oppofite direétions, 
perpendicular to the reft of the wire, and in the plane of the 
horizon. | The confequence of electrifying this apparatus was, 
that the wire would turn round’ with very great ‘velocity ; 
moving, as he fays, always in a direction contrary to that in 
which the eleétric fluid iffues from its point, without havin 
any conducting fubitance near it, except the air. He alfo 
obferves, that if this wire were made to turn the contrary way, 
it would ftop, and turn as before. + 

Tue fame experiment was alfo made by Mr. Kinnerfley'of 
Bofton, with this addition, that he electrified the wire nega- 
tively ; and obferved, to his great furprife, that it ftill turned 
the fame way. This he endeavoured to account for by fup- 
pofing that, in the former cafe, the points, having more e-) 
lectricity than the air, were attracted by it; in the latter 
cafe, the air, having more than the points, was attracted by 
them. } 


* Lettere dell’ ellettricifmo, f C4 + Phil. Tranf. Vol. 51. pt. 2. p. gos. 
t Ib. Vol. 53. pt. 1. p. 86. 
Ir 


430 ELECTRICITY anp Part 


Ir may, by fome, be thought that this pointed wire turn- 
ing the fame way, whether it be electrified negatively or pofi- 
tively, is a proof that the electric fluid iffues out at the points 
in both cafes alike, and by the reaction of the airis, together 
with the points, driven backwards; contrary to what ought 
to have been the cafe if the electric fluid had really iffued 
out of the point in one cafe, and entered it in’ the other, ‘But 
it will be found by experiment, that an eolipile, with its ftem 
bent like the wire above-mentioned, and fufpended on its 
center of gravity by a fine thread, will move in the fame di-~ 
rection, whether it be throwing fteam out at the orifice 3 or 
after it is exhaufted, and cooling, it be dtawing the el or 
water in. AER 


I sHax clofe this fection of mifcellaneous articles, and 
the whole hiftory of electricity, with a fuccin@ account of 
fome of the chief particulars in which the analogy between’ 
electricity and magnetifm confifts ; very nearly as it was drawn 
up, in an abridgment of A®pinus, and eonstoiitentod to me 
for this purpofe, by Mr. Price. rat Me 

- As a rod of iron held near a magnet will” have’ feveral 
fuccstive poles; fo will a glafs tube touched by an ays 
tube liave a fucceflion of pofitive and negative parts. AY 

2. Boptes pofitively and negatively electrical, when in 
contaét, will unite to one another} as will magnets,’ when 
they are laid with their oppofite poles to one another. taht 

3- Grass is a fubftance of a nature fimilar cotibdereay: 
fteel. The pofitive and negative fides of the former anfwer 
to the ees and repelling ends of the latter, when mag-_ 
netical. : 


4. As f. 


‘\Per.X. Src.XV. .° MAGNETISM. 431 


4. As it is difficult to move the electric fluid in ithe pores 
of the former; fo, likewife, it is difficult to move the: ins 
netic fluid inithe pores. of the latter... 

g. As there can be no.condenfation of ithe cleric ‘fluid in 
ares Sian without.a rarefaGtion ; fo, in the latter, if there 
_be a condenfation, or pofitive magnetifm in one end of a'bar, 
ithere muft-be.an evacuation, ‘or negative magnetifin in the 
other end. 

6. STEEL correfponds to. electric per fe, and iron in fome 
meafure, to conduétors of electricity. 

7. Sreet islefs fufceptible of the magnetic virtue, but 
when it has acquired it, it retains it more f{trongly than iron; 
jut as electrics per fe will not fo eafily receive the electric flu- 
id, but when it is forced into them, will retain it more 
ftrongly than conduétors.. 

_ 8. Aipinus adds, and reckons it one of his difcoveries, 
that an electrified body does not.act on other bodies, except they 
are themfelves electrified; juft as a magnet will not act on any 
other fubftances, except they are themfelves pofleffed of the 
magnetic virtue. So that.an electrified. body attracts and re- 
pells another body, only in confequence: of rendering it firft 
of all eleétrical; as a magnet attracts iron, only in confe- 
quence of, firft of all, making it a magnet. 

g. Mr. Canron hag alfo found, that if the tourmalin be 
cut into feveral pieces, each piece will havea pofitive and ne- 
gative fide, juft as the pieces of a broken magnet would have... 

Tuus far, fays Mr. Price, there is an analogy, and, in 
-fome inftances, a ftriking one, between magnetifm and elec- 
tricity, upon the fuppofition: that the caufe of magnetifm is a 

fluid... 


Judomeuttie! Siohgsm shay a 
1 tent s yhtes ‘tie 


= 


SERIES oF PROPOSITIONS, 


COMPRISING ALL THE 


GENERAL PROPERTIES or ELECTRICITY. 


FTER tracing, at large, the progrefs of all the dif- 

coveries relating to electricity, and giving an hiftorical 
account of them, in the order in which they were made; it 
will, probably, be no difagreeable repetition, if I give, at the 
clofe of it, a SERIES OF PROPOSITIONS, comprifing all the 
general properties of electricity, drawn up in as facciné a 
manner as poffible. And, notwithftanding the large detai] 
which has been made, it will be found, that a few propofiti- 
ons are fufficient to comprife almoft all that we know of the 
fubjec. AO% 

Tuts circumftance may be regarded as a demonftration of 
the'real progrefs that has been made in this fcience. And as 
this progrefs advances, and the hiftory enlarges, paradoxical 

K kk as 


434 A SERIES Parti. 


as the affertion may feem, this part may be expected to con- 
tract itfelf in the fame proportion. For the more we know 
of any fcience, the greater number of particular propofitions 43 
are we able to refolve into general ones; and, confequently, 
within narrower bounds {hall we be able to reduce its ne 
ciples. 

1 MIGHT have nade this part of my work anttich Sorter; 
even in the prefent ftate of the fcience, if I would have ad- 
mitted into it any thing theoretical ; but I have carefully a- 
voided the principles of any theory, even the moft probable, 
and the neareft to being perfectly afcertained, in this feries of — 


propofitions; in which propofe to: ‘comprehend only ‘known 


faéts ; that my younger readers may carefully diftinguith be~ 


tween fact and theory; things which are too often con- 
founded, 


minutia, in the defcription of electrical appearances, b 
they have been entered into before, and a repetition of them 
would have been tedious. At the fame time, I think it 
be found, upon examination, that I have. not t omitted. to take 
notice of any difcovery., of, importance, , I have alfo intro~ 
duced into it the definition. of, allethe moft, neceffary technical 
terms ; that this part of the work. might ferve : as a methodi- i 
cal, and fufficient introduction, to thofewho.are beginning: 
the ftudy of electricity ; and defire a general knowledge of the 
firft elements of the f{cience, before they,enter-upom the detail { 
of particulars, which will be heft ‘learned, afboryeatpty from 
the hiftory. b : 
By eleéfricity, in the following sepeeinoey! I parts ih Ny 
underftood 


I wave not, in this. partof my; work, -detve rd sd-to ny ni stay | 


or PROPOSITIONS. . 433 


underftood to mean, only thofe effects which will be called 
electrical; or elfe the unknown caufe of thofe effects, ufing the 
term, as weoufe:the letters (x) and (y) in Algebra. 


- Ary known fubftances are diftributed by electricians into , 


two forts. | Thofe of one fort are termed edeéfrics, or non= 
conduétors ; and thofe of the other non-electrics, or conduétors 
of elettricity. 

Mera ts of all hinds, together with femimetals, and all 
fabftances in a ftate of fluidity, except air, are conduétors. 
So alfo is charcoal, and other fubftances of a fimilar nature, as 
will be fhown at large in the laft part of this work. All o- 
ther fubftances, whether mineral, vegetable, or animal, are 
non-conductors. But many of thefe when they are made very 
hot, as glafs, rofin, baked wood; and, perhaps, all the reft 
6n which the experiment can be made in this ftate, are con~ 
duétors of eleétricity: 

’ Axx bodies, however, though in the fame ftate of heat and 
cold, are not equally perfec eleétrics, or perfe&t conductors. 
Vegetable and animal fubftances, for inftance, in their natu- 
ral ftate, are feldom perfect electrics, on account of the 
moifture that is contained in them. And, independent of 
moifture, there is a gradation in all fubftances, from the moft 
perfe& conductors to the moft rd ee ogts ant of 
electricity. 

Tr is the property of all kinds 'of ele@trics, that when they 
_ are rubbed by bodies differing from themfelves (in roughnefs 

or fmoothnefs chiefly) to attraét light bodies of all kinds 
, which are prefented to them; to exhibit an appearance of 
light (which is very vifible in the dark) attended with a 
fhapping noife, upon the approach of any conduétor ;~ and, if 
Kkka2 the 


ayy 
5 2 
3 


436 A SERIES Part II.. 


the noftrils be prefented, they are-affected: with a fmell >a 
that of phofphorus. 

An electric fubftance exhibiting thefe appearances, is fia 
to be excited, and fome of them, particularly the tourmalin, 
are excited by heating and cooling, as well as by rubbing. | 

‘Ir is neceflary, however, to.a.confiderable excitation of 
any electric, that the fubftance againft which it is rubbed 
(ufually called the ruéser) have a communication with the 
earth, or bodies abounding with eleétricity, by means of 
conductors ; for if the rubber be in/ulated, that is, if it be cut 


off from all communication with: the earth by means of elec- 


trics, the friction has but little effect. 

Wuen infulated bodies have been attracted by, and brought 
into contact with any excited eleétric, they begin to be re- 
pelled by it, and alfo to repel one another: nor will they 


be attracted again, till they have been in contact with fome 


conductor communicating with the earth ;. but, after this, 

they will be attrafted as at firft. ws 
Ir condudtors. be infulated, clectrie powers may. be: commu 

nicated to them by the approach of excited, electrics. They, 


will then attract light bodies, and give {parks,) attended with — 
a {napping noife, like the electrics-themfelves. But there is — 
this difference between excited. and communicated electricity, 


that a conductor to which eledtricity has been communic: 

parts with its whole power at once, on the contact of a con- 
ductor communicating with the earth; whereas an excited 
electric, in the fame circumftances, lofes its electricity only, 


na 
partially ; it being difcharged only from the part which was 
actually touched by the conductor, or thofe inthe neighbour= 


| 
‘ 
‘ 
j 
F 


or PROPOSITIONS. 437 


hood of it; fo that the fpark of cleétric fire is not fo denfe, 
nor the explofion made by parting with it fo loud, from ex- 
cited, as from communicated electricity. 

Execrric fubftances; brought into ‘conta with excited 
electrics, will not deftroy their electricity ; whence it is that 
they are called non-conductors, becaufe they will not convey 
or conduct away whatever.is the caufe of electric appearances 
in bodies. 

. Wuen elettricity- is fttongly communicated to infulated’ 
animal bodies, the pulfe is quickened, and perfpiration in- 
creafed; and; if they receive, or part with their electricity on’ 
a fudden, a painful fenfation is felt at the place of communi-- 
cation.. 

_ THE growth of vegetables is quickened by electricity. 

No electric can be excited without producing eleétric ap- 
pearances in the body with which it is excited, provided that 
body be. infulated. For. this infulated rubber: will attrac 
light bodies, give fparks,.and make a {napping noife upon 
the approach of:a conductor, as well as the excited eleétric. . 

Ir aninfulated conduétor be pointed, or if a pointed con 
ductor communicating with the earth be held pretty near it, 
little or no eleétric appearance will be exhibited ; only a light 
will appear at.each of the points, during the act of excitation, 
and a current of air-will be fenfible from off them both. 

TueEse two eledtricities, viz. that ofthe eledtric itfelf, and 
that of the rubber, though fimilar:to, are the reverfe-of one 
another. A body attracted by the one will be repelled by the 
other, and they will attract, and in all refpeéts act upon one 
another more en ely than upon other bodies; fo that two 


pieces 


438 2 VAo hE RAST 20 - PARP, 


pieces of glafs or filk, poflefied. of contrary clectricitiés, |will 
cohere firmly together, , and, require! a/ confiderable- Sane. 
feparate them. 

Tuese two electricities, having been firt iewoeia by 
producing one of them. from glafs, and the other/from am- 
ber, fealing wax, fulphur, rofin, &c. firft: obtained: the 
names of vitreous and refinous electricity; and it being after - 
wards imagined that one of them was a redundancy, and the 
other a deficiency of a fuppofed electric fluid, the former (viz. 
that which is, produced from the friction of fmooth  glafs tubes 
or globes by the human hand, ora common leathern rubber) 
obtained the name of pofitive; and the latter (viz. that which 
is produced from the friion of fticks or globes of fulphurs 


&c. or collected from the rubber of a glafs globe above- — =" 
mentioned) that of negative ei 2 = thefe terms are : 
now principally in ufe. ous. ext Sams ef 


Ir a conduétor, not infulated, be troughs within the at =, 
mofphere, that is, the {phere of action, of any ei. 
body, it acquires the eleétricity oppofite to that of the elec! _ 
trified body; and the nearer it is brought, the ftronger oppo- 
fite electricity doth it acquire ; till the one receive afpark from 
the other, and then the eleétricity of both will be difcharged. 
Tur electric fubftance which feparates the ‘two conduétors, | i 
poffetiing thefe two oppofite kinds of eleétricity, is faid to be aA ie.) 
charged. Pilates of glafs are the moft convenient for this pur- mi 
pofe, and the thinner the plate, the greater’ charge it isa 
pable of holding. The conductors contiguous to each fide of — 
the glafs are called their coating. we apie Hey ~) bi ' 
AGREEABLE to the above-mentioned om princi le, 


> eee de 


iasal op? iPROPIOSE TE OWELE / 439 


ipneveffary, (that one fide of the charged glafs have a commu- 
nication with the rubber; while the other receives’ the “elec- 
tricity from the condutor ; or with the er while the 
other receives from the rubber. 

ott follows alfo, that the two ids oP Aleipatertius charged 
are always’ poffeffed of the two oppofite’cletricities ; that fide 
which communicates with the excited electric having the 
alegtricity of the cleric, and sits tomar communicates ‘with 
the rubber, that of the rubber. 

*Tarre is, confequently, a very eager attraction eevee 

theft two dleétricities’ with’ which ‘the different fides of the 
plate are charged’; and, when a proper communication is 
made by means of conduétots, 2 flath of eleétric light, at- 
tended with a repott (which is greater or lefs in proportion 
to the quantity of electricity communicated to them, ‘and the 
goodnefs of the conduttors) i is perceived between them, and 
the electricity of both fides is thereby difeharged. 
Tue fubftance of the glafs itfelf, in or upon which thefe 
eleGtricities exift, is impervious to electricity, and does not 
permit them to unite; but if they be very ftrong, and the 
plate ef: glafs very thin, they will force a paflage through the 
glals. ‘This, however, ‘always breaks the glafs, and renders 
it incapable of another charge. 

“Tue flath of light, together with the explofion between 
the two oppofite fides of a charged electric, is generally called 


“the eledfric fhock, on account of the difagreeable fenfation it 


gives any animal, whofe body is made ufe of to form the com= 

munication between them. 
Tuts eleétric fhock is always found to perform the circuit 
from. 


440 A SERIES or PROPOSITIONS. Par II. 


from one fide of thé charged glafs to the other by the-fhorteft 
paflage, through the beft .condu€tors. Common communi- 
cated electricity alfo .obferves the fame ‘rule, in its s tranfni- 
fion from one body to another. 

Ir has not been found that the elettric thock, takes up the 


leaft fenfible fpace of time in being tranfmitted to the wdigkaal : 


diftances. 

Tue eleétric fhock, as alfo the common eleétric fark, dit. 
places the air through which it paffes ; and if its paflage from 
conduétor to condudtor be interrupted’ by non-conduétors of 
a moderate thicknefs, it will rend and tear them in its paflage 5 
and in fuch a manner as to exhibit the appearance of a fudden 
expanfion of the air about the center of the fhock. 

Ir a ftrong fhock be fent through a {mall animal body, it 
will often deprive it inftantly of life. ; 

Wuen the electric thock is very ftrong, it will give pola- 
rity to magnetic needles, and fometimes it evslng their 


poles. » : * 


GREAT fhocks, by which animals are killed, are Gia to 
haften putrefaction. 


Erecrricity and lightning are, in all refpeats, “the bes 5 


thing. Every effect of lightning may be imitated. by. eleétri- 
city, and every experiment in electricity may be made wit 
lightning, brought down from the clouds, by means of i 
fulated a Prins rods of metal, - ' 


b>, 


- bneiie yllergina oWs ‘eRe Da ro weoneogqE Tiiw bathinepas 
lita 2qewla\iessnimegqe tout deidwint evonefianoo ons ot 
-qe slod Yo" éues otis en morls gnitobiinos qled tonnes bas 
asiStehodd esocmftentprig epee fed iebonareog 
Wag soddte-twe-gaiams I0 eoiieb in sw esoumbogge won ah 
(ye be HEORIBS core BLVECTRICITYS 
Loxhbuoitay odd ned? order gtidion es (esiuposciiar bas 
ee ogaind-orwhio ni ea Siuso semorgel eds ‘ddidwr ni ebods 

: ke L-yangileb iaorg eid tuod 


ciate: 
Shy 


hu Microb. yididus owtan i0F 


Ath niggnasaqo gatqtonitg teensy stan ‘sais leat gaihss2 


? ; Naiah Haklban, genes lin gi ong, oft Reqxe os argolsas 
Che of the moft intimate shal struions ne human, 
; Sei st They fuggeft one a- 


SHe'GR bran. 4here ete ae AE's 
Ta viewing the works of nature, we ‘neceflarily become firft 


Mirsad igo REIMOTNT — a 


gon \mads-03 ditidvevig: wade evonbilavs | 
(Rel 2a ybel o22 sw eis brie édwa2 to-aisdo aids Aiggtbies 


_ sibdsy pnars8 mort. breast oie: yednsidt ile: wh 


ra hl a ll 


442 THEORIES or Part III. 


acquainted with appearances, or effects. We naturally attend 
to the circumftances in which fuch appearances always arife, 
and cannot help confidering them as the caufes of thofe ap- 
pearances. Then, confidering thefe cireumftances themfelves 
as new appearances, we are defirous of tracing out other cir- 
cumftances that gave birth to them. Thus, conftantly af- 
cending in this chain of caufes and effects, we are led, at laft, 
to the firft-¢apfe ofvalh:) and then. we ¢oiifidér all. {econdary, 
and inferior caufes, as nothing more than the various me- 
thods in which the fupreme caufe a&ts, in order to bring a- 
bout his great defigns. 

In all fcience, we firft afcend from particular to general. 
For nature exhibits dothing but particulars; and all general 
propofitions, as well as general terms, are artificial things ; 
being contrived for the eafe of our conception and memory, 
in order to comprehend things clearly, and to comprife as 
much knowledge, as poflible, in the: fmalleft compafs.» Its 
ng, wonder then that we take, pleafure.in: this:procefs, Be- 
fides, we actually fee in nature a vaft variety of effets 'pro- 
ceeding from the fame general principles, operating in dif- 
ferent circumftances; {o that judging from appearances, that 
nature is every where uniform with itfelf, we are led, by 
analogy, to expect the fame in all cafes 5 and think it-an 
gument in favour of any fyitem, if it exhibit a variety ohefD 


feds fpringing from 4 few caufes. For fuch variety, in effects, 


and {uch fimplicity in caufes, we enerally, fee in nature, 
“HAWN ‘ifeovered the caule Ae any. persed it is the, 


if “did 


UD raat ELESG TRACP T 443 


dist other. fithilar appearances from -fimilar- previous fituations 
of. things. .-By:this means, . the true philofopher; knowing 


what will be the sefule -of/ putting every thingy’ which the 


prefent:fyftem exhibits, |into every: waritty lof cireumftances, 
is mafteriof ll the:powers of nature, and can dpply them to 
all, the -uleful. -purpofes' of (life. :| Thus (does: dmowiedge) as 
Lord Bacon’ obferves, become powér;' and thus ‘is the philo- 
fopher capable of providing; ima more effectual manner, both 
for his own: happiness iandfor that of others} cand ‘thereby of 
epproving: hinifelf a -good:citizeny and aw Ufefal ‘inetitbet of 
fociety. ‘yoite19qo: ines aisds Ao-bosrik od..190.2n2mghis} 
dg is obvious, from this general:view of the bulines of phi- 
lofophy, that, in order to ‘trace thofe eircumftancés ih which 
any appearance in nature is certainly atid invariably produced, 
itis chiefly ufeful to obferve what there 48 42 common in: the 
circum#ances' attending fimilar appearances’ fot on thofe 
common cireumiftances, all that is common in the appearances 
muft-depend. And the eafieft poffible method, by which we 
cain ¢race:Gnt the conne@ion of caufes atid’ effets in nature; 
is to ‘begin with comparing thole appetratices Which ire moft 
fimilary where the idifferende:confifts in’ a fingle eiteurhftances 


_ the whole:effeét iof which, in different appearances, ig theteby 


perfegily known. And when we have, by this means; noted 
the! whole effectiof allithe feparatesdirouth hance 4nd ‘tua! 
tions-of things, weican eafily judge of their ‘eff in’all pof-” 
fiblescombinations: Pst.2.28 bevbitacs 2ibas «dosh bsmist 
» Hence analegy.is our-beft guide in all: philofophical invet- 
tigations; and all difcoveries, «which’ were not made by:mere 
ann Lile accident, 


At THEORIES! oni i i Parr Il. 


accident, have-been made by the “help: of sit. Wetoblerve'a 
complex appearance, attended: with a proportionable ‘variety 
of circumftances ‘and fituations.~ We alfo fee another appear= 
ance, in fomie refpeéts fimilar,» in others diffimilar; ‘the: cir= 
cumftances, \likewife, :fimilar and diffimilar in ‘thecfame pro- 
portion, or, wes! purpofely vary the circumftances ‘of the 
former appearance; and obferve what difference» it coccafions. 
But, unlefs:there/be avery great analogy; or fimilarity,  be- 
tween them, fo that; the influence of a:fingle circumftance, or 
of a few, circumftances, .can be traced feparately, thoapteietle 
judgment can be formed of their real operation. vgdbis 

. Bur in all this procefs; a! man who aéts from defign, and 


not -abfolutely at random,’ would never think of trying the 


influence of any circumftance in an appearance, \unlefs, from 
fome. other. analogies in nature, more:or lefs perfectyihe had 
formed, f fome idea, what.its influence would. probably» bei; at 


leaft, he mutt, from analogies in nature previoufly »obferved, — 


have: formed an idea of feveral poflible confequences,: and try 


which of them will) really, follow e.'Thatvis, sir other»words, 


eyery experiment,.in-which there isiany cdefigh, vis\imadexto 
afcertain fome hypothe/is. ; _ For an-bypothefis is nothing more 
than a preconceived idea of an, event, as fuppofed tovarife 
from certain circumftances, which mutt ‘have been: imagined: 
to have produced, the fame,,oria fithilar efféctimpon ‘other 
ogcafigns ni An, Ahypothefis., abfolutely «verified ogeafes itouube 
termed fuch, and is confidered as a fact ;;thoughy«whenlitt 
has long been, in an, hypothetical ftates:it may, continuetd be 
called,. eee iby; the fame-namessiib Le baa yenoitagit 

an sfid ; es 


1 
stiles 


Mwrsat . ELEC TRUGPRUT 445 


_o Tue only danger in the ufe of hypothefes arifes from mak- 
ing this tranfition too foon. » And when an hypothefis is no 
longer confidered as a mere probable: fuppofition, but a real 
fact ; a philofopher not only acquiefces in it, vand ' thereby 
miftakes ‘the caufe‘of one particular. appearance 5’ but, by its 
analogies, he miftakes the caufe of other‘appearances too, and 
is led into a whole fyftem of error. A philofopher who has 
been long attached to a favourite hypothefis, and efpecially 
if he have diftinguithed himfelf by his ingenuity in difcover- 
» ing or purfuing it, will: not, fometimes, 'bé Convinced of its 
falfity by the plaineft evidence of fact.’ ‘Thus’ both himfelf, 
and all his followers, are put’ upon falfe  purfuits, and feem 
determined to warp the whole courfe of 1 nature, to — — 
manner of conceiving of its operations. 
Bur; provided philofophers can be upon their int re 
this {pecies' of vanity (which muft be owned to be very tempt-~ 
| ing) and againft theobftinacy which is the confequence of it ; 
hypothefes, and even a great variety of them, ” are’ certainly 
very promifing “citeumftances to’ philofophical * difcoveries: 
Hypothefes,- while they’ are confidered merely as” “fuck, Tead. 
pérfons to try a variety of experiments, in order to afcertain 
them. In thefe experiments, new facts generally arifé. Thefe 
new faéts ferve to corre&t the hypothefis which ‘gave occafion 
to'thett: ‘The theory, thus correéted, ferves to difeover more 
neiw fadts ; Which, a8 before, bring the theory {till Hearét to 
the truth: °In' this progreffive ftate, or method: of approxi- 
mation, “things continue ; till, "by degrees, we may hope that 
we (hall‘have difeovered all the faéts, and have formed a per= 
fea theory of them. By this perfect theory, I mean a fyfteni 
of 


148 THEORIPST ori.ic Parr Ii : 


of propofitions, accurately defining: all the circumfances of: 
every appearance, the feparate effect of each ci i: 
and the manner of its operation. boiabRiies t9¢ aul 
. Taave dwelt fo long upon this Gabjedts becaufe I appres 
henal that ele&tricians have generally been too much attach+ 
ed to their feveral theories, {0 as to have retarded the progrefs 
of real difcoveries,. Indeed, no other partof the whole coms 
pats of philofophy affords fo fine a {cene:for ingenious fpecu+ 
lation... Here the imagination may ‘have full play, in con- 
ceiving of the manner.in which an invifible agent: produces 
an almoft infinite variety of vifible effects... As the agent is 
invifible, every philofopher is at liberty to make it whatever 
he pleafes, and afcribe to it fuch properties and powers as.are 
moft convenient for his purpofe.. .And,, indeed, if he» can - 
frame. his, theory |fo.as. really to fuit all-the fats, ithasallithe * 
evidence. of truth that the nature of things can admit.) ~ |) 

Wiru the-firft eledtricians, electricaljattraction was perform ik 
ed by means of undtuous effluvia,emitted by. the excited »elecs Jah 
tric... Thefe | were fuppofed to faften upon all bodies in theis 
way, and to carry back with them all that Were not too heavy; ‘wh 
For, in that age of philofophy, all effluvia were. fappofed. to i 
return tothe bodies from which they were. emitted ;, fince no 
perfon could, otherwife, . account, for the fubftance not be+ 
ing fenfibly wafted by the. conftant criti ir gna 
light bodies, on which the, undtuous effluyia had 
were arrived:at the excited. cleric, a freth emiffion of the ef — 
fluvia was fuppofed to carry them back again. But this effect — 1 
of the efluvia was not. thought of, till electrical repulfionhad * 
been fufficiently obferyed. ; 50 bids VAC! uae ae ody 344 

1 C Sea 


ELECTRICITY. 447 


‘Wuen the Newtonian. philofophy had made fome progrefs, 
and; the extreme fubtilty of light, andother effluvia of bodies, 
was, demonftrated ;. fo. that philofophers were under no/appre- 
henfion of. bodies being: wafted: by continual emiffion, the 
doGtrine of the return of effuvia was univerfally given up, as 
no longer neceflary ; and they were obliged to acquiefce in the 
unknown principles of attraction and repulfion, as fuppofed to 
be, properties of certain’ bodies, communicated to them by the 
Divine; Being, the mechanical: caufe: of which ae fearce at~ 
tempted to,explain. —- 

Wuen, Mr. Du Faye! difcovered the Conscapipobite gua of 

eletricity,. which he termed the vitreous and the refinous elec- 
tricity, he.neceflarily formed the idea of two déftinct electric 
Siuids, repulfive with refpe& to themfelves, and attractive of 
ene another., But he had no-idea of both: fpecies being  ac- 
tually concerned. in.every electrical operation, and that glafs) 
or rofin-alone, always, produced. them both... This. theory, 
therefore,. was as fimple in its application as the other. 

_ Wuite-nothing more was known of electricity but attrac- 
tion and repulfion,, this general theory, was fufticient. The 
general, attraction, ofall bodies to alk bodies:was called (andr 
by, fome abfurdly enough fuppofed:to be accounted for by)’ 
gravitation, and many fuperficial philofophers thought they: 
had given.a very good account of electricity, cohefion, and: 
magnetifm, by cailing them hance eee of attraction 
peculiar, to-certaim bodies, _ 

_ Bur when eleGricity began to: deter itfelfiin.adgreater va- 
riety of appearances, and to make itfelf fenfible to the {mell,: 
the fight, the touch; andthe oe when bodies*were' not 


only 


448 THEORIES or —.- Part IIL. 


Tue great difficulty» common tovall thefe theories was 'to 
afcertaity the diretion ‘of the ‘eleétric matter.’ ‘It is no won). 
der that; ‘when eleétridal appearances were “firft obferved, ‘all 
eleétric: powers were {uppofed to refide in; * and therefore ‘to 
proceed fromi the. excited: eledtric.!« Confequently, the elec’ 
tric {park:was firft:imagined to be darted from the eleétrified 
body towards:any’ conductor that was prefented to it.» It was 
never imagined there could be any difference in this refpect 
whether it was-amber;! glafs,’ fealing wax,’ or any thing’ elfe! 
that was excited. Nothing! was thought) to be more evident” 
to the: fenfes than this progrefs of the cleétric matter : What! 
then muft have been the aftonifhment of all electricians, when- 
they firft obferved electric appearances at an infulated rubber; 
at the fame time that it was demonftrated, that ‘the action of 


the rubber did inot produce,’ but “only colleé ithe eleétric » 


fldids i} aria oF ol inte agg: t9 pat 
In. this cafe, the current could not have been fuppofed to” 


flow . 


See. I... ELECTRICITY.: 449. 


flow both from, the conduétor and the rubber; and yet the. 
firft appearances were the fame. To provide a fupply of the. 
electric matter, they were obliged to fuppofe that, notwith- 
ftanding appearances were nearly the fame, the eleétric fluid 
was really received by the electrified body in the one cafe, 
and emitted by it in the other. But. now, being obliged to. 
give up the argument for the manner of its progrefs from the 
evidence of fight, they were at a lofs whether, in the ufual 
method of eleétrifying by excited glafs, the fluid proceeded 
from. the rubber to the conduéor, or from the conduétor to 
the rubber; and nothing was found to obviate thefe difficul- 
ties, till an excellent theory of pofitive and negative elec- 
tricity. was fuggefted by Dr. Watfon, and digefted and il- 
luftrated by Dr.Franklin. _. , 
~ Ir was foon found, that the cle&ticity, at the cable was 
the reverfe ‘of that at the conduétor, and in all refpeéts. the 
fame with that which had before been produced by the fric- 
tion of fealing wax, fulphur, rofin, &c. Seeing, therefore, 
that both the eletricities, as they had heretofore been called, 
were produced at the fame time, by one and the fame elec- 
tric, and by the fame. friction, all, ele@tricians and among 
the reft Mr. Du Faye himfelf concluded, that they were both 
modifications of one and the fame fluid; and the old dogtrine 
of the. different electricities was univerfally difcarded, © 
‘THe accidental difcovery of the Leyden pbial moft “clearly 
demonftrated the imperfedtion of all the theories preceding 
that of pofitive and negative electricity, by exhibiting an afto- 
nifhing » aie which no eleétricians, with the help of 
iomM mm » any 


. 450 Mr. WILSON’s Part Hf,’ 


any theory, could have forefeen, and of whieh’ etic bags 
have formed no idea, @ priori. 

~ Upon this great event, new theories of dlettricity ahi 
plied apace, fo that it would be to no purpofe to enumerate 
them all. Indeed many of them were no more than the be- 
ings of a day. For no fooner were they ftarted, but the au- 
thors themfelves, upon the appearance of fome new fac, faw 
reafon to new model, or entirely reje& them. ‘I fhall, there- 
fore, content myfelf with giving the outlines of fome of the 
principal theories of electricity, which have their adherents 
at prefent, without confidering whether they took their ten 
before or after this difcovery. 

Wirn fome, and particularly Mr. Wilfon, the chief agent 
in all electrical operations is Sir Ifaac Newton’s ether ; which 
is more or lefs denfe in all bodies in proportion to the 
{mallnefs of their pores, except that it is much denfer in 
fulphureous and unétuous bodies.* To this ether are afcribed 
the principal phenomena of attraction and -repulfion, whereas 
the light, the {mell, and other fenfible geek of the clec- 
tric fluid are referred to the groffer particles of bc ies, driven 
from them by the forcible aétion of this ether. any phe- 
nomena in eleétricity are alfo attempted to be explained t 
means of a fubtile medium, at the furface of all bodies, 1 w! 
is. the caufe of the refraction and reflection of the Q ie 

‘This. 
Je 


rays: of 
and alfo refifts the entrance and exit of this ether ap hi 
and is of the fame nature with what is called the ele&tric : lui 


medium, he fays, extends to a {mall diftance fron 


® Wilfon’s Differtation, p. 5+ + Hoadley and Wilfon, p. 55. 


Set. THEORY. 451 


‘On the furface ‘of conductors this medium is rare, and eafily 
admits the paffage of the electric fluid; whereas on the fur- 
face of ‘cleGttics it is denfe, and refifts it... This medium is 
rarified by heat, which converts non-conductors into conduc- 
tors.* On this theory I thall make no particular remarks, 
becaufe I cannot fay that Iclearly comprehend it. 
. Bur the far greater number of philofophers fuppofe, and 
with the greateft probability, that there is a fluid /ui generis 
principally concerned in the Bufinels of ele&tricity. ‘They 
feem, however, though perhaps without reafon, entirely to 
coverléok Sit Taac Newton’s ether; or if they do not fuppofe 
Gt to be wholly unconcerned, they allow it only a fecondary 
“and fabordinate part to'aét inthis drama. And among thofe 
who fuppofe'a fluid fii generis, there is a great diverfity of o- 
“\pinions about the mode of its exiftence, and the manner of its 
SpefatibnxeehsoA oto teatelierg Dod Jallulr. 
- "Tub ingenious Abbé Nollet whofe theory has been more the 
fubje& of debate than all the other theories before Dr- 
Franklin’s, fuppofes that, in all electrical operations, the fluid 
is thrown into two oppofite motions ; that the affluence of this 
‘matter drives all light bodies before it, by impulfe, upon the 
‘leGtrified body, and its effuence carries them back again. 
‘But he feems very much’ embarraffed: in accounting for facts 
where both thefe currents muft ‘be confidered, at the fame 
time that ‘he‘is obliged to find expedients to prevent their im- 
peding the effeéts of each other. To obviate this great diffi- 
‘culty, he {uppofes, that every excited clectric, and likewife 


* Ib. p. 78. 
Mmm 2 every 


452 NOLLET"s Part IIL 


every body to which eleétricity is communicated, has two 
orders of pores, one for the emiffion of the effluvia, and the 
other for the reception of them. A man oflefs ingenuity than 
the Abbé could not have maintained himfelf in fuch’a theory 
as this; but, with his fund of invention, he was never at a 
lofs for refources upon all. emergencies, and) in his Jaft pub- 
lication appears to be as zealous for this: <5 tet iyyeraeie. 
as at the firit. 

He more than once requefted a deputation of the mem- 
bers of the Academy of Sciences, to be witneffes of fome ex- 
periments, in which, he thought, there was vifible eflluence 


of the electrical effluvia from the conductor, both to the globe | 


at one of its extremities, and to any non-eledtric prefented to 
it at the other; and their teftimony was figned.and regiftered 
in proper form.* But it does not feem to the honour of 
Mr. Nollet, or thofe gentlemen of the Academy, to be fo 
very pofitive in a matter which does not admit of the evidence: 
of fenfe. o Pstdut 

Tue Abbé’s confidence upon this fubjeceis is very saeliheatin 


rh Ad ws shal 


. 


Thefe effects, fays he, well confidered, and reviewed a thou- - 


fand times, in the courfe of thirty years, in which [have applied 
to electricity, make me fay with confidence, that thofe pencils 
of rays are currents of electric matter, which fly ‘from 
the conductor towards the excited globe. _ This is ‘fo evident, 
that I would freely appeal to the ocular teftimony: of any 
unprejudiced perfon, who fhould fee the experiments-which 
Thaverecited. But, fays he, the fact in queftion is contrary 


* Lesons de Phyfique, p. 368, 395- 


‘Seek EPO EO RBUTAOS 3 


toafyftem of eleatricity, which fome perfons perfift in main- 
taining. They have the affarance to tell me, that the matter 
of the fiminous pencil, “in my experiment, ‘moves in a direc- 
tion quite oppofite to that which I fuppofe; that it proceeds 
from the excited globe, and is from thence thrown upon any 
non-eleétrie within its reach. * In another’place, ‘he fays, 
that the'prineiple of fimultanéous effluences and oe is 
bas fiiamapathe® sgn but a fact well proved. G 
“Tue Abbé Nolet propofes an ‘hypothefis to ‘esphian the 
difference between common’ clectricity: and the | eleatric 
- fhock. - All the effects of common electricity, he fays, plain 
ly thow, that the electric matter is animated with a progref- 
five motion, which really carries it forwards; whereas the 
remarkable cafe of the electric fhock appears to be an inftan- 
taneous percuffion, which the contiguous parts of the fame 
matter communicate to. one another, without being difplaced. 
Sound and wind, he fays, are motions of the air; but would 
a philofopher, be permitted to take the one for the other, 
in meafuring their velocity or extent. But this comparifon 
is by no means juft. ¢ 
Ir muft be acknowledged, that far the greater part of the 
Abbé Nollet’s arguments in favour of his doétrine of effluen- 
ces and affluences are very unfatisfactory, and that his method 
ef accounting for electrical attraction and repulfion, with o- 
ther phenomena in ele¢tricity, by means of it, is. more inge- 
nious than folid. It is a great pity that this truly excellent phi- 
Tofopher had not {pent more time in diverfifying facts, and 


“Ib. p. 363. + Lettres fur I’ ele@ricité, p-98. tLeconsde Phyfique, 293. 
lefs 


454 NEGATIVE anvy POSITIVE Part II 


lefs.in refining upon theory. Bat it is in fome meafure fe nar 
tural fault of a difpofition to philofophize.. 9, |. 

Mr. Du Tour improves upon. this hypothefis ae the Abbé 
Nollet, by fuppofing that there is a’ difference. between the 
affluent and effluent current; and that the particles. of the 
fluid are thrown into vibrations of different qualities, which 
makes one of thefe currents more copious than the other, 
according as fulphur or glafs is ufed. Difficult as it i is to form 
any idea of this hypothefis, the author appears very much 
attached to it, and has no doubt-of its erponnting for all 
electrical appearances, 


bes i2 


SECTION 


Sell. ELECTRICITY. «— 455 
vpitiuy Wbiahiqdeodig Bist! 39 
"SE CT PO NTT: 
Silisnua 


: - be 


Tue ruEoRY oF POSITIVE AND NEGATIVE 
ELECTRICITY. 


HE Englith philofophers, and perhaps the greater part 
of foreigners too, have now generally adopted the theo- 
ry of pofitive and negative electricity. As this theory has been 
extended to almoft' all the phenomena, and is the moft 
probable of any that have been hitherto propofed to the world, 
I fhall give a pretty full account of it, and fhow how it a- 
grees with all the propofitions of the laft part, to which it 
has hitherto been applied. © 
~ Turis theory generally goes by the name of Dr. Franklin, 
and there is no doubt of his right to it; but juftice requires 
that I diftin@ly mention the equal, and, perhaps, prior claim 
of Dr. Watfon, to whom I have before faid it had occurred. 
Dr. Watfon thowed a feries of experiments to confirm the 
dogtrine of plus and minus eleétricity to Martin Folkes Eq. 
then prefident, and to a great number of fellows of the Roy- 
al Society, fo early as the beginning of the year 1747, before 
it was known in England that Dr. Franklin had difcovered 
the 


456. POSITIVE axp) NEGATIVE Part Ii 


the fame thing-in America. See the Philofophical Tranfac-" 
tions, Vol. 44, p. 7393 and Vol. 45, p- 93———101- Dr. 
Franklin’s paper, containing the fame difcovery, was dated at 
Philadelphia, June the 1ft. 1747-0 © ye 
Accorpinc to this theory, all the operations of cleCtricity_ 
depend upon one fluid fui. generis, extremely fubtile» and» 
elaftic, difperfed through the pores of all bodies ;. by which 
the particles of it are as ftrongly attracted, -as,they are re~ 
pelled by one another. ein | a ee ell 
Wuzn the equilibrinim of this faid.in any: bedysiseotaice= 
turbed; that is, when there is in any body neither more nor 
lefs of it than its natural fhare, or than’ ee 
it is capable of retaining by its own: attraction, it 
difcover itfelf to our fenfes by any_ effec. he aBieg 
rubber upon an eleGric difturbs this equilibr occafioni 
a deficiency “a0 Sebihins one wee and a redundang of ii 
in another... Yo Dh 
Tuis equilibrium being forcibly difturbed, the. mutual re: 
pulfion of the particles of the Suid is necoiieeny exerted to” 
reftore it. If two bodies be both of them ms harged, 1 


silJs 


the bodies recede from one another to places. s wh 
is lefs denfe.. For, as there is fuppofed to be : an 
tion between all bodies and the ‘ele@tric fluic 
dies go along with their atmofpheres.. Aj If both the 
exhaufted of their natural fhare of this fluid, they: 
attradted by. the denfer fluid, exifting, either, = th 


Smt 8 ABEMEE RECEP FOOT - hy 


which ocdafions:themi Mill to” récede’ from one” ariothet,”as 
much as when they were overc -boting 2 2oluit 
~. Sonre‘of uthe cpatroné’ Of thé ‘iy potHielis’ of é atidhe- 
gative electricity conceive-other wife oF *the’ arate 


of this repilfion. > They fa that, (a8 the denfer ‘eleGttic “fue 


Is not|the repulfion, faysthey, owilig rather’ to an accumti 
lation: of the eleétric fluid’ on: the farfaces of the two bodies} 
which: a¢cumulation is» produced by, the ‘atttaétion ‘of’ the 
bodies, and the difficulty:the-fuid finds“in’ entering them ? 
This difficilty::in entering: is» fuppofed to “be owing,“ chief- 
lysi:to the. air’ on the-furface of bodies; which i probably’ 
little: \condenfed there ; as) may appear from Mr. Canton’s ex. 
periment above~ e-imentioned»ois the'double barometer. aA 
Last xy, if oneof the bodies haveiat.overplus of the fluid, 
and the other|a deficiency: of ite. tht equilibrium is reftored 
with great violence, cand ailisivdsicnh anaenenenen bosages 
them are more ftri 44 doidve noiteciles 
3 _ Tm HE influence,of points. in Arasinky orsthootwisig off ees ai 
ieatric ener not. been quite. fatisfatorily, accounted: for 


with fome ey og both in pc and quitting any” shea 
whatever be the caufe of that refiftance, it is natural to fups 
pofe, that it muft be leaft at the points.of bodies where there 
are fewer particles of the body (on. which, the .refiftance de= 
pends) oppofed to its paffage, than at the flat parts of the 
Naan furface; 
ip) 


453 POSITIVE aun NEGATIVE Paar Uh 


furface, where. she reiting, power of = great numbec of por 


ticles is united. -be taidoi9vo S19 yarlt, gai tw ee tlongec: : 


_, Tne, Sight which. is, vifible in, ple@rical appeatanees: is: ge- 


nerally : to be part of the. compofition iof the cleric 
fiuid, which appears when, it is properly agitated. . But this 
foppofition concerning cleric light, is not ouniemahand 
hypothefis:,, It.may. be fuppoftd,!upon ithis.as. well 
Mr, Wilfon’s, theory, that. the. light, ih FS 
fmell, ‘in. electrical experiments. arife frou. patticles of matter 
much groffer.than the proper-eleétric fluid,: but: which’ may 
be:deivenfiom baslien ty its. powerfula@tione.() bo9  os.l00 
Tue Jound,of an electrical: explofien is certainly produced 
by: the! aig being difplaced.iby, the. cledtric: fluid, andthen 
fuddenly collapfing, fe as.to oceafiom a vibration, which: dif- 
fafes itfclf- every way: from the place. where the explofion was 
made. For in fuch vibrations found is known to confit. 
_ Bur: the: chief excellence of this:‘theory of pofitive ba 
negative cle@ricity, and-that which gave it-the ea? 
tation, is the eafy explication which it fuggetts ‘of all the 
nomena of the Leyden phial. This Auidi is fuppofed to 
with the greateft cafe in \bodies whieh are conductors, i 
with extreme ‘difficulty in -eleéttics per fe; inforniith ‘ 
plafs is abfolutely ‘impermeable ‘to! it Tt is: moredvi 
fuppofed, that all clerics (and pirkicthaddy glafs)'on’ account 
of the {mallnefs of their pores, do at all-times contain, an ex- 
ceeding ‘great, and always an” equal quantity of ‘this fluids fo 
that no more ‘can be thrown into°one “part of any dedtric 
fubftance} except the fame quantity go. out-at another, and 
thegain be exactly equal to the-lofs. Thefe things being 
previoufly 


‘ 


See BEET RPCEPYOOT | hy 


previoufly’ fuppofed, ‘the phenoment of chatging’ 
Sg of a no eae a 
Iw the ufual -mianter' of by & fittooth glafe 


pontabds sider aceen ige thé Fabber frond 
all the bodies'Whie! etamonaed mae to 


that fide ‘of the glafs ainsrekemitiaherinn aeaee 
miift neceflatily berexhautted »ivorder te fuppl ly the coridues 
tor) whiel evult convey the Whole of it tothe fide with which 
it-eowirnuiieates! | By ‘this “6peratioti)’ therefore the: deatie 
fluid “Becomes | almoft re extaaned? dHOSgHe Gab UF 
the plate, “while! it is ‘as’ tach’ actuinnilated ‘on the other; 
andthe difeharge’ is made by thé eléGtrie fluid “rtithih 
Weacetinencektone is! given 4} ee shee fe 


" condti@érsj? {fromn® 


wasitwhaufted?)! ‘iolau ti weibsdriw peti asqmsite Hs ftaiog 
Tr ismot neteffary, however,” rosthectleibys had the 
fame individual particles of eleétric matter whieh were th 
Jesutahopanetaabrnawenrarvian tereine 
bee n yi i 
Liendeien extihuiftted 'fide.'°Ft may Be fat? 
ane to fippote; as was'obferved before}. that thie additional? 
quantity’ of fluid difplaces and occupies the {pace of ar eqiial! 
portidn ofthe natural quantity’ of Auid ‘belonging 46 tHE? 
cond uGtrs inthe citeuit, whith lay'conti peri i 
fide: ofitlie glafsl ‘wT hie difpladed uid ative forwardsian! 
i rts cy si “fame? matter iH the? next conduerdy 1 


Nnona2 and 


460 POSITIVE ana NEGATIVE _— Parr IIE 


and thus the: progrefs, may continue, till the exhaufted fide of 
the glafs i is 5 fupplied by the, fluid a. in the-eon- 
duétors contiguous toit.: In this ‘opla.thesmotan ef she's ‘elec- 
tric fluid in an explofion. will rather refemble the | vibration 
of the air, in founds,: than a current of it in; windss,..) 91) (\. 
ee eafily be.acknowledged, that while, the, fubftance 
of, .is fappofed to.contain asimuch. as it ¢an poflibly 
hold. of the electric fluid, no.part of it, can be forced into one 
of. the, fides, ; without, obliging an equal quantity to quit'the 
other fides, but it may be thought,a difficulty upon this by. 
pothefis,. .that.one of the fides of a glafs plate, cannot be.ex~ 
baufled, without the: other receiving more: than its natural 
thare, particularly as the particles of this fluid are fappofed 
to be repulfive of one another. But, it muft_be -confidered, 
that, the attraction of the glafs.is fufficient to. retain, evenithe 


large, quantity of the electric fluid, which |is natural tovit; :a-) ” 


gainft all attempts to withdraw it, unlefs that eager jattrac~ 
tion.can be fatisfied by the. admiffion’ of an equal. quantity 
from. fome other quarter... When, this opportanity of a fap— 
ply, is, given, by, conneGing. one ofthe coatings: withthe; 
rubbers and the other with the condugtor,, the two attempts 
to introduce more; of the, fluid into one -of-the fides; and. to: 
take from it ,on, the. other; .. are made,, in #'manner,; at the: 
fame inftant. The, action of the, rubber) tends'to 
equilibrium of the fluid im the. glafs,, and’no {gener leas 2; 
{park quitted one of the fides,| toigo to)the, rubber, ; but itis, 
fupplied by the;conduétor on: the’ other; rand the difficulty: 
with which thefe additional particles move in the fubftance of. 
s Bas ‘the 


Sec. I «= BLECTRICITY. , 461 


the, glafs effectually prevents its reaching the oppofite ex- 
hhaufted fide; near as the two fides are to one. another, . moh 
eager as, is the adearens, of the fe to go whither it is, fo 
Airongly attradied. 

Ani is not faid,. ‘however but that sitio. fide of the gat 
may, give or receive a fimall quantity of the eleGtric fluid, with- 
out altering the quantity on the oppofite fide. It is only a 
-very,confiderable, part of the charge that is meant, when one 
fide is aid to be filled, while the other is exhaufted. 

_ Ir is a little remarkable, that. the electric fluid, in this, 
and in, every. other hypothefis, fhould fo. much refemble the 
ether of Sit Ifaac Newton. in. fome. refpeds, and yet differ 
from it fo effentially in others. ‘The eleétric fluid is fuppof- 
ed to be, like ether, extremely fabtile and elaftic, that is, re- 
pul ive of itfelf; but, inflead of being, like the ether, re- 

‘by all. other. matter, it is ftrongly attracted by it; 
that, far from being, like. the ether, rarer in the {mall than 
in the large pores, of bodies, rarer within the bodies than at 
their furfaces, and 1 rarer at their furfaces. than at any diftance 

om. them; 3 uit ‘mutt be denfer in fmall than i in large pores, 

denfer within, the fabftance of bodies. than at their furfaces, 

on denfer at their farfaces than. at a diftance from them. 
But no other property can account for the extraordinary quan- 
tity of this fluid contained within the fubftance of electrics 
per fe, or for the common atmofpheres of all. excited. and 
elettrified bodies, 

i account for the attraétion of light bodies, and ane 
eleétrical ‘appearances, in air of the fame denfity with the 
common -atmofphere, when glafs (which is fuppofed to be 

impermeable 


462 POSITIVE anv NEGATIVE Parr If. 
imiperiieablé to ele@tricity) is sheer pateds j itis asaipads that 
the addition or fubftraétion of the eleétric fluid, by the aétion 
of the excited eleétric, on one fide of the glafs, oceafions (ad 
in the experiment of the Leyden phial) a fabtragtion or 4 e.: 
dition of the fluid, on the ‘oppofite fide. The ftate of the 
fluid, therefore, on the oppofite fide ‘being’ altered, all lig 
Bodies within the fphere of its ation mutt be affeéted,” int he 
very fame manner as if the effluvia of the excited’ electrié 
had actually penetrated the glafs, according to the opinion of 
all eleétricians before Dr.’ Franklin. ATS 
Tite manner in which clouds acquire their polite de nega® 
tive eledtricity i is not determined, “according, to this, ph 
other theory, with fufficient certainty. Mr, Canton’s 
jeCture i is, _that the air refembles the tourmalin, and, co: 
quently, acquires i its electricity by heating or ‘cooling 3 bu 
whether i “it gains or lofes the electric fluid in either ftate m 
be determined by experiment. ‘Signior Beccaria’s s theory ( 
the electricity of the clouds has been related at large. ir 
THis hypothetis of pofitive a and Degative elegtricity h has b b 
adopted, and, in fome meafure, ‘rendered 1 more. ‘fyftemati 
by #pinus, in his elaborate treatife entitled, Tentamen 2 


rie Eleéttricitatis et Magneti imi. a esa 55 
He has extended the property « of impermeabil ity to air 


all eleétrics as well as lags, and | defined i itin 1 a bette 
He fuppofes impermeability to confift in Y the § 
with which electric  fubftances admit the el tr 
their pores, and the flowne{s with which it moves in he: 
Moreover, in confequence of this impermeability. of air to 
the eledtric fluid, he denies the reality of electtic atmofpheres, ' 
and 


Sec. I, . jELECTRICITY, ,. 463 


and thinks, as was obferyed before, that Dr, Franklin's theo- 
ny. vill do much better without. them,..... Mu sii ] 
thinks tha 


fabftances have in 


AW lh WVU 


ter) it could pot happen, that bodies in their natural fate, 
wi ed to, eleftricity, thould neither attragt nor repel 


cipia. Bet Py r Oeil 
Mie Wixi) 6, ell as pious adopts all. the. general 
‘principles of Ds. Franklin's theory of pofitive and negative e- 
fase wt eeiean experiments which haye hither- 
o been made thow. which of the electricities. is pofitive and 
which negative. Suppofing,. however, what is-called. pofitive 
to be really fo, and that {mooth. glafs,. for inftance, rubbed 
upon fulphur.attradts the electric fluid from it, he would ac- 
count for it upon the fame principles. whereby water ftands-in 
drops on rough furfaces, but is ditfufed on {mooth oncs. The 
electric fluid, he would: fappofe; is more ftrongly attracted by: 


the: 


4h23 


464 POSITIVE sawp NEGATIVE Pak Ti. 


the fmodth flirface of the’ glaft; 4nd therefore “diffules ‘ie 
over it, while it retreatS from eleéttics’ “of rougher fu 

But this explanation, ‘I itmagine, will ‘give’ little tien 
to {ceptical eleGtricians. 

Mr. WILKE schnoidledges there is. ‘great difficulty i ‘in ac* 
counting for the repulfive power of bodies electrified _Rega- 
tively, and thinks that it obliges us ‘to fuppofe the mutual r re- 
pulfion of all homogeneous matter. Mr. Waitz, he fays, was 
of the fame opinion, Mr. Wilke obferves upon’ this fubjeé, 
that the attra¢tion of light bodies to negative eleatrics cannot 
be owing to the repulfive power of the eclectic fluid in the 
neighbouring air, driving them, or the ele&tric matter ‘in them 
to the place where there is a want of it; ‘becaufe the've 
ought to decreafe‘as it recedes from the impulfive power : 
whereas it is accelerated, as if i it were ible yp by | the 3 Po 
tive eleétric. fF ~ 

Bur to this it may be replied, “that a facceffion of i impul 
fes, though every fubfequent one ‘fhould be weaker than t 


preceding, will produce an accelerated motion. _ Befides, ra ; 
nearer the light body is'to the negative ele€tric, the: nearer it 


is to the point where the equilibrium: of the fluid is molt 
ftroyed ; or the lefs force there is on the fide ‘of the ‘ledtric 
to balance the force that drives the light body: towards it it, a 
therefore the impulfes themfelves muft increafe. 


Mr. Witke, whofe treatife on the two cleétricities i is; : : 


aH 
mirable, both for its materials, ‘and methodical “arrangem fn id 
of them, diftinguithes three caufes of ‘excitation, y viz. wary 1 
* Wilke, p- 5. + Ib. p. 15. pulp 

ing, 


See. Il. ELECTRICITY. 468 


ing, liquefaction, and fristion ; and he advifes, that we care-. 
fully diftinguith between /pontaneous and communicated electri- 
city. By the former he means that which is the refult of the 

appofition, ‘or mutual action of two bodies; in confequence 

of which, one of them is left pofitively electric and the other 

negative. Whereas communicated elettticity is that which is 

fuperinduced upon a body, or part of a body, electric or non- 

eleétric, without its being previoufly heated, melted, or rub- 

bed; or without any mutual action between it and any other 

body. This diftinétion is, in general, very obvious; but 

Mr. Wilke defines it more accurately than it had been done~ 
before, and mentions feveral cafes in which they are afte ; 
cofifounded. 

_ SIGNIOR Beccarra admits the theory of pofitive and ‘ne-~ 
gative electricity, though he explains fome electrical pheno- 
mena in a. manner, different from the other patrons of that 
fyftem. 

He fuppotes th that electrified bodies: move to one another 
only in the ac of giving and receiving the eleétric fluid: # 
this effect being produced by the electric matter making a 
vacuum in its paflage, and thé contiguous air afterwards col-", 
lapfing, and thereby puthing the bodies together. + © This 
vacuum, he fays, is very obfervable upon great explofions of 
thunder, when animals have been ftruck dead: without being 
touched with the lightning; a vacuum being only fuddenly 
made near them, and the air immediately rushing out of their: 
lungs to fill it, whereby they are left flaccid and empty ;: 


* Lettere dell’ elettricifmo, p. 36. t Ib. p. 41. 
Ooo whereas 


466 POSITIVE ann NEGATIVE _ Part Ii. 


whereas when perfons are properly killed by lightning, 
their lungs are found diftended. * amet tibey 
In confirmation of this hypothefis, he fays, that'lefs motion” 


is given to bodies by eledtricity as the air is excluded from — 


them, and that in vacuo no motion at all can be given to 
them. + He/alfo fays, that no eleétric light is vifible ina 
barometer in which there is a perfect vacuum’: whence he in- 
fers, that electric light is vifible only by means of fome vibra- 
tions which it excites in the air. ¢ 

Tuts hhypothefis feems to be unworthy of fo eminent an e- 
le&trician, and it is certainly not fact, that there is no elec- 
tric light, if there be no eleGtrical attraction in vacuo, 

To account for the colleétion or diflipation of cleGtricity’ 
by points, he fays that the eleétric fluid’ appears, from ex- 
periments, to move with the greateft' violence in the fmalleft. 
bodies. All eleétrical appearances will, therefore, be moft 
fenfible at the points of bodies; and, confequently, it will 
be fooneft diffipated there. But this does not feem to touch 
the real difficulty. : 

Dr. FRANKLIN the author of this excellent theory of pofi- 
tive and negative electricity, with a truly philofophical great- 
nefs of mind, to which few perfons have ever attained, al- 
ways mentions it with the utmoft diffidence.. Every appear~ 
ance, fays he, which I have yet feen, in which glafs and e-' 
le&tricity are concerned, are, I think, explained with eafe by’ 
this hypothefis. Yet, perhaps, it may tot be a true one,” 
and I hall be obliged to him who affords me a better. jj 

“Tp 5. Resin coe 
Ir 


él  “BLECTRICITY, 467 


- Ir is no wonder, indeed, that this excellent philofopher 
fhould treat even his own hypothefis with fuch indifference, 
when he had fo juft a fenfe of the nature, ufe, and import- 
ance of all hypothefes. Nor is it, fays he, of much import- 


~ ance to us, to know the manner in which nature executes her 


laws. It is enough if we know the laws themfelves. It is 
of real ufe to us to know that china left in the air, unfupport- 
ed; will fall and break ; but how it -comes to fall, and why 
it breaks, are matters of fpeculation. It is a pleafure indeed 
to know them, but we can preferve our china without it. * 
Tue great merit of this writer as an eleétrician ftands ine 
dependent of all hypothefes, upon the firm bafis of the dif- 
covery of many new and important faéts. and, what is. more, 
applied to the greateft ufes. Suppofing him, for inftance, to 
hhave been miftaken-in his account. how the clouds come to 
be poflefied of electricity, muft-not all the world :acknowledge 


- themfelves indebted to him for the difcovery of the famenefs 


of the ele&ric fluid and the matter of lightning; and efpecial- 
dy. for a certain. method of preferving their buildings and per+ 
fons from ‘the fatal effects of thunder ftorms. 


* Franklin’s Letters, p. 59. 


QOoo02 SECTION 


468 Tue THEORY oF Part IIL. 
SECTION IL 
Or rue THxory or TWO ELECTRIC FLUIDS. — 


ONVINCED, as the reader may have perceived that I 
am, of the ufefulnefs of various theories, as fuggefting 
a variety of experiments, which lead to the difcovery of new 
facts; he will excufe me, if I recall his attention to the old 
theory of vitreous and refinous electricity, as it was firft fug-_ 
gefted by Mr. Du Faye, upon his difcovery of the different 
properties of excited glafs, and excited amber, fulphur, rofin, 
&c. and as it has been new modelled by Mr. Symmer. To. 
‘ fhow my abfolute impartiality, I thall, notwithftanding the | pre- 
ference I have given to Dr. Franklin’s theory, endeavour to re= 
prefent this to as much advantage as poffible, and to do it more 
juftice than has yet been done to it, even by Mr. Symmer 
himfelf; who, as I obferved before, has fallen into fome 7 
miftakes in his application of it. Indeed, hitherto very little 
pains has been taken with this theory, nor has it been pc! 
tended to any great variety of phenomena, 
Ler us fuppofe then, that there are two eleétric fluids, 
which have a {trong chymical affinity with each other, at the 
fame time that the particles of each are as ftrongly repulfive of 


< 


Sec. I. TWO ELECTRIC FLUIDS. 469 


one another. Let us fuppofe thefe two fluids, in fome mea- 
fure, equally attracted by all bodies, and exifting in intimate 
union in their pores, and while they continue in this union to 
exhibit no mark of their exiftence.. Let us fuppofe that the 
friction of any electric produces a feparation of thefe two flu- 
ids, caufing (in the ufual method of electrifying) the vitreous 
eleétricity of the rubber to be conveyed to the conduétor, and 
the refinous electricity of the conduétor to be conveyed to the 
rubber. © The rubber will then have a double hare of the re- 
finous electricity, and the conductor a double fhare of the 
vitreous ; fo that, upon this hypothefis, no fubftance whate- 
ver. can have a greater or lefs quantity of electric fluid at 
different times; the quality of it only can be changed. } 

Tue two electric fluids, being thus feparated, will begin 
to fhow their refpective powers, and their eagernefs to ruth 
into reunion with one another. With whichfoever of thefe 
fluids a number of bodies are charged, they will repel one a- 
nother, they will be attra€ted by all bodies which have a lefs 
fhare of that particular fluid with which they are loaded, but 
will be much more’ ftrongly attraéted by bodies which are 
wholly deftitute of it, and loaded -with the other. In this 
cafe they will rufh together with great violence. 

Upon this theory, every eleétric {park confifts of both the 
fluids rufhing contrary ways, and making a double current. 
When, for inftance, I prefent my finger to a conductor. load- 
ed with vitreous electricity, I difcharge it of part of the vitre- 
ous, and return as much of the refinous, which is fupplied’to 
my body from the earth. Thus both the bodies are unelec- 
trified, the balance of the two powers being perfectly reftored, 

Wuetn 


‘479° Ye THEORY or) Parti. 


_ Wuen I -prefent the Leyden phial to be charged, and, con- 
: Sequently, connect the. coating of one of its fides with the 
tubber, and that of the other with the conductor, the vitreous 
eleGricity of that. fide which. i is connected with the condu@- 
or is tranfimitted to that-which is, connected with the rubber, 
which returns an equal. quantity of its refinous electricity ;, fo 
that all the vitreous electricity, is conveyed to one of the fides, « 
and,all the, refinous to the other.. Thefe two fluids, being thus 
feparated, attract one another very ftrongly through the thin 
fabftance of the intervening glafs, and ruth together with 
-great violence, whenever an opportunity is/prefented, by 
ameans of proper conductors, Sometimes they. will force a 
paflage through the fubftance of the glafs itfelf;.. and, .in the 
mean time, their mutual attraction. is ftronger than any. force 
that can .be applied to, draw soni saint of, the, fluids fe- 
parately. ibn Othi 
Havine ftated the general principles of this) hypothefis of ~ 
tworfluids, I {hall now’ enter! into .a brief \comparifon. of it 
with that of a fingle fluid, as explained by the mode of pofi- — 
tive and negative electricity ; that wemay fee which, of them 
will account for the fame facts in the eafier manner,.and more 
agreeable to the analogy of nature in other:refpedts. For, al- 
lowing that no fact can be fhown to be abfolutely; inconfift- 
ent with either of them; yet, certainly, that will be judged 
preferable, which. is-attended, with the} leaf woah in-con= 
ceiving of its mode of operation. ty 4 
In the:firft place; the fuppofition itlelf, of pos evil is not 
quite fo eafy as that of one, though it is far from being difagree- 
able to the analogy of nature, which abounds with affinities, _ 
and 


Sec. UI. TWO ELECTRIC FLUIDS. 47% 


and-in which we fee innumerable cafes:of fubftances formed; 
as it were to unite with and counteract one another. Here, 
likewife, agreeable to the theory of two ele@tric fluids, while 
thofe fubftances are in union, we fee nothing of their feparate 
and peculiar powers, though they be ever fo remarkable. 
What, for inftance, do. we fee of the ftriking properties of 
the:acid and alkali while they are united in a neutral fale? 
What powets in nature are more formidable than the vitri- 
olic acid, and phlogifton (which confifts principally, if not 
wholly, of miephitic air) and what more innocent than com- 
mon fulphur, which is a compofition of them both, and —— 
which the aétion of fire feparates them. 

Tue two fluids being fuppofed, the double current from 
the rubber to the conduétor and from the conduétor to the 
riibber is an eafy and neceflary confequence. For if, upon 
the common fuppofition, the aétion of the rubber puts a 
fingle fluid into motion in one direétion, we might expec 
that, if there were two fluids, which counteracted each other, 
they would, by the fame operation, be made to move in 
contrary directions. And a perfon who has been ufed to 
conceive that a fingle fluid may be made'to move either way, 
viz. from the rubber to the conductor, or from the conduc- 
tor to the rubber, at pleafure, according as a rough ora 
fmooth globe is ufed, can have much lefs objection to this 
part of the hypothefis. 

Apmittine then’ this different action of the rubber and 
the eleftric upon the two different fluids, the manner of con- 
veying electric atmofpheres, or powers to bodies is the fame 
on this as on my other theory; and it is apprehended, that 

the . 


472 Tue THEORY orf Part Il, 


the phenomena of negative electricity are more eafily con- 
ceived by the help of a real fluid, than by no fluid at all, 
Indeed Dr. Franklin himfelf ingenuoufly acknowledges, that 
he was a long time puzzled to account for bodies that were 
negatively electrified repelling one another; whereas Mr. Du 
Faye, who obferved the fame fact, had no difficulty about 
it, fuppofing that he had difcovered another electricity, fimi- 
lar, with refpeét to the properties of clafticity and repulfion, 
to the former. 

By this double aétion of the rubber, the method of charg- 
ing a plate of glafs is exceeding eafy to conceive. Upon this 


hypothefis, all the vitreous electricity quits its union with the : 


refinous on the fide communicating with the conductor, ‘and 


is brought over to the fide communicating with the rubber; - 


which, by the .fame operation, had:been made to part with 
its refinous electricity i in return. ailt 
Axx the vitreous electricity being thus brought to one) fide 


of the plate of glafs, and all the refinous to the other, ‘the y 
phenomena of the plate while ftanding charged, or when ; 
difcharged, are, perhaps, more free from all difficulty than | 
upon any other hypothefis. When one of the fides of the glats ; 
is conceived to be loaded with one kind of ele¢tricity, and — 


the other fide with the other kind; the {trong affinity be-, 


tween them, whereby they attract each other with a force 
proportioned to their nearnefs, immediately fupplies a fatif- 
factory reafon, why fo little of either of the fluids can be drawn i 
from one of the fides without communicating as much to the 
other. Upon this fuppofition, that confequence is perhaps 
more obvious than upon the fuppofition of one half of the 

glafs 


Sec. I. TWO ELECTRIC FLUIDS. 473 


glafs being crowded with the eleétric matter, and the other 
half exhaufted. In the former cafe, every attempt to with- 
draw the fluid from one of the fides is oppofed by the 
more powerful attraction of the other fluid on the oppofite 
fide. On the other hypothefis, it is only oppofed by the 
attraction of the empty pores of the glafs. 

Lastry, the explofion upon the difcharge of the glafs 
has as much the appearance of two fluids rufhing into union, 
‘in two oppofite directions, as of one fluid, proceeding only in 
one direction. The fame may be faid of the appearance of 
every common electric fpark, in which, upon this hypothefis, 
there is always fuppofed to be two currents, one from the 
electric, or the eleétrified body, and the other to it.’ 

I po not fay that the bur which is ufually feen on both 
fides of a quire of paper pierced by an electric explofion, and 
‘the current ‘of air flowing from the points of all bodies 
‘ele€trified negatively as well as pofitively, are material dbjec- 
tions to the doctrine of a fingle fluid. I have even thown 
how they may be explained in a manner confiftent 
with ‘it; but upon the fuppofition of two fluids, and two 
‘currents, the difficulty of accounting for thefe facts would 
hardly have occurred. 

THE phenomena of difcharging a plate of glafs, upon the 
hypothefis of two fluids, are indeed, injudicioufly explain- 
ed -by Mr. Symmer; who fuppofes that the two fluids 
do not always make the whole circuit of the intervening con- 
duétors, but enter them more or lefs, from each fide of the 
plate, according to the ftrength of the charge. But upon 
this fapp&ition, the fire of the {malleft charge performs the 

Ppp whole 


474 Tue THEORY => or = Part III, 


whole circuit, as well as the fire of the greateft, iniorder to 
reftore the equilibrium of the two fluids on cashitide of the 
lafs. ors wih 
: -Ir is almoft needlefs to obferve, that the influence of points 
is attended with exa@tly the fame difficulty upon this theory 
as upon the other. It is equally eafy, or equally. difficult, 
to fuppofe, one fluid to enter and go out at the point of an e- 
ledtrified conduétor, at different times, as to fuppofe that, of 
‘two fluids, one goes out, and the other goes. in, at the fame 
* time, : 
Tuar bodies apanteed 3 in eleétric sieht mutt ac, 
quire the contrary electricity, .is quite as eafy to conceive up- 
on this, as*upon any other hypothefis. For, in this cafe, 
fuppofe the electrified body to be poffefied of the vitreous 
electricity, all the vitreous eleétricity of the body which is 
brought near it will be driven backwards, ‘to the more diftant 
parts, and all the refinous eledtricity will be drawn » forwards. 
‘And when the attraction between the two eleétricities, in 
thefe different bodies, ‘is fo great, as to overcome the op 
tion to their union, occafioned by the attraction of the bodies 
that contained them, the form of their furfaces, and the re- 
fiftance of the interpofing medium, they will, ruth togethers 
an eleétric fpark will be vifible between them, and the elec-— 
tricity of both will appear to be difcharged; the fac 
eleGtricity of each being faturated with an equal quantity 
‘the oppofite kind, from the other body. _ wats at ogee 
Tus hypothefis will likewile eafily account for. the di 
culty of charging a very thick plate of glafs, and the im 
bility of charging it beyond a certain thickne 1 


Sec. II. TWO ELECTRIC FLUIDS. 475 


fluids at a greater diftance, will attra one another lefs for- 
cibly; and at a certain ftill greater diftance will not attraé 
at all. : 32 
Havine given the moft favourable view that I can of this 
hypothefis of two electric fluids, I thall, with the fame fairnefs, 
make the beft anfwer I am able to the principal obje@ion 
that will probably be made to it. 
Ir it be afked, why the two fluids, meeting on the furface 
of the globe, or in the eleétric explofion, do not unite, by 
means of their ftrong affinity, and make no further progrefs ; ° 
it may be anfwered, ‘that the attraGtion between all other 
bodies and the particles of both thefe fluids may be fuppofed 
to be, at leaft, as ftrong, as the affinity between the fluids 
themfelves ; fo that-the moment that any body is difpoftefted 
of one, it may recruit itfelf, to its ufual point of faturation, 
from'the other! © 5 ‘i ’ 
‘ Brstpes, in whatever manner it ‘be that one of the elec- 
tric fluids is diflodged from any body (fince, upon every the- 
ory, the two eléétricities are always produced at the fame 
time) the oppofite eleétricity will, by the fame a@ion, be 
diflodged from the other fubftance. And (as upon the come 
mon theory) whatever it be that diflodges the fluid from 
any fubftance, it will be fufficient to’ prevent its return; 
confequently, fuppofing both the fubftances neceffarily to 
have a certain ‘proportion of electric matter, each may be 
immediately fupplied from that which was diflodged from 
the other. 
Tue rubber, therefore, at the time of excitation, gives its 
Vitreous eleGtricity to that part of the fmooth glafs againft 
Ppp2 .- which 


476 ooTae: THEORY: oF’) > Parr Ih 


which it has been preffed, and takes an equal quantity of the 
refinous in return, The glafs, being a non-conduétor, does 
not allow this additional quantity of vitreous electricity to 
enter its fubftance. It is therefore diffufed upon the furface, 
and, in the revolution of the globe, is carried to the prime 
conduétor. There (as in,the experiments begun by Mr. Can- 
ton, and profecuted by Mr. Wilke, &c.); it repels the vitre- 
ous, and violently attracts the refinous eletricity; and (the 
points of the conductor favouring the mutual tranfition) the 
vitreous, which abounds upon the globe, paffes to the con- 
duétor ; and the refinous, which abounds on the neareft parts _ 
of the conduétor, rufhes upon the, globe. . There it mixes 
with, and faturates what remained of the vitreous electricity, 
on the part on which it flows, and thereby reduces it to the 
fame ftate in which it was before it was firft excited. Every 
part of the furface of the globe performs the fame office, 
firft exchanging eleétricities with the subbate and then with 
the conduétor. 

Tue folution of this difficulty ‘will likewife folye hadi of 
the electric explofion, in which there is a collifion, as it 
were, of the two fluids, while yet they completely pafs one. 
another. For ftill each furface of the glafs may be fuppofed 
to require its certain portion of electric matter, and therefore 
cannot part with one fort without receiving an equal quantity 
of the other. It muit be confidered alfo, that the air, 
through which thefe fluids pafs, has already its natural quan- 
tity of electricity, fo that being fully faturated, it can con- 
tain no more; and that the two fluids only ruth to the places 
from whence they had been forcibly diflodged, and where the 
greater body of the oppofite fluid waits to embrace them. 

Mr. 


SecllL.. TWO ELECTRIC: FLUIDS. 477 


_ Mr. Symmer’shypothefis of a double current differed in 
fome, refpects from that of the Abbé Nollet. . The Abbé, 
however, according to his ufual candour, {peaks of him with 
the higheft refpect ; at the fame time, he ftill appears an ad- 
vocate for his old favourite hypothefis. 

Jouannes Franciscus. Cicna, who purfued the experi- 
ments above recited of Mr. Symmer, obferves, with refpect 
to his theory; that it is not contradicted by any phenomena 
that are yet known, and that it fuits fome of them in a pe- 
culiarly clear and elegant manner; _ particularly every thing 
relating to charging and difcharging a plate of glafs; all the 
experiments which feem to fhow a mutual attraction between 
the two electricities, when they are kept afunder; and that 
curious experiment above-mentioned of Signior Beccaria, of 
difcharging a plate of glafs fufpended by a filken ftring, with- 
out either touching or moving the plate. Yet, upon the 
whole, he declares in favour of Dr. Franklin’s theory of pofi- 
tive and negative electricity, on account of its admirable 
fimplicity, and becaufe philofophers ought not to multiply 
caufes without neceflity. 

Dr. Franxtin’s theory, he fays, completely folves all 
the cafes of the two eleétricities deftroying one another when 
they are mixed; but doth not fo clearly account for their at- 
tracting, and counteracting one another when they are fepa- 
rate. He concludes with faying, he doth not chufe to fay 
much on fo very obfcure a queftion, which has divided the 
opinions of very great men; and that any hypothefis of the 
two eleétricities, which will account for the deftruction of all 

the 


478 DESIDERATA un Part III. 


the figns of electricity when they are united, and their mutual 
attraction when they are feparate, will equally fuit re ‘the 
ee peeanenst that have yet been difcovered.. 

I. wave taken a little pains with this theory, becaufe I 
thought, it had been hitherto, too much overlooked, and that 
fufficient juftice had not been done to it, even by thofe who 
propofed it. For the future, I hope it will be feen to more 
advantage, and appear a little more refpectable among its fif- 
ter ‘hypothefes; and then, valeat quantum valere poteft. If 
any eleétrician will favour me with the communication of any 


other theory, not obvioufly contradicted by facts, I fhall — 


think myfelf obliged to him, and thall think I do a piece of 
real fervice to the fcience in the publication of it. If more 
perfons favour me with more different theories, I fhould 
think my book, as far as theories are of nid ufe, oF much 


the more valuable. — 
j s : igen 


SECTION 


Sec. I. ELECTRICITY. 479 


DESIDERATA IN THE SCIENCE OF ELECTRICITY, AND 
; HINTS FOR.THE FURTHER EXTENSION OF IT. 


S$ E-Cek FON iil 


GENERAL OBSERVATIONS ON THE PRESENT STATE OF 
ELECTRICITY. 


HAT real progrefs has been made in eleétricity, has, 

I prefume, been fufficiently demonftrated in the 

courfe of the preceding hiftory; that a great deal ftill re- 
mains to be done, will, I think, be evident from this part of 
the work. Thofe perfons who think that nothing has been 
done to any purpofe in Natural Philofophy, or that the ad- 
vances have been made very flowly, fince the time of Sir 
Ifaac 


480 DESIDERATA in Part IV. 


Ifaac Newton, need only read the preceding hiftory, to be 
eonvinced, both that a great deal has been done, and that 
the progrefs in this kind of knowledge, inftead of being flow, 
has been amazingly rapid. ‘To quicken the fpeed of philo- 
fophers in purfuing this progrefs, and at the fame time, in 
fome meafure, to facilitate it, is the intention of this treatife, 
and f more efpecially of this —_ of it. When a traveller 
about making difpatch, thinking that, without any Wile, the 
labour of the day will quickly be over; whereas, if he find 
that, whatever progrefs he may have made, he has a great 
deal ftill to make, he continues, or quickens his fpeed. i 
Tue principal reafon why many ingenious perfons have fo 
foon got to their xe plus ultra in philofophical difcoveries, has 
evidently been their attachment to favourite theories; which 
they imagined both accounted for all the phenomena that had 
been obferved, and would likewife account for all that thould 
be obferved. Having therefore attained to the great object 
of a fcience, and difcovered the ultimate and moft general 
principles of it, there was nothing more that was worth thei iM 
notice ; it being beneath men of genius to {pend their time in i 
diverfifying effects, when there were no new caufes to bi 
found. 1 hope that what has hitherto been faid conc } 
the nature and ufe of hypothefes, and about the fn i 
prefent imperfed ftate of thofe which refpe el : 
convince thofe electricians who may not yet) have fe Samora | 
vinced of it, that our bufinefs is ftill chiefly with. fobs, 


the analogy of. fads; that far too few of thefe have va Ny 
covered to afcertain a perfect general theory, and that all feelin 


Sxé.daed BLES TLRECURY. a 481 


the prefent hypothefes can do for us Sige confift in fuggefting’, 
further experiments. 

> Ir: we look back upon the hiftory of electricity, and con- 
fider the ftate of facts and of hypothefes at any particular pe- 
riod of time paft, we {hall fee that there was always the fame 
apparent reafon for acquiefcing in whathad been done, as at 
prefent. The theories of the firft electricians, lame and im- 
perfect as they were, were yet fufficient to account for all the 
facts they were acquainted with ; and as for other facts, they 
could have no idea or apprehenfion of them, and therefore 
could not be folicitous about them. 

Mr. Boyre, no doubt, was as fully fatisfied wei: his 
fimple hypothefis of the un@uous effluvia, as Mr. Nollet 
with his theory of affluences and effluences ; or the greateft 
part of the prefent race of electricians with that of pofitive 
and negative electricity. Mr. Hawkefbee, when he made 
his furprifing difcoveries concerning the properties of cleétric 
light, and many curious circumftances concerning electric at- 
traction and repulfion, might very naturally think that 
little more was to be done. Indeed, who could have thought 
otherwife, when the fcience was actually at a ftand for feveral 
years after him? All that the indefatigable Mr. Grey (who 
made the great difcovery of the communication of eleétric 
powers to bodies not eleétric per fe) imagined to remain un- 
done, were mere chimeras and illufions. Mr. Du Faye, who 
made the difcovery of vitreous and refinous ele¢tricity, had 
no idea of the eleétric fhock ;. and the German philofophers, 
who accidentally obferved it, knew nothing of its moft re- 


tmarkable properties. Notwithftanding a great number of 


Qqq treatifes 


48a DESIDERATA (ty. Parr lv: 


treatifes on the fubject of electricity appeared prefently after 
this difcovery, and fome of them very fyftematical, compre- 
hending,. no doubt, what the authors of them thought to be 
the whole of the fcience, yet none of them had the leat idea 
of the amazing difcoveries of Dr. Franklin, relating either to 
the Leyden phial, or to the nature of lightning. And 
though numbers of Dr. Franklin’s admirers thought that he 
had exhaufted the whole fubject, he himfelf was far from 
thinking fo; and the hiftory of eleétricity, fince the date of 
his capital difcoveries, demonftrates that ne we ior? was 
true.  bhyoo 
‘Ir may be faid, that there is a ne plus ara’ in every thing, 
and therefore in electricity. It is true: but what reafon is 
there to think that we have arrived at it. Mr. Grey might 
have ufed the fame language above twenty years ago; but 
every body will, now, acknowledge, that : would have 
been above twenty years too foon: and yet, I think, it is 
evident, that Mr. Grey had really more reafon to think he | 
had’ artived at the ne plus ultra of ele&ricity, than we have | 
think that we are arrived at it. Time has brought to light a 
great number of incomplete, as well as complete ex 
and perhaps more of the former than of the latter; concern- 
ing all which, as he could have no knowledge, fo he re 
have no doubts ; fo that, though we know much more than 
he did; we, at the fame time, know how much tore 18); 


unknown betterthan hecould. Hitherto the acquifition of ¢ elec Ne 


trical knowledge has been like the acquifition of riches. 
more we poflefs, the more we with to pofle(s; and, Ih 


Sec. I. © ELECTRICITY. 483 


the more indefatigable we. e thall be to gues the poffeffion 
of it. 

One thing extremely. fei to the comets of fotthes dif- 
coveries, is to know what has really been done by others, 
and where the feience ftands at prefent. For want of this 
knowledge, many a perfon has loft his time upon experiments 
which he might have known had either failed or fucceeded 
with others; and which it was, therefore, not worth his 
while to repeat. But the fources of this kind of information 
are too much feattered, and too diftant for moft perfons to 
have accefs to them. This was the firft motive of the prefent 
undertaking, ‘intended’ to exhibit a diftin@ view of all that 
has been done in’ clectricity to the prefent time, ‘and likewife 
the order and manner in which every thing has been done; 
that ele@tricians, having a diftin@ idea of what the progrefs 
of ‘electrical knowledge has been, might fee more. clearly 
what remiains’ to be done, and what purfuits béft- pean af 
reward their labour. 

“Inpeep it is almoft impoffible for any oti to read the - 
hiftory of ele&tricity without gathering many hints for new 
expériments. When he has the whole before him at one 
view, he'can better bring the diftant parts together; and from 
the comparifon of them, new lights may arife: When he 
fees what experiments have failed, and-what have fucceeded; 
what branches of the feience have been moft attended to, - 
and what things feem to have been ovérlooked ; ‘what “has 
been difeovered by accident, and what by theory ; 3 when “he 
fees both the true lights which direéted fome happy difcove- 


Qqq2 rers 


- 


484 DESIDERATA un Part IV. 


rers, and the falfe lights which mifled others, he will have 
the beft preparation for purfuing his own inquiries. 
. To point out many of the defiderata in the {eience of iiss: 


tricity, I am fenfible, will, for this reafon, be fuperfluousto ~~ 


many perfons, and probably to moft who will have read thus 
far of this treatife: for fufficient hints of them mutt have 
been fuggefted by the perufal of the hiftory. But if P have 
been anticipated in this part of my work by’ fome of my rea- 
ders, it will not difpleafe them to find it; and to others the 
contents of this chapter will be peculiarly ufeful, — ope Bik 
Ir, indeed, I had confulted my reputation as a writer, or 
a philofopher, I fhould not have attempted this chapter, at 
all. For not only will many of the articles which I fhall ibe 
put down as defiderata in the {cience be foon no longer fo, and 
even young electricians be able to give fatisfactory anfwers to 
fome difficult queries I am_ going to propofe ; but many 
of them will probably appear idle, frivolous, or extravagant | 
ones; and, in a more advanced ftate of the fcience, it will 
hardly be imagined why I put them down at all. But if this” 
chapter be a means of haftening fo defirable an event, and o of 
accelerating the progrefs of electrical knowledge, Iam very 
willing that it fhould, ever after, ftand as a + monument of my 
prefent ignorance. hal {mod Niaiy 
«© Turse thoughts,” to adopt the words of Dr. Frankli 
with much more propriety than he himfelf firtt ufed'tl em, 
«* are many of them crude and hafty, and if I were merely, — 


« ambitious of acquiring fome reputation in philofophy, I ia 
«« ought to keep them by me, till correéted and improved by _ sa) 


“« time and farther experience. But fince even fhort hints” 
and imperfect experiments, in any new branch of fcience, " 


a! 


Steck. ELECTRICITY. 485 
7 


«< being communicated, have; oftentimes a good effeét, in 
“exciting, the attention of the) ingenious to the fubje@, 
«« and fo become the occafion of more exa¢t difquifitions, and _ 
*¢ more*complete:difcoveries; you are at liberty,” fays he, 
to Mr. Collinfon, ‘* tocommunicate this paper to whom you 
<< pleafe, it being of more importance that knowledge fl fhould 
‘« increafe,. than that your friend fhould t be  sshomghts an ac- 
£¢ curate philofopher.” se WA 

I.wouxp not even propofe to: draw up the Fallopsins queries 
upon the plan of thofe of Sir Ifaac Newton, .at the end of his 
treatife on Optics. Many of them, are:fuch, that I have hardly 
the moft diftant expe¢tation of their being verified ; but the 
attempt to verify them may, poffibly lead to/fome other dif- 
coveries of more importance. . They are fuch random thoughts 
as led to the new experiments I have made; and not having 
any more leifure to purfue them myfelf, I freely impart them 
to my reader, that he may make as much advantage of them 
as he can: being determined, upon taking leave of the fub- 
je&t, to write myfelf fairly out, as Mr. Addifon fays; or, as 
the Spanith writers fay, to /eave nothing in my inkborn. 

Harpy would it be for fcience, if all philofophers who 
are engaged in the fame purfuits, would make one common 
chapter of all their hints and queries: and greatly honoured 
fhould I think myfelf if the prefent chapter in this treatife 
might be made ufe of for that purpofe, and if, in future edi- 
tions of the work, it fhould be looked into as the common 
receptacle of the prefent defiderata among the whole body of 
electricians, and of their imperfect hints for new difcoveries, 
With pleafire thould I fee each of them diftinguithed by the 

name 


486 QUERIES sks HINT s Parriv, | 


Sinn OF Tost enero wi illuftrious contributor. © A 
the reader will find, have been ‘added ‘to’ my ov 
aiftinguifhed in this manner oie ol 
“otis pene | can throw out hints, who either hav 
leifure, of apparatus fe prfing coral 


leifure,, ul proper apparatus ing « 

aré content ¥ Taliep rating peer ne ei 
diverffying the old appearances, for w 
for finding new ones. By this means, pa ih 
might make’ the ‘belt ufe of his. 8 for 

nly ‘phil OF As pst e pl 
pret icone nei ny ia 
tity Be d contributed to sia difcoveries of others. a} vite 


Miyen jon Has = ober iat qio Wort silt of ba 


ANZ 


riod) negini yao I ae x ceils oti a of nitigh stom une Us 


stiodd qo Squttinvbs B opti es Silbcn Yers od tect} her UR Ph ” 


«dat ais Yo'ovseol unidst nogu (bedstenh Raiod sagpod ae 
. “i . > ? +1 MA , - oF * 
3 (10-7, ANE MOhebs. wus ZS_+ ¢ 49 atta, \s UISS. ANG wv. Pre fs i 


toro ae wr graion, soul ck ysl 2 Ta SPREE 


odw erdgotelidg Ils tt eansist rot ad) 3% bigow 5 YATh me 
ono asm bisow 2g cont. silt 2 nt bogagn . S15, . i 

non yh oa bas ‘:esinsup bas ead dodt fis do qgiged > a 

ort erat i 4 ; y oes i Gokyie alaidsd bluodd pacha 
sin « i bas loging isdt4 10. gh Sbecty 4.2, sdgien. we |) 
1mo3 of} en ot boztool od hlaodk, : si iow. add , 19, 209i... a 
tbod olodw orfs gnome nino nies oft io 2st RR A 
VO) : sHogcait o. ban eaRpatets 5 e; 


oh BR AR 
cee 


a4 
; 


See. | in ELECTRICITY... 487 


2a oval si og ONE -OE 


QUERIES ano HINTS carcuratep To PRomMoTE 
_ FURTHER DISCOVERIES IN ELECTRICITY. 


i 


Queries AND HINTS CONCERNING, THE ELECTRIC 
FLUID. Beivl 


J HAT is the proportion of the feveral colours in ¢lec- 
tric light, in different sage and. in different appear- 
ances of it ? 

Is not the eleétric light a real vapour b:igniiad, fimilar to 
that of phofphorus ; and may not experiments be, hereafter, 
made, where we fhall:- have the’ explofion, the thock, and the 
other effects of eleétricity, without the light?» Isithe elec- 
tric light ever vifible except in vacuo?) “In the open’ air the 
eleétric fluid makes itfelf a vacuum in order to its paflage. 

Cotcecrt the electric fluid, not from the general mafs of 
the earth but from bodies of particular kinds, and obferve if 
it have any different properties, with refpect to light, &c. 

Is 


488 QUERIES ann HINTS Parr Ivy, 


Is it exaétly the fame at fea, as onland; below the fur- | 
face of the earth, as above it, &c. &c. &c.? 

Dr. FRANKLIN obferved, that iron was corroded by being _ 
expofed to repeated eleétric fparks. Muftnot this have been 
effected by fome acid? What other marks are there of an acid 
-in the eleétric matter? May not its phofphoreal {mell be reck- 
oned one? Is it not poffible to change blue vegetable juices 
into red by fome application of electricity? This, I siciede] 
have been told has been done at Edinburgh. __ 

Is there only one eleétric fluid, or are there pk ioinda., 
there any eleétric fluid fai generis at all,» diftin& from the e- _ 
ther of Sir Ifaac Newton? Ifthere be, in what refpect mote 
it differ from the ether? i 

Are the particles which affect the organ of finelling,! as” 
well as the particles of light, parts of the proper electric fluid, _ 
or are they merely adventitious, being, fome way or other, 
brought into action by electricity ? ay 

Does not fome particular order of the particles,: whic 
Tfaac Newton fuppofes:to be continually flying from the. 
faces of all bodies, conftitute the eleétric fluid; as pe 
imagined, conftituted the air, and others the ether, &&c. 2 

Is it probable that there is even any temporary, or wi 
addition to, or diminution of the whole ftock of eleGtricity ? ‘| 

Wuence arifes the elafticity of the ele@ric fluid, and ac- 
cording to what law do its particles repel one another ? Mr. 


Price. : nicer BiDe Sak 


bps 


Sec. II, In (ELECTRICITY, 489 


3 OE ft ‘ 


Il. 


SERS: AND HINTS CONCERNING “ELECTRICS AND 
ae ; CONDUCTORS. rors 


«) In what does the difference between electrics and conduc- 
tors confift? In other words,- what is it that makes fome bo- 
dies permeable to the electric fluid, and others impermeable 
to it? 

Are the pores of eleétric bodies fmaller than thofe of con- 
duétors, and do they contain very much, or very little-of the 
electric fluid ? 

Wuar is it in the internal ftructure of bodies that makes 
them break with a polifh? Perhaps all folid electrics do fo. 

Has elafticity any connection with electricity, fome elec- 
trics being extremely elaftic ? 

Wuart is the reafon why, in fome of Mr. Hawkefbee’s 
experiments, the electric light was vifible through 'confider- 
able thicknefs of very opaque eleétrics, as rofin, fulphur, 
pitch, &c; but not through the thinneft bye a con- 
ductors ? 

_ Wuar fimilarity i is there in the erences of calcination; 
vegetation, animalization, and in fome meafure chryftalizati- 
on, fince all bodies which have: gone through any of thofe 


_ procefies, and perhaps no others, are found tobe cleétrics ? 


1 ry ARE 


4909 QUERIES ann HINTS Parriv, 


Are not both electrics and conductors more perfe& in their 
kind in proportion to their fpecific gravity? dhe 

Wiz not water conduét electricity the beft in its ftate of 
greateft condenfation; and metals the leaft in their pecestett 
expanfion, as fhown by a pyrometer? 

«Try the’ condudting power of different metals, “by feaing 

a large fhock through wires of the fame fize, and obferving 

the different lengths that may be melted of the oot wires. : 
Dr. Franklin. 

Compare the invifible effluvia of water svithithe invifble 
effintin:iof burning candle, and: alfo thofe proceeding from 
other bodies, with refpe&t to their power of conducting elec- 
tricit ine 
Ohare what degree of heat will difcharge any given 
degree of ele&ricity, in order to find in what degree heat 
makes air a conductor. (Sify dirk, 

bats Hitec 
hs ¢ iilog’ a tw alend anol ath 
TG oan yes ysiseds da BB 1) 
ty rs Mees) i) aan 
rust ak rau es 


“QUERIES 4 AND HINTS contain ‘EXcIT ‘ 
; to ei 


A i i er etn 


thers by heating and coatiige? wid 
Wuar have friction, heating, cooling aoa 
after clofe contaét in common to them: all? How « 


See... s NV! ELECT RACUITYVu o 49% 


them contribute. to excitation? },And in what ‘manner is oné; 
ot the other kind of electricity: igamus by rubbets.and,¢lee- 
trics of different furfaces:?ic soeli\ of) vila so tniog om 

Is not Epinus’ ikepeaietane ie preffing two Aatipiena of* 
glafs together, when one of them »contraéts:a pofitive and the 
other a negative electricity fimilar'to the experiments of Mr. 

Wilke; concerning ‘the ‘produdion: lof eleétricity by the lique+ 
faction of various fubftances in»others ; when the fubftance 
which melts and contra¢ts is jn one ftate, and that which con- 
tains it is in the oppofite? And are not both thefe cafes 
fimilar to the excitation of the tourmalin, &c. by heating 
and cooling? In this cafe may not the tourmalin and the air 
act upon one another and be in oppofite {tates ? 

Is not the circumftance common to all thefe cafés, fome 
affection of that {pace near the futface of the bodies in which 
the refractive power lies ? When bodies which have been preff- 
ed together within that {pace recede from one another, more 
furface, and confequently more of that fpace isimade, doth hot 
the eleétric fluid flow into it from that: body which has the 
leaft power of retaining it, and which it can permeate with the 
moft cafe 3; when not being able to enter the fubftance: of 
the other it refts upon its furface ? 

Are not the particles of the) electric and'rubber thrown in- 
to a vibration in the act of excitation, which makes frequent 
recedings of’ the parts from one another, and thereby, pro- 


motes the effect above-mentioned ? 


Wuar is the real effect of putting. moifture or amal- 
gam upon the rubber? Do not thofe fubftances. increafe 
the: power of excitation, as conductors more diftant from 

Roirr 2 the 


‘492 QUERIES Ann HINTS Parriy, 


the fmooth glafs, in the gradation of electrics, than the furface — 
of the leather? Or do they only make the pieaiornstuann 
more points, or alter the furface of the rubber?) | 
* Has that difference of furface on which Cokie depends 
any influence upon the power of excitation? : 

‘Tue tourmalin and a vefiel of charged glafs hermetically 
fealed are both excited by heating and cooling. What other 
properties have they in common? Aids). awotiey.to neifpt 


IV, 4 ati ' 1) oF» 1s hier a 
5 salle) 
a 
par yay anp HINTS concerninc ELECTRIFICA- 
TION. 


o4 tt 


Does eleétrification increafe the exhalation of vapours, 
either from cold or from boiling water? If it do, is the in~ 
creafed exhalation the fame in all ftates of the atmofphere ? 

Does not the eleétric matter pafs chiefly on the mera 
of bodies ? 

Is the action of electrified bodies upon one another more 
properly an attraction, or a repulfion ? 

Wovtp not continued electrification promote pistol? 

In what manner is the mutual repulfion of two bodies: 
cletrified. negatively performed? Is it by the attraction of 
the denfer eleétric fluid in the neighbourhood, or by the quan- 

tity: 


; 
/ 
| 


S809 ¢ Txt ELECT RICE YS 493 


tity of it which may be fuppofed to be accumulated on the 
furfaces of fuch bodies in the manner defcribed? P.. 457.) 
een sonehth mifiss bh or sd vl 


ta 


QUERIES AnD HINTS €oNCERNING THE POWER OF 
CHARGING erecrrics. ©) © 1‘ 


., Wuart is the real, kreneaies ef eoodingorniin Restiog elec- 
tric fubftances ? ,).. ‘ os 
Wuy, may not one al be decane he conan it with 
another (while it is charging) as high as if it were charged at 
the prime conduétor? ;Or by what rule muft) the force of 
thofe different chargings be eftimated? To all appearance, 
two phials charged together, fo as that one of them receives 
the fire from the other, do not give fo large a fhock, as ely 
one of them charged in the ufual way. 
|Wuar is the maximum. of charging a glafs jar, , pith ré~, 
fpe& to the quantity of its furface, covered by the coating? 
It is evident that fome jars..will difcharge themfelves, when 
only a {mall part at the bottom of them is coated, and when 
the explofion is very inconfiderable. 
Enpgavour to. charge a plate of glafs fie the coating 
preffed into actual contact with its furface, by means of heavy 
weights. Alfo endeavour to excite a plate of glafs in the fame 
manner. It is pretty certain that, in the ufual method of ex- 
citing 


ge es So Oe eee Ba ei 
Mao AAV eibaieeb iets itty neil 
‘ Se ee ea pice.) Bei te thee. 
to “n@Wo ant obtmraanos* TUT aKa 2aLiayo 
QUERIES c CONCERNING. a ay 
Strips at heer Be ae ee Det rs Wr 
1, ohebie tae ty ee Reacts Pe 
~spaiven iis tubeinadeoeboninn aia ae mn 
of any given ftrength, attract and repel light bei 
the fame thicknefs the limit befivcin bhi 
de Ftd? SOW 1) teen tlpithes) Cpsigrens enw shielge) sat 
‘ols not wiptieer esti me its dimenfions B 
ing,’ ‘the'/two' ele sie ey 7 
creafe its’ ecifie ? 26 Oo}. tedtogor bovrncdo alendn 
“Is the ae “aioe ‘veffel, tnade’ in’ the? re 
the fame when it is charged aswhen it isunchatyed 2° ‘Or 
would the ringing” oF it” make it? more" liable ‘to break! in 
thofe! eittumftanices'? ® east ai Jotiingep odi of Deqh” De ae 
“Dots the eleétric Auid with which glafs is chatged tefide 
in the pores of the glafs, or only on its! farface; or rather 
within the {pace that is occupied by ‘the power of 'fefragtion, 
ive. @ final fpace within, and likewife without thé firface ?- 
“Is the refractive ponent nF ened the faite whemit is charged 
or excited ? 20! 1uovpebaogilA.. .eisnisw 
i3E y sda ni i gists. wieig etd]. Ea 


- 


SeeThat eiNVELECTRICITY.-» 495 
».JHow:does:the idifferent refractive \power’ of siti GY ORE 


denfity (whieh:is probably: in the: fame’ OWT ae 
refnagtive power) | affect» its cpeatiay: Sere} “excited” ‘ot 
charged 2): dou ol svor 31 Stem ylto binges somes 


Us “there! pots a: con fderatile, diféreince> ia glats whe fe 
new. madey,and-when itchas:been keptva month or. two, botlt 
with re{peG.to, excitation-and:chatging ?. colisiniaimos 

Ler glafs of every different compofition be: tried both’ with 
refpect to'excitation, and charging. Would it’not be found 
that differences with, refpect tometallic ingredients; hardriefs; 
annealing, continuance in fufion, 8c.) would influenceyboth 
the! properties s! » ‘andyithat, fin feverab cafes, the fame circum- 
ftance. that was! favourable to: one would be urifevouctislone 
the other jjoi; d ol ft-to .29ontin 

G1 Ass-has hitherto: been Guplpatadcictboe fall of the alee 
fluids and:its impermeability hhas‘been accounted for upon the 
difficulty with which: the  eleétric fluid! moves in its pores. 
But may we not fuppofe the fubftance of glafs to be abfolutely 
impermeable to electricity, that no foreign electric matter 
ever fo much as enters a fingle pore of it, but lodges wholly 
on its furface; for initance, bike ween the point of contaét and 
the real furface, or within the limits of the refractive power 
that is a little way. on both fides the furface. . This place is,) 
I think, on--many,accounts,, extremely convenient to difpofe 
of the eleGiric matter, whether we make it to confift of two 
fluids, or of one. Their being kept afunder, if there be 
two, orits being prevented from: getting through, if there 
be but-one,| will be much ‘eafiersto:conceive in this cafe, than- 
upon the fuppofition that the electric fluid can enter and 

move 


49 ra spake HINTS: inal 
SMe area AR, though it ‘can 

the motion be ever fo di 
sagen ce could onl | 


ther it has fo es sp 
| Moreover, hie emparia i 


the ght, eoetine os difehiarge) er il 
through the fubftance of the glafs, in 2 

manner, without breaking the -glafs;_ ‘atsoruiaiat n the 
furfaces of the glafs are fuppofed to be aoa oref d; 
and the pores of it not inthe leaft entered by any’ particle? of 

the fluid, . or) fluids, the: i ibility ‘of the electric 
getting through the glafs is evident, aswell as ‘the - 

of its saan the pas if it do force a paflage. 9 “yee jue 


so.2i3Relo. avis opt, 1ncks,.ytiodsipete) 08 ene 
fs Wand sy a Lo. ovape ghoatiis. <1 ttt 0 

re Iniog atl n VIL. 330 it a |, oastbaate so 

{ nao oom teat ods ™ 

QUERIES anp -HINTS rae THE “ieee “OF 
Sg sieganysrc ok ANIMAL BODIES. ~ 


itae iotens sv package ett siyect greatly aso Behh | | 


riod Ty 200/80) apy aphin ft 
pi the ‘fluid on peo Ahr depends at all concerned’ 
in any of the functions of an animal body? Inwhat'ma 
{ 1939 yes bi intools od3. ject noitegqul saaiolgs 


Sec. I.” In ELECTRICITY. 497 


is the pulfe of a perfon electrified queens and his sit 
ration increafed?..9.. 

‘Dogs not the air, by being: heated i in the Jomjgesid commu- 
beusasah electric virtue to the blood? What conneétion has 
this circumftance with the mephitic air which is exhaled - 
from the lungs in great quantities, as well as contained in all 
the other excrements of the animal body? 

‘May not the incteafed perfpiration of an animal body be : 
grdaieo in a moift atmofphere than in a dry one, there being 
then more conducting particles in the atmofphere, to aét and 
react upon the’ effluvia in the pores of the body; on which 
the copious Jaaigrys does,: maoaebiys ‘in a great aeentate, 
frend ft Phonos 


VIII. 


QUERIES AnD HINTS concerNnING THE ELECTRICITY. 
or THE ATMOSPHERE. 


~ In what manner do the clouds become: poffeffed of elec- 
tricity ?- 

Doss the wind in any meafure contribute to it? 

Ts it effected by the gradual heating and cooling of the air? 
If fo, whether is it the heating or the cooling that produces 
pofitive electricity? Which ever it be, the contrary will 

Sff probably 


498 BRANCHES or KNOWLEDGE Parr. IV, 


probably produce negative electricity. Let the experiment 
be made by an eleétrical kite. Mr. Canton.’ \so190) oiten 
_ As thunder generally: happens in a faltry ftate of the air, 
when it feems replenifhed with fome fulpbureous va 
may/inot the ele&tricmatter then:in the clouds: be 7 
by the: fermentation of frighnnenep pega 
acid vapours in the‘aity | MrsiPrices 10 rinomavene vedio 242 
- | Ler rain, fnow, and hail -besreceived >in infulated -vellels, 
in different ftates of the atmofphere, to obferve whether they 
contain any eleGtricity, and in what degree. 990) 0 4 
-May not the void {pace above’ the clouds be! always occus 
pied with an electricity oppofite to that of the earth ?jo:And - 
may not thunder, earthquakes, &c. be occafioned by. 
rufhing of the eleétric fluid between them whenever the: 
dancy in either is exceflive ? Is not the aurora borealis, 
other eledtrical meteors, which are remarkably bright and 
quent before earthquakes, fome evidence of this? 4 
Is not the earth in a conftant {tate of moderate eled 
tion, and is not this the caufe of vegetation exhal a 
other the moft important procefies i in nature? Thefe : 
moted by increafed eleétrification. And it is probable 
earthquakes, hurricanes, &c. as well as oe ar 
confequence of too powerful an Scie! i i? 


l cubpig > ay ad hy Pryde 


gaoub cit nstile ify 109 iissad sry Fabel oye 


Ske. = oP USE 18 ELECTRICITY." 499 


mpovéohit Lett J..viioiud 16.5 ue onl} 


ef bbe BOERS iM 


Sa jit Sashes spent 1 oN” mr. 284 
oft Ab tiae it’ soie8y 1G T 


<7 te BG OF BOVD Bod 42 R290 79 z 


Brancues OF KNOWLEDGE PECULIARLY USEFUL To AN 
: ays 1h ELECTRICIAN, | . Hage 


3 it 70 iais 


: 


rN the hiftorical part of this work I ate fhown “what: ‘has 
been done on the fubjeét of electricity, and under the pre- 
ceding defiderata I have endeavoured to give fome idea of 
what yet remains to be done, with a few hints concerning 
further experiments. In the clofe of this part, I would 
willingly do fomething more towards enabling my reader to 
make | farther advances in electrical inquiries. However, all 
that can be done in this way mutt, in its own nature, be more 
imperfect than even the account of the defiderata: for it is 
evident, that. he who is able to teach others to make difcove= 
ries might make them himfelf. Notwithftanding this, it is 
poffible that fome general obfervations may be of ufe to this 
purpofe ; fuch for inftance as Lord Bacon makes, in his Novum 
Organon ; a. book. which, though it contain few or no philo- 
fophical difcoveries itfelf, has contributed not a little to the 
Ciipanerien contained in others. . A few fuch general obferva- 
Sff2 tions, 


‘foo + BRANCHES or KNOWLEDGE Parr IV. 


tions, confined to the fubje&t of electricity, I thall endeavour 
‘to fuggeft in this place. 
~ Ir is an obfervation which the progrefs of fcience dail 
confirms, that all truths are not only confiftent, but | 
‘connected with one another. The obfervation has, with no 
fmall appearance of juftice, been extended even to the arts ; 
there being no two of them fo remote, but that fome of the 
‘methods and proceffes ufed in the one have fome analogy to 
fome that are ufed in the other. Hence the knowledge of 
one art or fcience is fubfervient to the knowledge. of others ; 
and no perfon can prefume that he is perfectly mafter of any 
one, till he has received all the affiftance he can from, ae 
leaft, all its fifter arts or fciences. OM i 
InpEEp the very exiftence of the various arts ‘and. ee 
is almoft a demonftration of their relation to each other. — 
- it were highly unreafonable to fuppofe, that the elements of 
any new art or fcience were difcovered by means independ 
of the ftudy or practice of thofe already’known. As it is by 
eafy tranfitions that we pals from one part of any i 
fcience to another, fo it is by tranfitions equally afy that 
mankind have paffed from one’ diftin& fcience to “another. 
Confequently, to thofe previoufly difcovered arts and feiences 
muft we have recourfe, in order to underftand — the full” "evi- 
dence, on which the firft principles of any new art or feience 
reft. 20k Me ea crab l 
Exectriciry is by no means an exception to this ge 
rule. It has its fifter fciences as well as others. “In ] 
ance of them were its own principles firft difcove 
the further profecution of eleGtrical Pat Beri 


= 


Sec, IIl.' or USE 1x ELECTRICITY. © 501 


its conne¢tion with more fciences than it was at firit appre- 
hended to:have any rélation to.» Now the ftudy- of all. thefe 
cannot but, reciprocally, contribute to perfect and extend the 


knowledge of electricity. 


nbs the fir of modern eleGrricians, was ed t to 

make. his electrical experiments by | their relation to thofe of 

into which he: was profeffedly inquiring. ..'The 

ftudy. of chymiftry. feems to have led Mr, Boyle to attend to 

eleétricity, as well as to other occult qualities of particular 

bodies, |, Electric. light .was .confidered by all thofe who fife 
obferved it-as a {pecies, of .phofphorus; and with: this. view 

was, Mr. Hawketbee. conducted in all; the experishents, re 

made upon it. 

-Tuese, and, other difcoveries in) idleAcicity. dupiigsiten 
made thus indirectly, excited the attention of philofophers to 
the fubjeé, and induced them to fit down to the ftudy of it in 
a direé&t and profefied manner. . Upon this it {oon “appeared, 
that electricity was no fecondary, or occafional, sbat a princi- 
pal, and-conftant agent in the works of nature, even in fome 
of its grandeft fcenes; and that its agency, far from being 
confined. to bodies of a particular clafs, extended: its influence 
to all without exception ;. that the ‘miineral, vegetable, and 
animal world, with the human frame ima particular manner, 
were all fubject to its power; and that electrical experiments 
and principles enter into the moft interefting arts and: fciences 
which have them for their objet. We alfo fee! every day, 
that electricity is extending itfelf ftill more into the fubjects 
of other {ciences, both by means of the analogy of their opé- 
rations, and alfo by their reciprocal influences. 

On 


soz = BRANCHES or. KNOWLEDGE - Pagir Iv, 


-» Ow thefe accounts, tobe ameleGrician: at preferity requires 
almuch«moreéxténfive fund of various! ‘nondaige daa eid 
but tem years ago; and a:manimmft havea: very comprehen- hen- 
five knowledge of nature in all its known operations, before 
he ‘can ‘reafonablyéxpect:to anake> any’ further. difcove 8. 
For it can only be by:applying electricity to various attsiof 
nature, and by combining its operations with lb 
both of nature and art, that-any thing new can’ 
Almoft all that can*be done by the common: aia 
chines, ‘andthe! ufual apparatus’of them, has been done: al 
ready 5: ifo that we muft look farther in’ queft of new difcove- 
ries... E hope, therefore, that I thal be excufed,) if Vendeas 
vour to give a hint of that kind of knowledge which, Faps 
prehend, may be peculiarly fubfervient to improvements in - 
electricity, and furnith. views. dod materials. song) er a 
mentso ybud} acl} of awe aod? beavbai bre. Poi Ag}: ome 
| Naruran PHILOsoPpHY, cannot but be of: thas 
ufe for this:ipurpofe;> but, of all its branches, none p 
mifes to be of more ufe to the electrician than cuyMIsTRY. 
Here {eems to be the great field for the: extenfion 
trical: knowledge: » for. chymiftry and» electricity a 
converfant about, the latent and lefs obvious properties 
bodies; and yet their relation to eachother has b en | out lit 
tle confidered, and their operations hardly ever combined 
few of our modern eleétricians yore oe ay ulat 
qr practical chymifts. —. 1 20h meds 

. Amone other branches of Natural Philofophy, e doc 
ttine of LIGHT AND CoLouRs be eer aCRi & 


SkorIii or!USEiNELECTRICITYi< — «503 


It:was:this:that Newton thought, would be |the key to other, 
at prefent,/ occult properties of hodieds ormfnoriob asd ow 
». Lesmparticular,attention :be alfo, given to, ‘every. ithing that 
the imperfect ftate of Natutal Philofophy. furnithes refpecting 
the aT MosPHERE, its compofition and affections... Thesphe- 
nomena ofiightning thow the conection of this fubjed with 
‘eleStiicity.;.and probably, electricity, may. /be ourjkey;to.a 
much more extenfive — of. wqisornlogy Aba nciva ar 
yet poffefied of." sintinw? Yagorg sii to Pojdut ody uo 
- Tue hock of. the, Leyden: phial,, the difcovery of the fame- 
nefs of lightning ;and.jele@ricity,.togethen withthe cure, of 
feveral difeates by electrical; operations,| are fufficient, to, con; 
vince bof the fingular importance of the ftudy of Anatomy, 
and eyery. thing relating , to the ;animal economy to;an elec= 
trician. And had phyficians more generally ,attended to elec> 
tricity, as anyarticle of the materia medica, .many more’ im- 
portant, and wfeful. difcoveries might, ;no doubt, haye been 
made, Enowsshoweyes, sagt /beem made to excite us to 
farther inquiries.) ¢ 0) 0. (gareht 

_ fEpinus has’ lately. given, up sn excellent fisivinas of inn 
ate) MATHEMATICS, and -efpécially - algebraical. calculations 
may -be of to.an ¢leétrician, and; theitJufe, a ree ot >in 
time, be found ftill mote: extenfives:.) (5! 

As: ele@tricity. has. much. to expect feom-feveral eatibkien of 
Natural Philofophy,: fo-it «will -be,seady,. ii its turn, to, lend 
its|affiftatce ito! ithemooolt already:ifupplies:.arguments | and 
ptoofs. of» fomer principles in, Natural Philofophy, \which 
ftrengthen thofe that areidrawn from other quarters... By e+ 

leGricitys 
anT 


‘so BRANCHES of KNOWLEDGE Parr Iv. 


‘leGtricity, “as well as by the ‘principles! of ‘light /and colours, 

we can demonftrate, that it ‘requires a confiderable force to 

-bring bodies which are’ contiguous to one “andther,: and: even 

lie upon one another, into actualcontaé ;' and the moifture 

of the air may: perhaps be fhown to more ‘exaétnefs by Mr. 
‘Canton’s eletrical balls than by any other hygrometer what- 

‘ever. But I donot mean to»purfue this fubje@, and only 
“mention thefe cafes by way of example. ° notks Storm fork: 

Upon the fubject of the proper furniture for an eletrician, 

‘I think it may be juftly added, that a knowledge of mecua- 

Nics will be ufeful to him; by which'I' mean, upon this oc- 

‘cafiort, not only the theory,’ but in fome meafure the prattice 

too. For without fome mechanical knowledge’ of his ‘own, 

his electrical ‘machinery will be very often out of map 2 and 

but ill anfwer his purpofes 90%! comony ai 

Try Gndeed, ‘a: perfor ‘mean nothing *nere? tact to amufe 

himéelf and ‘his friends: with ‘the’ experiments that have been 

made by others (and ‘this is a - method of amufement which I 

am far from difcouraging) the machines he may purchafe, 

ready conftructed ‘to ‘his hafids,” will ‘anfwer his: _purpofe very 

well; and the dire@tions which are ufually: given calong with 

the machines will enable him to perform the common expe- 

riments with tolerable certainty: and>if any damage/fhould == 
happen to his apparatus, any mathematical inftrument maker 
(if he happen to live. in or néar’a ‘large, town)! can ‘readily 
repair it for him. But if aman propofe: to.ftudy thelflibjeé 
of electricity as a philofopher,:iwithiarview to! extend: the 
knowledge of it, the affiftance of others :will fot be filfficient 
for him. 

Tue 


Seco!  CORTUSEYNELECTRICITY:') 5 


Te common elettrical: machines, and the ufual eleGtrical 
apparatus, will enable a’ perfon to do little more than exhibit 
the common experiments. If he propofe to go further, he 
mutt diverfify his apparatus ; he muft often alter the conftruc~ 
tion of his machines, ‘and will find that common workmet» 
cannot execute any thing out of their ufual way, without more 
than-general directions. . Befides, unlefs a perfon be fortu- 
nately fituated, workmen of every kind cannot always be at. 
hand, -toido every little thing he may want in the mechanical 
way; .wheriever-he nes. ttl to get a a ‘hint sfonde a new eat 
opt that requires it./0) 1 

oo An electrician, : therefor’, pha tit never to bk tack ‘hb, 
common tools of a cadinet maker, clock, and watch maker, at 
leaft, and know, in fome meafure, how to ufe them. With 
refpe&t to, glafs; he ought, by all means, to learn the ufe of 
a bbw, pipe, the method of drawing out’ and bending glafs 
tubes, and performing, swith fome degree of dexterity, other 
operations. upon glafs, which’ he will want to ufe in a great 
variety of forms. © An eleétrician, thus furnifhed, will be 
able, upon any occafion, to ferve himfelf: and the flownefs 
and, bluriders of; mechanicks do but ill fuit with the ardour of 
perfons engaged ‘in philofophical inquiries. 

ly were,:much to be wifhed, that philofophers woul at- 
“tend: more. than they do to the conftruétion of their own ma- 
chines.,:;We might then expe€ to fee fome real ‘and capital 
improvements in them; whereas little can be expected from 
mere mathematical inftrument makers ; who are feldom men 
of any feience, and whofe fole aim is to make their goods 
elegant and portable. 

a oS FoRMERL ¥ 


506 BRANCHES or KNOWLEDGE Paar IV. 


Formerty, indeed, philofophers. were obliged ito-conftruct 
their.own machines, Mr. Boyle, Mr: Hawketbee, -and Dr. 
Defaguliers would haye done nothing by giving ‘tradefmen 
orders for what they wanted. There were no fuch things to 
be had... Neceflity therefore drove: them \to othe ftudy “and 
practice of mechanics, and’ from their :contrivances areide- 
rived almoft all.the philofophical inftruments Atha are:now . 
in ufe. it yloten 

Every original genius, like shine. tenis in thisirefpest, 
follow their fteps.. He will extend ‘his. views beyond the 
power of the prefent machinery, which ‘can only:be adapted 
to the prefent ftate-of fcience.. And,:I think, one principal 
reafon of the imperfect ftate of feveral branches of eleétrical 
knowledgewith us, may be evidently traced tofome general im- 
perfections in the ftructure of all our commoh machines in Eng- 
land ;. which render feveral kinds of experiments very diffi- 
cult, or-almoft impoflible to be made 5 :as:may:be fhown in 
the next part of the work; in which I hall treat at large of 
the conftruétion of machines, and. ais the eas a aig 1 
am able for ufing them. TOGM 93 

Lastxy,. if an elettrician intend that the: public ‘hould be 
benefited by his labours, he fhould, by all’ means, qualify 


himfelf to draw according to the rules of PeRsPEecTIVE 3 with- 


out which he will often be unable to give an adequate idea of 
his experiments to others... There is fo much beauty. in the 
rules of this ingenious art, and fo much pleafare in the appli- 
cation, of them, that I cannot help wondering, ‘that all gen= 
tlemen, of a liberal education do not take the {mall degree of 
pains, that is neceflary to make themfelves. matters of it, All 
the 


Sc: Ii =. or USE i ELECTRICITY. 509 


the mechanical methods of drawing, efpecially where a great 

‘number of right lines are ufed, as in drawing machines, &c. 
are exceedingly imperfect, and infufficient. They admit not 
of half the variety of perfpective drawings. They can hardly 
ever be near fo correct: befides that, I know by experience, 
they take up much more time, and the operation is exceed- 
ingly flavith and troublefome. 


SIYIEEDAN RB Jizi i 


508 Tue CONSTRUCTION «or Part Vv. 


7 yllaiaeqio .gniwsib to eborisar {eomsisser sels 
ign qnivenb nies .blo dw esail tigitto mimun 
noros : cg ash ¥ Oo a 1x9 Sik 
‘PAR Pay a Yad Yo 
sd: Gn0> ot iwi od WY. 

? stortt rover rat suey yoils 

advo brie iivel yighi 


Or THE CONSTRUCTION of ELECTRICAL MACHINES, 
AND THE PRINCIPAL PARTS OF AN ELECTRICAL AP- 
PARATUS. 


SECTION I. 


GENERAL OBSERVATIONS on THE CONSTRUCTION 
OF AN ELECTRICAL APPARATUS. 


MPROVEMENTS in electrical machines have, as might. 
well be expected, kept pace with improvements in the {ci- 
ence of electricity. While nothing more than eleétrical attrac- 
tion and repulfion were known, nothing that we fhould now 
call an e/eétrical apparatus was neceflary. Every thing that was 
known might be exhibited by means of a piece of amber, 
fealing 


Tl 


om 


ToT 


| | 
_F 2 
C 


Srceknt ELECTRICAL 1MHCHINES, 509 


fealing. wax, .orglafss) which-the:philofopher:rubbedagainft 
his:coat;; ahdyprefented sto bits of paper, featliers, and) other 
light bodies ;thatscame iin-bis way,},andcoft: him. nothing.» 

»To\-give! aogteater degree of friction to electric fubftances 
Otto Guericke and Mr. Hawkethee contrived to whirb fulphur 
and glafs in a fpherical form ; but their limited knowledge 
of} relectricity.-did siot | fuggeft; or require the:more complex 
ftruGture of -a)modern electrical machine. «Mr. Hawkefbee’s 
contrivances, indéed,» were excellent, and: the apparatus .for 
many of his experiments aa ser aap to rw purpofes for 
which they! were lintendedy sib 

hoWuen ono: further! ufe could be made of lotic “philofo- 
phers-had recourfe to the'eafier and cheaper apparatus of glafs 
tubes,! and fticks of fulphur-or fealing wax; and the firft con- 
duétors. they made ufe’ of were ‘nothing more than hempen 
cords fupported by filken lines.. To thefe,: bars “of metal 
were foon: fubftituted. After that, recourfe was again had-to 
the globe, as much more convenient to give an uniform fup- 
ply of electric matter to thefe infulated conduétors; and, in 
due time, a rubber was ufed to fupply the reste . a human 
hands) 1 
THE Bimovany of the Liege plait occafioned ftill more 
additions to our electrical apparatus; and the more modern 
difcoveries’. of Dr. Franklin) and: others have likewife made 
praportionable additions highly requifite. No philofopher, 
for inftance, can now be fatisfied, if he be not able to fupply 
aiconduétor from the clouds, .as well as from the friction of © 
his glafs globes or tubes. — having already marked the 
beard 7 rebar . ‘ progrefs 


510 Tue CONSTRUCTION. or Parry. 


progrefs of improvements im ele@trical machines, . aswell! as 
in. ele@rical {cience, “I fhall content’ myfelf with: this brief 
recapitulation, and: proceed. to’ defcribe:what:experience ‘(in 
many cafés dear bought) hasitaught'me to'think the beftme- 
thod of conftructing: machines, and'to lay down: the bef rules | 
for conducting eleétrical opérations:) |) 90i9''¢! © ni ely bas 4 
» NorwrrusTanpinG globes’ or :cylinders: are: now ofthe 
moftiextenfive: ufe in electrical -expetiments,:GL Ass) TUBES 
are, neverthelefs, moft convenient for feveral purpofes,. and:no 
electrician ought to be without them.) ‘They fhould be made 
as long as a perfon can well draw. through: his hand atone 
ftroke, which. is tabdut+thrée!feet, or: famething more; ‘and 
as wide as he-can conveniently gtafp: 1) The: thicknefsiof the 
metal is not material, perhaps the thinner'they are the better, Ma 
if they will bear fufficient friétion ; which; however, needs 
only to be very gentle, when. the'tubeisiin goodiorder.) Ibis 
moft. convenient to have the tube clofed atone /end: fot, obe~ 
fides that the ele&ric matter is thereby: retained: beft on its 
furface, the. air may | more: cafily: be: drawm out) ofvity or 
condenfed: in it, bytmeans ofia brafs cap fitted: to the iopem 
end. A tube thus farnithed is requifite for various experid | ae 
ments! [4s0Ph\ Hi |» byal ods to yovotib ast So * 
Tue beft rubber that min yet been found for afmoothiglafs 
tube is: the rough: fide of black oiled ilk, -efpebially- when 
little amalgam,/of mercury and any: metal,» is: pat-upon ites 
An electrician fhouldi be farnithed with tough g! 
i. e. tubes with theit polifhvtaken off, 'asowellkcas 
ones; but-a cylinder of baked: wood will do nearly aswell! ees 
The beft rubber for a rough glafs tube, or a cylinder of baked r 
wood, © che). 


Srewd. ELECTRICAL MACHINES. 5ir 


awood} as wellas for a ftick of fulphur or fealing’ wax, *is' foft 
néw, flannels. of rather fkins, fuchyas hare tins, ‘or cat fkins, 
tanned with the hair on, being: pmereng ue: vested a more 
exquifite polifh. 2m * arid-39; 
» GBLecPRICIANS:are not initenies siieetian ie preference 
isy upon the whole, ‘to bei given to’ GLOBES; or‘cyLINDERS. 
In favour of cylinders it is faid, that more of their furface’ may 
beltouched»by:the rubber. On the other) hand, ‘in favour of 
globes,' it is faid, that they'can more'eafily be blown true, {o. 
as to'prefs the rubber-equally : they may alfo be:made: larger 
in diameter, and: by this means, the -axis (if they have any) 
may be further from the~ excited: furface:, for when the axes 
arenear the furface, the eleétric fire will feein to ftrike to them, 
fo that they will fometimes appear luminous in the dark, and, 
if they be infulated, the extrentities' of the axes’ will” give 
{parks » which’ is: Certainly’ a diminution: of we ar oe fire at 
the conductor. — phar gisdon 
For this reafon, I desl advife, sinat all axes tiisivdidad lip 
muuch as poflible, having found by experience,’ that they are 
an no cafe whatever neceflary, the'largeft globes ‘being -whirl= 
ed horizontally, with the greateft eafe, and in every refpect 
fo more advantage, with one neck than two. This method 
of fitting up globes alfo makes eleétrical machines. prone lefs 
complex, expenfive and ‘troublefome.) 9) 98) O09 8 oni 
~ Ler every globe intended.to be thus finted up tides its neck 
inclofed in a pretty deep brafs cap, ending in a‘dilated brim, 
of about halfan inch broad, ‘if the globe be’a-largeone: To 
this neck let there be fitted a fhort iromaxis,: and on''that'a 


PULLEY; andlet a {pace.of about three quarters» of, an) inch 
of 


512 Tue CONSTRUCTIONS 6%  Panrv. 


sof the axis, be left between ithe pulley and) the’ cap.» Tncthis 
place the axis is to-be fupported by’ 4 ftrong BRASS ARM,» [c. 
| -Plvii-} proceeding from. the pillar into which the extremity 
of the axis is put, and in which it turns. ‘This brats arm _ 
may, be made to receive, globes: of any -fize whatever, x 
being Jeft-in it for pullies.of any. fize, )thatamaybe;wanted _ 
forthem.)) risn2%0 exer toc .bit) ci 11 wabnilyo}o anormhal 
In this manner globes may: be fixed. much mote trily than 
they can, with two necks, and; they’ are mounted with much — 8) 
more. cafe, and lefs expence.; . The: weight! of large'globes is qm 
no, objection to this: method.» The largeftineed n i) 
above.éight ‘or ten panel shale rei ea 
with great eafe in this manner..|, The rubber, if) it be placed 
under the globe; will contribute to fupport the weight of 
., Let there be a hole made in.the brafs cap above-menti 
ed,in-order to preferve|a communication, between the e: 
nal air, and the air within the globe: for if the air 
globe ‘be either rarer or denfer than that without; the 
tion is found to, be-Jeflened in proportion; and, judg 


which might bei fuppofed to infinuate itfelf into the 
_ fuch a communications > «4 sco Ciiw lanes ee 
Ir will, be found: convenient to have the axis projed 


turned without a wheel, for the greater variety. of ex, 
“Ir an axis -be ufed,. let both the extremities:of it 
rue turned i ina lathes otherwife it, will not dar rr 


Srcl. ELECTRICAL MACHINES. 513 


_be’made round, and fmooth, or covered with fome eleétric 
fubftance, to prevent its ane ag! much of the cages wittae 
of the globe. 

One of the pillars, in which ress globes or ejiintety with 
two axes are turned, fhould be moveable; for then a globe 
‘or cylinder of any fize may be ufed, and they ‘thould be made 
high enough, and have holes at fmall diftances quite to the 
top, to take two Gane hi ssnarr ese one peers the other. 
oe vii.) 

In has not Yolen sdcberadbag by: eluenvicianst what kind 
of glafs is the fitteft for cleCtrical purpofes, but’ the beft flint 
is commonly ufed)> I have not made’ fo many: experiments, 

as I could with, toiafcertain this circumftance; as they are both 

very uncertain, and expenfive ; but I have ‘fome’ reafon’ to 
think that» common _ bottle/metal is fitteft for the’ purpofe of 
excitation: -at/Iéaft)'the beft globe Ihave yet fen’ is‘one that 

Lhave of that metal. Its virtue is certainly exceeding greats 

and’ ‘attribute it’ in part|to the gréat hardnefs of the metal, 

andvin-part tolitsexquifite poliftt "The blowing of any thing 

{pherical in this metal,:and efpecially the making large'globes 

f{mooth’is ¥ sid le aa ane Sey Renan ‘made’ ‘with 

tivo necks. IONS I NSEADYMOOGL VIS. 2INUOI08 | yOGE 

a 0 sie: hea hea is abot ten inches in came: 
ter, but nothing has been determined about the beft fize. © 
have ufed almoft every {ize from three*inchés to jail cghnse 
in:diameter, without: ‘knowing what "advice to give.’ Perhaps 
ceteris paribus, twelve or thirteen. inches may be, upon the 
whole, as convenient'as any; ‘but much larger, if they could 
be whirled with the fame eafe,' would probably do better. 

: Uuu Ir 


514 ‘Tux; CONSTRUCTION or: 5 Paar. V, 


Ir a perfon chufe to have no affiftant, but would turn-the 
globe, and manage the apparatus himfelf (which is,,onanany 
accounts, very defirable) it will be moft convenjent’ to haye 
the axis of the wueex level with the table at which, he fits. 
But if he chufe:rather to ftand, all the time he »is: making hi 
experiments, , it thould. be. raifed proportionably, higher. 2 a 
will, ,perhaps, .be ;moft,conyenient to, make the! diamet of 
the;.wheel about .eighteen inches; and. the, of th 
pullies fhould be fuch as will give them, at leaf, four or five 
revolutions for one,of the wheel... For the)globe.. should: ge- 
nerally. revolve at leatt four of five times tina ifeco 
is. much {wifter, than jit,can, be.well; tamed without a wheel ate ls 

Tue wheel fhould be made moveable, with . ae 2% 
frame in which the-globes are hung, or the frame fhould be = 
moveable with refpe& to\the wheel, to fuit the altera ak 
which. the weather, will make.in the/length of the Pings: acta 
ticularly if it be made.of hemp 5, buti worfted is faid: 5 
an excellent ftring, and is not/fo apt to alter with: ‘the ‘weas 
ther... If thediftance between the wheeh andthe ic 
not ,be altered, the operator muft occafionally no it ter his 
hempen, ftring, in order to: make it, tighters, which: is, 
many accounts, very inconvenient. Several grooyesimthe = 
{ame wheel are. very ufeful, and almoft. neceflaty,.if ret - 
one globe be ufed at the fame. time, | pak ds nould, eu 


leys, that the firing may lay. Pic y vs: and th 
firings of different fizes may be ued. 4, 

Tue beft RuBBERs for globes or cylinders are-ma 
bafilfkins, particularly the neck part of them, wh 


Secl. ELECTRICAL MACHINES. $15 
grain’is thore open, and the furface rather’ rough. ‘That the 
rubber thay prefs" the globe equally, it fhiould be pit upoh 
plate of metal bent to the fHipe of the globe, and be fuffed 
with any thing ‘that is‘pretty foft. Bran is good; and if the 
ftuffing be a conduétor, as flax, it will be better than if it be 
4- “non cofiduétor, as hair, ‘or wool. It fliould reit upon q 
fpting, to favour any inequality’ ‘thére’ may be'in the formi of, 
the globe or’ cylinder. "The belt pofition of the’ rubber, for’ 
a varicty of putpofes, is an horizontal one, but it fhould be 
capable of beifig placed in evety variety of horizontal pofition 5) $ 
and the fpting which fupports the’ rabber thould bé miade to’ 
prefs more or lefe at pleafure. The rubber fhould be’ made’ 
nearly as large one’ way ‘asthe other. If it be made’ very’ 
narrow, fome’ parts of the globe will pafs it withoutea fuffici- 
ent fri€tion. To remedy that inconvenience, thé had (if it 
be dry) may be held to the globe, juft’before the rubber, to 
add'to its breadth; but that pofture is very incoriveniént! 

Ir is advifable that there be no fharp edges of angles about 
the rubber, for that would make the in/udation of it (which is 
a matter of great’ confequence) ineffe@tuial. By the infulation 
of the rubber every electrical experiment may be performed’ 
-with the twofold ‘variety of pofitive and negative, and’a con- 
duétor be made to give or take fire at pleafure. This infula- 
tion is beft made by means of baked wood, in the form of a 
plate, five or fix inches in diameter, [g PI. vii.] interpofed 
between the metallic part of the rubber and the fteel {pring 
that fupports it. When pofitive electricity is intended to be 
produced, a chain [# PI. vii.] muft connect the rubber with 

Uuue2 the 


516 Tue CONSTRUCTION or . Parr V. 


the floor; but when negative electricity is ‘eens the chain 
mutt be. removed, and. hung upon, the common condu: 
while another prime conduétor muft b be -connetted with _ 
rubber 5 which will therefore be electrified negatively, _ ae 

. ‘Tue beft method of, collecting, the electric fire from othe 
globe feems to be, by, three or four pointed wires, [wm PA, vii.) ‘ 
two or, three ; -inches long, hanging lightly upon the globes 


and neither fo light, as to be.thrown off the globe by electrical. tong 


repulfion (which would occafion’ a Jofs of the electric mat- 
ter) ;nor fo heayy, as, to preyent.their’ feparating toa Proper, 


diftance, ‘and being drawn, backwards, on forwards, as the. moft. Tm 


effectual difcharge of the fire, accumulated on| different parts, ; 


of the globe, may require. For this purpofe. they are bet 


fufpended.on an open metallic ring. Needles with fine points 1: 
do admirably well. ..:, DAT oF _ .ndifgn® iho 
_ It is requifite,, fora variety, of ufes,. that the PRIME eet 
DUCTOR be fixed very fteady. /It ought not, therefore, to 
in filken ftrings, but have.a folid fapport; and, of all ee 
the preference is to be given to baked wood, being found. bye" 
experience to make the moft perfect infulation, and being _ 
the cheapeft,, and beft in all other refpects. dup ye “Hie 
For common purpofes a fmall conductor is moft conveni- 
ent, but where a ftrong {park i is wanted, it is proper to have — 
a larger conductor at hand, which may be occafionally placed 
in contact with the fmaller, and be removed from, i it. at 
pleafure. But whatever be the- fize of a prime conduétor, 
the. extremity of it, or that part which is moft remote from _ 
the globe, fhould be made much larger and rounder than the 
reft ; 


Sec. I. an. ELECTRICAL APPARATUS 517 


reft: [& Pl. vii.] for the effort of the ele@tric matter to fly off 
is always the greateft at the greateft diftance from the globe. 
As the eleétrician will have frequent occafion to ‘infulate 
various bodies, I would advife that he make all the ftands 
and ftools which he ufes for that purpofe of biked wood: It 
may ecafily be'turned into‘any form, ‘it infulates better than 
glafs, and is not fo brittle: © But care fhould be taken that 
the wood be thoroughly baked, even till it be quite’ brown. 
It will not then ‘be found very apt to colle@ moifture 
from the air.’ If it fhould,. a little warming and rubbing will 
be fufficient to expel the moifture again:» At moft it can only” 
be’ neceffary to boil it in linfeed oil, of give it a flight coating 
of varnith after it has.come hot out of the oven. ~If this pre-° 
paration be ufed, it muft be well Eecnagal ‘once. sisi imme- 
diately after the boiling. aq 
©THE eleétrician, having thus conftruced his machine, will” 
- want METALLIC RODS, [5 Pl. ii.] to take {parks from his con- 
duétor for various ufes...'Thefe fhould ‘have knobs, larger or 
fmaller in proportion to the curvature of the conduétor. If 
the knob be too. fmall, it will not difcharge the condutor at 
once, but by degrees, and with a'lefs'fenfible-effe@; where- 
as the fpark between broad furfaces is thick and ftrong. © 
~Tue more formidable part of an electrical apparatus con- 
fifts in the coaTEp Guass, that is ufed for the Leyden ex- 
periment. The form of the plate is immaterial with ‘refpect 
to the fhock ; and, for different experiments, both plates of 
glafs, and jars, of various forms and fizes, muft be ufed. 
For common ufés, the moft commodious form is that of a 
jar, as wide asa perfon can conveniently hold by grafping, 
and 


when one is wanted, will be eafier to manage. But no elec- 


_ will generally anfwer the beft.. The tinfoil may be put. stp 


.» Geiser ‘ara + but oie a be mnsil 
convenient to have the mouth “narrower than the belly 5 for — 
then it may be more: eafily kept clean and: dry, and the cork, — 


trician would chufe to be without a great number of jars of — 
various fizes and forms. A confiderable variety may bet fee i: 
in plate ii. fig. cy de fi &> brits jr he a vie 
‘Tue method of coating is much preferable to that of put= Ey 
ting water or brafs thavings into, the jars, which both makes 


which is Sequidte 1 in many experiments. Brafs duft; how 
ever, or leaden fhot is very convenient for finall phials., Tl 
ferve very well where it is neceflary to remove the coating 
foon as the jar is charged, but, for this purpofe, quickfil 


either with pafte, gum water, or bees wax. Tocoatthe 
infides of veffels, which have narrow mouths, moiften 
infide with gum-water, and then pour fome brafs duft- 
it. Enough will ftick on to make an exceeding good coat 
ing; and if nothing very hard rub againft it, it onan 
eafily come off. This brafs duft, which is exttemel 
in a great variety of eledtrical, experiments, wae be] 
the pin-makers. 
In the conftruction of an ELECTRICAL BATTERY Tiwouldt 
not recommend very large jars. A number of fmaller are 
e dash 


2 
7 


Plate III. 


beth: 4 aw ELECTRICAL APPARATUS. 19 


heme Norham If. anes thefe break -by an 
ae mem the lofs is lefs con- 


ee. fiderable ; . ‘ 7 4 
7 f 


and without, 2 
digious force: h 
the top, they will eo 

Tue firft battery that I ec 

* ed of forty one jars of this f 

_-burfting by fj 
which I much 
Plate III. It e 

long, and two inches and a half it 

an inch and a half of the top. ». T! 

4 half a fquare foot ; fo that ‘the whole b 

two {quare feet. The wire of each j 

{mall wire twifted about the lower end 

- infide coating in fevéral places; and. Seip throaihin pedity 

-Targe piece of cork, within the jar, ‘to prevent any part of it 

touching the fide, which would tend to promote a fpontane- > 4 

ous difcharge. Each wire is turned round; fovas to make“a —— — 

hole 


_ purpofe than the beft flint; »as| I. find jars mad 


520 Tue CONSTRUCTION or . Paar 


hole at the upper ded and through thefe holes a 
brafs rod with knobs ‘is put, one hed ferving for one 
the jars.’ pay aIDts 05 hase ©} As 
Tue communication between thefe rods is made 
over them all a chain, which is not drawn’ in the | 
the figure fhould appear too confufed. If I. 
part of the battery, I lay the chain over as - 
want rows of jars. The bottom of the box, 
jars ftand, is covered with tinfoil and brafs duft ; “and ; 
wire, touching this tinfoil, is put through the box, and 
pears on the outfide, as in the plate. To this wire’ is fat 
whatever is intended to communicate with che quelideleé 
battery; as the piece of {mall wire in the figure; 
difcharge is made by bringing the brafs —_ to ‘abi 
knobs of the battery. - 
Tuis is the hetiary whieh I have generally 


I have fronted a very great force, I have joined bot 

teries, and even feveral large jars to them. Ancbit ill 
haps be. allowed to be fome evidence of the goodnefs.o: 
conftruction, that after ufing it fo much, I fee -no 
with the leaft alteration in any part of it. . Were I, 
ftrugt, another, battery, I thould take jars of the ve 
fize, and difpofe them in the very fame manner. . hn 

Tue glafs of which this battery is made is what ith 
men call flint-green 3 which I think is much 


apt to difcharge themfelyes. Befides it is much che ‘ 
flint. : 


Sec. I. an ELECTRICAL APPARATUS, 521 


To difcover the kind and degree of electricity, many 
forms of ELECTROMETERS have been thought of, as the rea- 
der may have perceived in the courfe of the hiftory, but this 
bufinefs is ftill imperfect. Mr. Canton’s balls are of excellent 
ufe both to difcover fmall degrees of electricity, to obferve 
the changes of it from pofitive to negative, and vice ver/a ; 
and to eftimate the force of a fhock before the difcharge, fo 
that the operator fhall always be able to tell, very nearly, how 
high he has charged his jars, and what the explofion will be 
whenever he chufes to make it. 

Mr. Canron’s BALLS (reprefented on a glafs, ftanding on 
“the ftool [¢ Plate ii.] are only two pieces of cork, or pith of 
elder, nicely turned in a lathe, to about the fize of a {mall 
pea, and fufpended on fine linen threads: It is convenient to 
have thefe in fmall boxes for the pocket; the box being the 
full length of the ftrings, that they may lie there without be- 
ing bent. ‘ 

Mr. Kinnerstey’s electrometer defcribed p. 216, is ufe- 
ful to afcertain how great fhocks have been, and for many 
curious experiments in eleétricity. A drawing is given of it 
[r Plate ii.] but the glafs tube is reprefented as much fhorter 
than it was made by Mr. Kinnerfley. I think it in general more 
convenient ; as the bore of the fmall tube may eafily be pro- 
portioned to it. But if a perfon get one long tube, of the 
fame fize throughout, it may be cut into different lengths, 
and the fame brafs caps will fit any part of it. 

Ar the top of the ftand of baked wood which fupports Mr. 
Kinnerfley’s electrometer, I have fixed another, contrived by 
Mr. Lane, to give a number of fhocks, all of -precifely the 

Bb ap « fame 


322 Tur CONSTRUCTION or | Part Ve 


fame degree of ftrength ; but the reader muft wait Mr. 
own leifure for a pantignle: account of it, anal i 
ules. 

To the account of hele atticles of an ele@trical 
which mutt be ufed within doors, it will not be wh 
nificant to add, that a ftrong firm table is highly 
_ For if the raBiz_on which the apparatus is difpo 
to fhake, a great number of experiments cannot b 
to advantage. 

In order to repeat the noble experiment of nok 
the electric fluid with the matter of lightning, and 
further obfervations on the electricity of the atmofp 
electrician muft be provided with a MACHINE! FOR 

ELECTRICITY FROM THE CLoups. For the beft cot 
tion of fuch a machine, take the following » directions, 
the top of any building (which will be the more conve 
if it ftand upon an eminence) erect a pole, [a fig. 2.P 
as tall-as a man can, welll manage, having on the | 
folid piece of glafs‘or baked wood, a foot in Tength. 
this be covered with’a tin or copper vefiel [4] in the f 
a funnel, to prevent its ever being wetted. Above 
there rife a long flender rod, [c] terminating in « 
wire, and having a fmall wire twifted round:its whole 
to conduét the electricity the better to the funnel.» 
funnel make a wire [d]; defcend along the buildin 
a foot diftance from. it, and-beiconduéted through 
fath, into any room which hall be moft convenient 
naging the experiments. In this/ room let a pro 
tor be infulated, and connected with the wire 


Sec. I. AN ELECTRICAL APPARATUS 523 


the window. This wire and conductor, being completely 
; infulated, will be electrified whenever there is a confiderable 
quantity of electricity in the air; and notice will be given 
when it is properly charged, either by Mr. Canton’s balls, 
hung to it, or by fuch a fet of bells as will be deferibed 
hereafter. 

Ip the ele&trician be defirous of making experiments upon 
the eleétricity of the atmofphere to greater exactnefs, he muft 
raife a kite, by means of a ftring in which a fimall wire is 
twifted. The extremity of this line muft be filk, and the 
wire muft terminate in fome metallic conduétor, of fuch a 
form as fhall be thought moft convenient. Mr. Romas’s ex- 
periment will perhaps convince my reader, that it may be 
dangerous to raife this kite at the approach of a thunder 
.ftorm; and upon this occafion the common apparatus above 
defcribed for drawing electricity from the clouds will, pro- 
bably, anfwer his purpofe well enough. 

Burt, with the following apparatus, I fhould apprehend no 
great danger in any thunder ftorm. Let the ftring of the 
kite [a fig. 3. Pl. i.] be wound upon a reel [4] going 
through a flit in a flat board, faftened at the top of it; by 
which more or lefs of the ftring may be let out at pleafure. 
Let the reel be fixed to the top of a tin or copper funnel [c] 
fuch as was defcribed above; and from the funnel let a me- 
tallic rod [d] with a large knob be projected, to ferve for a 
conductor. This funnel and reel muft be fupported by a 
ftaff [e] the upper end of which, at leaft, muft be well baked ; 
and the lower end may be made fharp, to thruft into the 
ground, when the kite is well raifed. 

De > ar | THE 


524 A DESCRIPTION or Pant V. 


Tue fafety of this apparatus depeads upon the c 
faftened to the ftaff, by a hook a little below the ratey Sad “Ae bisa . 
dragging on the ground: for the redundant lightning will q 
ftrike from the funnel to the chain, and fo be condutted as” 7 
far as any one chufes, without touching the perfon ord M 
holds the ftaff. Serra 

Sparxs may be taken from the conduétor Gélindtogts 
.this apparatus with all fafety, by means of a. fmall rod of 
baked wood [a fig. 4.] furnifhed with a fmall funnel [4] and 
a brafs rod [c] and a chain conneéted with it: for the light- 
ning which ftrikes the rod, will pafs by the funnel and the 
chain, without touching the perfon who holds the rod. 


eee eee ee uy 
y 7, 


ij 


Sec. I.’ ELECTRICAL MACHINES. 525 


Sr OTTO 'N =: Ti 


A DESCRIPTION OF somME PARTICULAR ELECTRICAL 
MACHINES, wiru oBSERVATIONS ON THEIR PRINCI- 
PAL ADVANTAGES AND DEFECTS. 


FTER this general account of the conftru€tion of elec- 
trical machines, and the principal parts of an ele¢trical 


apparatus, my reader may perhaps expect a more particular 


account of fome of the principal varieties with which they 
are ufually made. And though it might be prefumed, 
from what has been advanced upon that head, that any per- 
fon might judge for himfelf, I fhall endeavour to gratify thofe 
who are willing to provide themfelves with an eleétrical ma- 
chine, by giving drawings and defcriptions of fome of the 
beft conftructions that have fallen under my notice, obferving 

what I apprehend to be their feveral advantages and defeéts. 
I suacx begin with Mr. Hawkefbee’s machine [Plate 4. 
fig. 1.] which is an excellent conftruction confidering the 
ftate of electricity in his time. The drawings annexed will 
render 


526 _A DESCRIPTION of. Parr V, 


renderavery particular de(cription of this, or the other machine, 
unneceflary.. This has no rubber, no prime conduétor, or 
field for making experiments ; for no fuch things were want- 
ed in his time: but it may be eafily accommodated with them 
all. A conduétor may hang from the cieling, a rubber may _ 
be fupported by a {pring fixed under the globe; and a table 
placed near the machine, may receive the apparatus neceflary 
for making experiments. The inconveniences of this con- 
ftru@ion are, that the operator cannot well turn the, wheel 
himfelf. A fervant is therefore neceffary, who yaa fit to 
his work. The machine admits only of one globe, or cylin- 
der, which muft have two necks; though is admits ofa con- 
fiderable variety of fuch, and it is by no means portable. 

Tue Abbé Nollet’s machine [Plate iv. fig. 2.] refembles _ 
the greateft number of the ‘eleGrical machines that were 
about the time that the Leyden phial was difcovered. T 
were the ‘machines, heavy and unwieldy” as the} feem, hat 
were generally carried from place to place, when. ele€trical_ 
experiments made a gainful bufinefs, and be peas the « ex ake 
pence of the conveyance. 

~ In thofe’early times, electricians had no ‘idea, th it 
poflible to make the globe revolve too fwiftly. They, ther 
fore, made their wheels exceeding large, and the frame : 
the machine proportionably ftrong. The globe x was gen 
ly rubbed’ by the hand, the conduétor was a bar. of i 
generally a gun barrel, fufpended i in filken lines from the raga at 
the room, and the apparatus was difpofed on an ss ning 
table. ; y 


3 £ 
eee o' 
t 
: 
| - ? 
$ a BV 
\ ( ; 
: 
. 
; —_ 
‘ . 
: . 
5 . 
. 
- if 
, . 
_ ee — whe _ — os — 
o * . 5 
Ke _/_ a ee - Se en Oe = 
. 
fi 
‘ 
7 a . 
; 
: 
“ ‘ 
; 
‘ . 
; - 
= ; ; 
. 
‘ 
- ; 


TI 


SS 
> 


See. Is. ELECTRICAL MACHINES. 527 


.) Taese, machinés. are rio univerfally laid ‘afide, being 
more fit for alarge laboratory than aprivate ftudy. © Befides 
they neceflarily require;amaffiftant;"and-do'not admit-oF half” ane 


the, variety in ythe ‘difpofition’ of the principal parts of the 
conftruction, which the variety of experiments now demands. 
\> ABovr-the' ti ‘Mr. Boze's shagigsie ee was ‘talked 


of, cleGritians awerég 
power, of electricity’; ough, eavla 6 uaa oe Maik 


lating, or prefetving ity it’ was difperfed’ as foon as raifed. 
The machine repr in Plate v. fg. r. Was a contrivance é 


irh four F globes at a has and 
unite the powerof them all’ oinwegh 

-, hcannot help: regretting that Ho fuch ‘machines set 
are conftructed at this day, when, by means of eleétrical 
batteries,’ fo great a power might’ be preferved, and e 
ed to the greateft purpofes, I with’ the! Dottor v 
the» michine here’ deferibed, if it be yet in being 
ftruct a battery proportioned to.it.. But F fhoald joice more 
to fee a machine moving by wind or water, turning v 
or thirty globes, and charging electrical batteries 
them. L. makeino | doubt but’ that-a full-chatge ‘of wo 


three thoufand: {quare feet of coutéd glafs would 1 fliock 
as, greatas a: fingle common flath of lightning. are not 
philofophers who will fay, that nothing gra d, a 


no new’ diftoveries made by fuch: a: power. reise 15" 
oiPuade vi fig, 2. éxhibits: a machine high’ Mr. Wile n 
oonftruéted, about the! time above-mentioned. Tt is much: 
more comimodious than:any! that had been contrived before, 

as 


528 A DESCRIPTION or Parr V. 


as all the parts are brought within’ a moderate compas fore 


that the fame perfon may turn the wheel, and condué the 
experiments. _ One of the moft complete machines, and one 
that had the greateft power of any that I have feen, except 
my own, is of this conftru€tion. 

Irs inconveniences,are, that it admits but little variety of 
globes or cylinders, and both thefe and the rubber are not 
fufficiently diftant from other bodies. The rubber is not in- 
fulated, and the conduétor is unfteady. This machine has a 
frame ftanding upon the ground, but the general | conftruction 
may be preferved, and the machine be made to {crew to a 

table. Some I have feen which, by this means, were made - 
. very portable; and a box was contrived in ieee: to.con- 
tain the apparatus. * . 

Or the more modern conftruétions (of which there is an 
_endlefs variety) the more elegant are thofe in which the globe 
is turned. by tooth and pinion. This reduces the wheel work, 

contained in the box [a Pl. vi. fig. 1.] to an exceeding {mall 
compafs, and gives the workmen an opportunity of making the _ 
machine all in brafs, very elegant, and portable. ButI objet 
to them, as liable to accidents, which eleétricians in general 
cannot eafily repair; and I would with philofophers to be as_ 
independent as poffible of all workmen. Of this more ele- 
gant kind of machines, is that made by Mr. Nairne, a drawing 
of which may be feen in this plate. ‘The conduétor belong- 
ing to machines of this conftruétion is generally hung in 
filk, fupported, either by wooden pillars, in a frame, as in 
the figure annexed, or by two brafs arms extending from 
the machine. ; 
THESE 


| 
| 


Sec. Il. ELECTRICAL MACHINES. 529 . 


| Turse machines are certainly very commodious for ferew- 
ing to atable. ‘They require no affiftant, and they admit of 
the experiments being made in a fitting pofture; which is a 
great recommendation of a machine, to thofe perfons who 
chufe to do things \ with little trouble, and who are fond of a 
ftudious fedentary life. This conftruétion admits of very lit- 
tle variety in the fize or. number of globes, and hardly of a 
glafs veffel of any other form. But the greateft inconvenience 
attending it, is the upright pofition of the globe and rubber, 
whereby. every thing put ‘upon i ‘it is aptito or eaen 3_and the 
rubber is not-infulated. 9: 

. Ar Mr. Martin’s I have feen'a machine, in which a eylin- 
et was made to revolve between two brafs pillars, by means 
of a wheel and pinion, concealed .in a neat box. In this 


conftruction the axis of the, cylinder,, and’ ‘conféquently ¢ the 
rubber, was horizontal; in which refpedit is preferable to 


that mentioned above ; but if the machine were placed upon 
a table, the handle feemed to be too high to admit of its be- 
ing ufed in a fitting pofture. 

In the machine reprefented in plate vi. figs 2.2 cylinder 


5 Saints perpendicular to the horizon, fupported by a brafe. 


bow, ‘which receives the upper end of the axis ;- and motion. 
is given’ to it by means of a pulley, ‘at the lower end of the 
axis, and a wheel, which lies. parallel to the tables: The 
condutor [a] is’ furnithed with points to colleg the fire, and 
it is {crewed to the wire of a coated jar,: [4] ftanding in. a 
focket, between the cylinder and the wheel. One machine 
of this kind I have feen, in which the: cylinder and. we veces 
were not feparated by the'condugtor. ») 1 >) I 


26 A Mt y Tus : 


ae eee 


530 «= SC A DESCRIPTION: oF Parr Ve 


Tuts conftraction is peculiarly ufeful to phyficians and 
apothecaries; and, with Mr. Lane’s electrometer [c] annexed 
to it, (the figure of which he has given me leave to infert in 
' the drawing annexed, taken from his own machine) as many 
thocks as are requifite may be given, of precifely the fame, 
and any degree of force, without any change of pofture, either 
in the patient, or the operator; who has nothing to do but 
turn the wheel, without fo much as RES other part 
of the apparatus. 

Wauen this machine is ufed for fimple eliisihivations: and 
other purpofes where the fhock is not required; the coated 
jar muft be taken away, and another jar, without any coating, 
put in its place. _ By thismeans the conductor is fixed, which 
is a very great advantage, and which few machines are pof- 
fefled of. But thefe machines, befides. that they admit no 
variety of globes or cylinders, and no infulation of the rub- 
ber, require a motion of the arm, which I fhould think not | 


quite eafy. ia 4m 


Mr. Wes ey’s people, I believe, generally ‘afe a machine 
in which two cylinders are turned by the fame wheel: but 
one that I faw, in the pofleffion of a very intelligent: perfon 
of that perfuafion, had the cylinders and rubbers fo confined 
in a cheft, that, though it might do very well for medical 
ufes,’ it was very ill adapted tothe purpofes of philofophy. 

Bur the machine which I would advife a philofopher to 
conftruct for his own ufe, is that of which a drawing is given 
plate vii. This conftrudtion is the refult of my beft attention 
to this fubje&t. I have ufed it above fix months (how much 
I leave the reader to imagine) without feeing the leaft reafon 

to 


* zt * 
co aap es Fad tales 214 F a 
hy lao ust Age ee ra sais. a, . 
Re bvaskpaiel ul velg eseony oR ot oa 
wih > 


ee ik Ae 1 cinds* Ssh gration adie ie 
WEP sig Yd aa ainatiee stir tenabisoes 

t RIO dy Vk deters Sr 2 he sabe baa 
eetge os) dite SOF ono acods ad thie RE ae 
Pipi ate phar i panne. Cae et ae 
Pe. PEA eh co 
shin’ ay athe tin tr -RE - 
=} 4 pee PFs 


ag wie 


Tare, 


‘ 


Shira eet sik Sake 4 


Garros 3 
Soh ae 


Ahig ate «ee ‘ . eee om ‘ % 
(oeathte aha Wales Gee weitond: gai nes 13, eae a 
“gears ace ri wth made Band : 
Set at : eee aifeae ‘s Ie > te? 
2 Goes ¥ oar 2 CEO, eee > i se 
pees inonmaiees Ser ane oo 
ae a rae ee eee - Ba fe 
3 4.9 yt AE Tene 3: ANTS, Sto é s aS 

AF PQA PS PS aoe SCE” ARES eye er f 


| 
a 
Be. 
. 


ay Sieh ere t aa ES 3-8ft Vio? Meh ae 4 : ’ 
at : * * 6 asl 9 } ——- - 4 
Asis t 
+7 a a} r F 
ey ‘ sD ; 
Pb ee Adi ¥¢ ’ 


NL ic 


Sec. I. ELECTRICAL MACHINES. 531. 


to-make any alteration of confequence in it; and believe 
it to have almoft all the advantages, which an eleétri- 
cal machine, defigned for the clofet, can have. ‘The rea- 
der will, therefore, allow me to be a'little longer in the de- 
fcription of it than I have been on the reft. ‘ 
THE FRAME confifts of two ftrong boards of Mahogena, 
[@a] of the fame length, parallel to one another, about four 
inches afunder; and the lower is:an inch on each fide broader 
than the upper. In the upper board is a groove, reaching al- 
moft its whole length. One of the pillars [4] which are of 
baked wood, is immoveable, being let through the upper 
board, and firmly fixed in the lower, while the other pillar 
flides in the groove above-mentioned, in order to receive 
globes or cylinders of different fizes; but it is only wanted 
when am axis is ufed. Both the pillars are perforated with 
boles at equal diftances, from the top to the bottom); by 
means of which globes may be mounted higher or lower ac- 
cording to their fize; and they are.tall, to admit the ule of 
two or more globes at a time, one above theother. Four of 
a moderate fize may be ufed, if two be fixed on one axis: and | 
the wheel has feveral grooves for that purpofe. aan. 
Ir a globe with only one neck be ufed;: as in the’ plate, 
@ BRASS ARM with an open focket [c] is neceflary to fup~ 
port the axis beyond the pulley; and this partis alfo contriy~ 
ed to be put higher or lower, together with the brafs focket 
‘in which the axis turns: The axis [d] is made to come quite 
through the pillar, that it may be turned by another handle, 
without the wheel, if the operator chufes. The frame, being 
ferewed to the table, may be placed nearer to, or farther from 


¥y y's the 


532 ‘A DESCRIPTION or)% Parr ¥. nn 


the wheel, as the length of the ftring requires, in different 
ftates of the weather. - The wueex is fixed in a iraeonibyist 
felf, [e} by which it may. have any fituation with r 
_ pulley,, and be turned ‘to one fides fo as to prevent the ftring 
from cutting itfelf... The hinder hi of this ie, is Lappart: 
ed by a foot of its own. io» ASD SBE, 
_ Tue Rusper [/].confitts ; of % : dellotr, piece of eopen 
filled with; horfe hair, and. covered with a- bafil, 
fupported by a focket, which receives the cylindric: axis of 
a round and frat piece of baked wood, [g] the oppofite ps rt of 
, which. is inferted’ into the focket of a bent fteel fpr ing. [4] 
Thefe parts are eafily feparated; fo that the rubber, or the 
piece of wood that ferves to infulate it, may be chan ged % 
pleafure. The sprinc admits of a twofold. alteration | ofp 
fition, It may be either flipped along the a 
in the contrary direction ; fo as to give it every d 
fition with, refpe& to the globe or cylinder ; and iti a 
furnifhed with a /crew, [7] which melons it nt 
lighter, as-the operator chufes..- 
THE PRIME ConDUCTOR [4] isa pe ie velel of 
ed copper, in the form of a pear, fupported by a’pilla 
a firm bafis of baked wood, and it receives. its fire b: 
a long arched wire, or rod of very foft brafi; [1] eafly 
to any aie and raifed higher or nici as the bys: 


Src. I. 7 ELECTRICAL: MACHINES.; — 533 


the fire wherever it is wanted, and for many, other purpofes, 
convenient in a-courfe of} electrical, experiments. ~The -con=, 
dudtor i is, by this means, fteady, and-yet may be: -eafily, put 
into any fituation. It colleéts the fire perfe&tly well, and. 
(what is of the greateft confequence, though but. little attend- 
ed to) retains. it, equally, every wherticsrs T rdidtw lao Ader 
| Wun pofitive electricity is wanted, a wire, or chain, as as 
is reprefented. in the |plate [7] connetts the rubber with the 
table, or the floor: .When negative electricity is wanted, that 
wire is connected ‘with another, conductor, fuch, as that repre. 
fented [7 Pl. ii.], while the conduétor in plate vii, is connected, 
by another wire or;chain, ,with the table, If the rubber be 
made tolerably free from points, the negative power. will -be 
as ftrong as the pofitive. In this machine I do. not know 
which is the ftronger of the two. 
In fhort, the capital advantages of this machine are, that 
- giafs veffels, or any other ele&tric body, of any fize or form, 
may be ufed, with one neck, or two necks, at pleafure ; and 
even feveral of them at the fame time, if required. All the 
effential parts of the machine, the g/ode, the frame, the wheel, 
the rubber, and conduéfor, are quite feparate; and the pofition 
of them to one another may be varied in every manner pofli- 
ble. The rubber has a complete infulation, by which means 
the operator may command either the negative or the pofitive 
power, and may change them in an inftant. The conduétor 
is fteady, and eafily enlarged, by rods inferted into the holes, 
with which it is furnithed, or by the conjunétion of other 
conductors, in order to give larger fparks, &c. The wheel 
may 


$34 PRACTICAL’ wiivliee Pas YE 


may ‘be ufed of riot at ‘pleittaresp fo" that ‘the ‘o 
cither fit, or ftand to his work, as he pleafess « e ma 
pewter vier both manage the wheel and his 
Fattis../iow wi ay eR ode eis "34 
Tpa ron would be fatiafied) widls fing: globes 
neck only, which I greatly prefer,one pillar, and ti 
eft part of the frame of this machine may be {pai 
tooth and pinion be preferred, the wheel may’ 
jor an elegant inftrument may be niade in brats, 
general plan, which’ may be brought into @ {im 
seh -and be greatly sf hae inftrument Th 
feen fold at any of the thops. ' But to ‘philofophers T 
for the reafons above-r ed, recommend the p 
ftruétion in: plain wood. © tril ‘nt - sotelitterp Serth! sed i 
Sh cowed onl tovsgaotd Pda 
ind? ove onitloeapeirla’ I eoystaivbe bitlgt’ oat 
as1od Io” esi Ynsdto: sbodionshls wiligivnsite ¢ : 
ste 2s ReoR] ts: .ealacn' ovrslio osm Shdieigi 


Ss dN <<. inidpor isin ay ond exit ta. grad tok 
ovtur-odd guante orld ¢ kel! ocd (onrdsamns Tog 
obsiiog dt bas dotekest stivp' ord YOUR MET 

-eqsonmem yore nh bsisuv od yam rodiohe Soo 

oete vit lnnds (nonsldini diy! qmos's adh addin 

ue nie) wilesechiegeg altos bandits WE : 
aiebnored D* srk cits et toodd sgeatis pv 

abiietss sdpost honkiniaboryd) (hegtabs elites Be ibe 

io to neinnitae SHYT yd Ww. sottinth eran ee 

ofr trl Tid outa qed otyielovipiiyaaino mas 

ia ’ 


PART. VI. 


. PRACTICAL MAXIMS For THE USE oF YOUNG 
; "ELECTRICIANS. ‘ 


_$ the chapter T am now entering upon is , profetedly 

L defigned for the ufe of young ele@ricians, it is hoped 

that the proficient will excufe my inferting a’ few plain ‘and 
trite maxims ; which, though they be fuperfluous with re- 
‘£pe& to him, may not be fo to all ‘my readers, The greateft 
leétricians (who are generally thofe who have had the feweft 
@nftrudtions) may remember the time when ‘the knowledge 
wf a rule of maxim, which they would perhaps {mile to fee 
in a book, would have faved them a great deal of trouble and 
“expence ; and it is hoped they will not envy others acquiring 
swifdom cheaper than they did. In a general treatife every 

aman has an equal right to expeé to find what he wants ; and 

it is for the intereft of the {cience in general, thatevery thing 

“be made as eafy and inviting ‘as poflible to beginners. It is 

this circumftance only that can increafe the number of elec- 
tricians, 


536 PRACTICAL MAXIMS. Part VI. 


tricians, and it is from the increafe of this number, that we | 
may moft reafonably expect improvements in the feience. _ a. 
Wuen the air is dry, particularly when the weather 
frofty, and when the wind is North, or Eatt, Bi is hi 
any eleétrical machine but will work very well. 
be damp, let the room in which the machine is ufe 
_aired with a fire, and let the globe and every thing a 
made very dry, and it may be made to rock fimet 
in the beft ftate of the air. 
Wuen atube is ufed, the hand fhould be kept wo 
inches below the upper part of the rubber; othe 
electricity will difcharge itfelf upon the hand, ant 
will remain upon the tube for electrical purpofes. 
A xittis bees wax drawn over, the ; fu 
tube will greatly ,increafe its; power, | ‘hen 
in very good order, and highly excited, . ere wi 
ftroke,,, throw off many pencils.of rays from its fur! 
out the approach of any. SORINER _except what 
the common atmofpheree so) of oy sy cay oly ) 
To increafe the quantity of, electric, fire fron 
emiibal the rubber a little from time to,time; or ra 
en- the’ under fide ‘of a loofe piece of leather, whick 
cafionally be,put upon.the rubber. . But, the moft 
exciter of electricity is a little amalgam, which n 
by: rubbing together, mercury and thin pieces of le 
in the palm of the hand. . If the Arto ] 
pendicular to. the borin: it will be neceffary 
tallow to make it ftick. With this excellent por 
- all ftates of the weather are equal to an eleétrician. 


in ELECTRICITY. © 9 - 537 


A .iTTLe time after frefh’ amalgam has been put upon the 
globe, and often at other times, if there be any foulnefs-up- 
on the cufhion ; and fometimes when there is none, there will 
be formed upon the globe fmall black fpots, of a hard rough 
fubftance; which grow continually larger, till a confiderable 
quantity of that matter be accumulated upon: the furface. 
‘This muft be carefully picked off, or it will obftruét the ex- 
citation, and in a great meafure defeat the electrical operations. 

When the amalgam has been ufed for fome time, there 
will- be formed upon the rubber a thick’ incruftation- of the 
fame’ kind of black fubftance which is apt to adhere to the 
globe. This incraftation is a very great improvement of the 
rubber.’ For when once a confiderable body of this matter is 
formed; and it is’ a little moiftened, or fcraped, as much 
fire will be produced, as if frefh amalgam were ufed : fo that 
it feems to fuperfede the further ufe of the amalgam." 5 > 
As the ele@ric matter is only collected at the rubber, it 
is neceffary that it have a communication with the common 
‘mafs of the earth, by means of good conduétors. If; © there- 
fore, the table on which the machine ftands, or the floor of the 
room in which itis ufed, be very dry, little or no fire will be 
got, be the machine ever fo good. In this cafe it’ will be 
neceflary to conneé& the rubber, by means of chains or wires, 
with the floor, the ground, or even the next water, ‘if the’ 
neighbouring ground be dry. This Dr. Franklin informs me’ 
he was frequently obliged ‘to do in Philadelphia. 

Wuen the electricity of a globe is very vigorous, the elec= 
tric fire will feem to dart from the cufhion towards the wires 

Beas of 


538 PRACTICAL MAXIMS. ParrVI. 


of the conduétor. Ihave feen thofe lucid rays (which are in 
part vifible in day light) make the circuit of half the globe, 
and reach the wires: and they will frequently come in a’con- 
fiderable number, at. the fame time, from different parts of 
the cufhion, and reach within an inch or two of the wires. 
The noife attending this beautiful phenomenon exaétly refem. 
bles the crackling of bay leaves in the fire. Frequéntly thefe 
lucid arches have radiant points, often four or five in different 
parts of the fame arch. Thefe radiant points are intenfely 
bright, and appear very beautiful. It is peculiarly pleafing 
to obferve thefe circles of fire rife from thofe parts of the 
cufhion where the amalgam or moifture has been put, or — 
which have been lately fcraped. Single points on the rub- 
ber will then feem intenfely bright, and fora long time to- 
gether will feem to pour out continual torrents of flame. If 
one part of the rubber be preffed clofer than another, the 
circles will iffue in that place more. frequently than in ‘any 
other. ’ a 

Wuen the condu@tor is taken quite away, circles of fire 
will appear on both fides the rubber, which will fometimes 
meet, and completely ericircle the globe. If a finger be - 
brought within half an inch of the globe, ‘in that flate, it is 
fure to be ftruck very fmartly, and there will often be acom- 
plete arch of fire from it to the rubber, though it be almoft 
quite round the globe. 

Tue fmaller the conduétor is made, the more fire may be 
collected from it: for there is lefS furface from which the 
fire may efcape. But in charging a phial, if ‘the wire be 

placed 


in) ELECTRICITY. 539 


placed clofe to the conductor, the difference will be inconfi- 
derable, whether a fmaller or larger conductor be ufed, till it 
begin to be charged pretty high: for, till that time, the con- 
ductor will not have acquired any confiderable atmofphere. 

Ir the conduétor be made perfectly well, and the air be 
dry, there will never be any lofs of fire from any part of it. 
For when the whole furface has received as high a charge as 
the machine can give to it, it will, in all places alike, per> 
fectly refift all further efforts to throw more upon it, and the 
circulation of the fluid by the rubber will be ftopped, being 
balanced, as it were, by equal forces. Or if it lofe in all 
places alike, the diffipation muft be invifible. This maxim 
almoft admits of ocular demonftration. For when the rub- 
ber is perfectly infulated, and the conduttor has an opportu- 
nity of difcharging itfelf, the rubber will take {parks from a 
wire placed near it very faft;. but when the conductor has . 
little opportunity of emptying itfelf, it will take fewer of 
thofe fparks. 
. To:form a juft eftimate of the eleétrical power of any mas 
chine, and to compare different machines in this refpect, take 
two wires with knobs of any fize, and fix one of them at 
the conductor, and the other at fome certain diftance from 
it, about an inch, or an inch anda half; and when the wheel 
is turned, count the number of {parks)that pafs between them 
during any given time. _Fix the fame-wires to any other con. 
ductor, belonging to any other machine (but the fame con- 
duétor would be more exaét) and the difference between the 
number of ftrokes in any given time will afcertain the differ- 
ence between the ftrength of the two machines. 

ZZ. 2.2 THe 


540 PRACTICAL MAXIMS: Parr VI. 


Tue larger the conductor is made, the ftronger fpark it — 


will give: for the more extended the eleétrified furface is, 
the greater quantity of the electric atmofphere it contains, 
and the more fenfible will be its effec when it is all difcharg- 
ed atonce. The conductor, however, may be made fo large, 
that the neceffary diflipation of the electric matter from. its 
furface into the air will be equal to the fupply from the ma- 
chine, which will conftitute the maximum of the power of 
that. machine, and will be different in different aaee of 
the air. > adi 

A cerTAIN degree of friction is ‘ndcedheng to siecle 
its greateft power. A number of globes increafes the power, 
but the increafe of fri&ion will make it more difficult for a 
man to excite their power. A few trials with a number of 
- globes would enable any man to judge of the maximum of his 
ftrength in exciting eledtricity.. I fhould imagine, from my 
own experience, that no perfon could excite much more elec- 


tricity from any number of globes, than he could from one 5 
fuppofing him to continue the operation an a or even 


only half an hour together. heeitahy 
Wuen a long conduétor is ufed, the longeft and chaielge 
eft fpark may be drawn from the extremity of it, ee 
that part which is the moft remote from the globe, 
Tue largeft and moft pungent fparks are drawn from at 
conduétor along an eleétric fubftance. ‘Thus if the conduétor 
be fupported by’ pillars of glafs or of baked wood, the 
fparks will be taken clofe to the pillar. Fay usar 


iteepni> 


Ir the conduétor bend inwards in any place, fo as to make 


the furface concave, a peculiarly large, ftrong, and undiy: 


2 In ‘ELECTRICITY... © % = 44x 


fpark’ may be drawn from that'place.. Where the ‘furface is 
‘convex; the {park is more apt to be divided and weakened. | 
. Ir afmooth cork ball be hung in a long-filken ftring, and 
eleétrified -pofitively, .it “will always be repelled by pofitive, 
and \attraéted by negative electricity. But the ftrongeft repul- 
fion' will be changed into attraction at a-certain diftance. 
_ Ir.two pith, balls hung!by linen threads, and diverging with 
pofitive electricity, be infulated, though in connection with 
condugors of confiderable length, the approach of a body 
eleétrified pofitively will firft make them feparate, and then 
. (if the electricity) of the balls be:fmall, and that of the ap- 
proaching body:great)’ it ‘will,: ata certain diftance, make 
them approach, and: at length come: into contact with it. 
Sometimes the divergence: previous tothe convergence is very 
flight, and, without great,attention, is apt to be overlooked. 
Ir the balls have a free communication with the earth, the 
approach of pofitive electricity will make them converge, and 
negative electricity will make them diverge: the electric mat- 
ter of the approaching body, in the former cafe, repelling 
that of the balls, .and. thereby, , as it, were, unelectrifying 
them; whereas, in the Jatter/cafe, the negative electricity of 
an approaching body draws, it: more powerfully into. the 
threads, and makes them diverge more. This method of 
judging is, therefore, excellently adapted’ to. afcertain the 
kind of electricity in the atmofphere, or of a charged jar or 
battery, the balls being held in the hand of a peelap mands 
on the earth or the floor. 
To difcover fmaller degrees of electricity than the balls can 
fhow to advantage, ufe a very fine thread, or two of them. 
If 


sy2 PRACTICAL MAXIMS. ParrVu. 


If infulation be neceffary, faften it to a ftick.of baked wood, 
But the moft accurate meafure of electricity I have yet hit 
" upon, is a fingle thread of filk as it comes from the worm. ~ 
When the end of this has received.a- {mall degree of eleétri- 
city, it will retain it a confiderable time, and the flightett 
electric force will give it motion. Before any» experiments 
be made, let it be carefully obferved how long, in any parti- 
cular fituation, it will retain the degree of electricity that is. 
intended to be given to it; ‘and let allowance ‘be made for 
that in the courfe of the experiments. It will retain ele@tri- 
city much longer, if afmall piece of down from a feather be 
faftened to it, but it will not acquire the virtue fo foon. And 
it will be moft eafy to manage, if two or three threads of filk 
be ufed, and the piece of down be fo adjufted to them, that it 
fhall but juft prefer a perpendicular fituation, and not ab-. 
folutely float in the air at random. This electrometer ‘is not. 
liable to the inaccuracies of thofe that have a fenfible weight: 
for as-there is always a {phere of attraction within a {phere of 
repulfion, the weight of the electrified body will allow ano- 
ther to pafs the boundary of thofe two fpheres, without a 
fenfible obftrugtion; but the body Iam defcribing immedi-. 
ately retires, with all its {pheres of attraction and repulfion 
about it. ; 
Tue force of the ELECTRIC sHocK is in:proportion to the — 
quantity of furface coated, the thinnefs of the glafs, and the 
power of the machine. That ‘this ‘laft circumftance ought — 
to be taken into confideration is evident ; for different ma= 
chines will charge the fame jar very differently. “With one 


2 not 
puspede 


omit 


in ELECTRICITY, 543 


machine, for inftance, it may be made to difcharge itfelf, 
when it cannot with another. 

_ Tue globe which charges the fafteft, or whole elafrical 
power is greateft, charges alfo higheft. Therefore a number 
of globes will not only charge fafter, but My probably, 
higher than a fingle globe. 

Tue moft effectual method of charging a a jar is to connec 
the outfide. by means of wires, with the rubber, while the 
wire proceeding from the infide is in contaé with the con- 
duétor. In this manner the infide of the jar will be fupplied 
with the very fame fire that left the outfide. In this cafe al- 
fo the jar will receive as high a charge as it is capable of re- 
ceiving, though the rubber be infulated, and have no com- 
naunication but with the outfide coating ; fo that, in the cafe 
of charging, there can be no occafion for the directions given 

‘above, when the table, the floor of fe room, or the igranpd 
are very dry. 

Tue greateft quantity of Gre that a jar will hold is not al- 
ways the quantity it will contain when it is coated juft fo low 
@s not to difcharge itfelf.. In this cafe, indeed, the part that 
is coated is charged as high,as it can’ be, but: then a confider- 
able part:of the furface is not charged at all, or’ very. limper- 
fely. On the other hand, if the jar be coated very high, it 
may be made to difcharge itfelf with as fmall an explofion as 
-one.chufes. The exact maximum of the charge of any jar is 
mot eafy to afcertain. 

Tue greateft effort in ajar to make a difcharge feems.to be 
=bout half a minute, or a minute, after it is removed from 

mhe conductor; owing, perhaps, ta noneelegtric duft or 
moifture 


544 PRACTICAL MAXIMS Parr VI, 


moifture attragted by and adhering to the glals, between the 
outfide and infide coating ; fo that if there be | any appre shen< 
fion of its difcharging itfelf, it is advifable to Retr 8 ibe 
fore it has ftood charged at-all. - 


Wuen a thin jar is difcharged, it is advifable not to vas ; 


by placing the difcharging rod oppofite to the thinneft part. 
It will endanger the burfting of the jar in that place, * 

‘Tue more perfons join handy to ake a. rig i iit Weaker 
itis; 9/2 712 

Ir two jars, of the ttc thicket, be ufed ores ti 
ftronger of them will receive'no highet a charge than’ the weak- 
er. Ifone of them, for inftance, be coated fo high as that it will 
_difcharge itfelf, either with or without’ burfting, after ‘a few 


turns of the wheel ; ‘ the other will always be difcharged ote ‘ 


with it, vu it' was capable of being charged ever fo 
by itfelf. | The method, therefore, of eftimating the’ f 
a number of jars, is to confider each of them ag" capableof 
containing no more fire than the weakeft in the company. It 
follows from hence, that if a fingle jar in a large battery have 
the fmalleft crack in the*coated part.of it, ‘not ‘one of them is 
capable of being’charged:in conjunétion with it.’ °! oto & 
In: large’ batteries,’ ‘it \is advifable’ to coat the jars ‘pretty 
high, the diffipation of the electric matter from’ fo great a 
-furface when the charge is high being very confiderable. ‘The 
battery might be made’ fo: large, as that, after a very moderate 
charge, the machine would be able to throw no more*fire in 
-than was exhaled, as we: may fay, from the furface? © This 
would be the MAXIMUM OF THE POWER OF THAT MACHINE 
IN CHARGING. GI « ‘ 


In 


Vv rand in CELECTRUCITY. « - 545 


sod njorder, to judge of, the}, ftrength of; a charge: (which,sin 
large, batteries, is athing of confiderablejconfequence) prefent 
Mr. Canton’s balls to. the wires, from.time to times: A com= 
parifon of the degree of their divergence, compared with ithe 
actual:explofion,: “ill foon enable, the...operatot, t0,;tell, how 
high his age th is charged, and what-will, be the force of the 
a tgictn esvig ybod ont dguoids 2 nifieq aAoodk tame A 
In comparing different explofions, by: their power: to imelt 
rd let it be obferved, that,,qim wires| of the famte.thickhels} 
the forces, that/melt them; willbe in the .proportion) of thie 
Jengths 3, and in, wires of the fame,Jength; ig the proportion 
of therfquares oftheir diameters... ojo. od Paty boteo> 
i) osnot expec that the explofion of,a battery, .will ‘pierce 
a;number of leaves pof Paget inj proportion, to. its force in 


other .refpects... That, depends, t1pon,,the “height ofthe 
charge much more than the quantity of coated furface. Ihave 


known an explofion which would have melted a pretty thick 
wire not able to pierce the cover of a book, which a fmall 
common jar would have done with eafe. Ifit had been pierced 
with the explofion of the battery, the hole would have been 
larger in proportion. 

Ler no perfon imagine that, becaufe he can handle the 
wires of a large battery without feeling any thing, that there- 
fore he may fafely touch the outfide coating with one hand, 
while the other is upon them. Ihave more than once receiy- 
ed fhocks that I fhould not like to receive again, when the 
ae fhowed no fign of a charge; even two days after the 

rge, and when papers, books, my hat and many other 
iis hhad lain upon them the greateft part of the time. If 
4A the 


1 zx 


46 «ENTERTAINING. ParrVil. 


the. box be tolerably dry, the refiduum of the charge will not 
difperfe very foon. I have known even the refduum of arefi~ 
duum in my batteries to remain in them feveral days, For 
prefently after an explofion, I feldom fail to difcharge the re- 
fiduum, ‘which, in fome cafes, is ‘very confiderable, for fear 
of a difagreeable accident. 
A smatt fhock paffing through the body gives a fenfatién 
much more acute and pungent than a large one. I cannot 
' boaft, like-Dr.. Franklin, of being’ twice ftruck fenfelefs by 
the cleric thock; but I once, inadvertently, received the 
full charge of two jars, each containing three fquare feet of 
coated glafs. The ftroke could not be called painful, but, 
though it paffed through my arms and breaft only, it feemed 
to affect every part of my body alike. The only inconyeni- 
ence I felt from it was a laffitude,’ which went t off in about 
two hours. 


' 


PART 


EXPERIMENT S. 547 


A DESCRIPTION OF THE Most ENTERTAINING EX- 
} PERIMENTS PERFORMED BY ELECTRICITY: 


oes 3: 
i 


: fy of Wekas 
Fs iso coed tie has one ‘confiderable advantage ovet 
moft other branches of | f{eience, as it both furnithes 
matter of lation for philofephers, and of entertainmen, 
for all perfons promifcuoufly. © Neither the air pump, nor the 
orrery; neither experiments in hydroftatics, optics, or mag- 
netifm ; nor thofe in all other branches of Natural Philofophy 
ever brought together fo many, or fo great concourfes of peo- 
ple, as thofe of electricity have done: fingly. Eleétrieal ex- 
periments have, in almoft every country in Europe, o¢éafion- 
ally furnifhed the means of fubfiftance to numbers of ingeni- 
ous and induftrious perfons, whofe circumftances have not 
been affluent, and who have had the addrefs to turn to their 
‘own advantage that paffion for the marvellous, which they 
faw to be fo ftrong in all their fellow creatures. An empe- 
ror need not defirea greater revenue than the fums which, 
4A 2 have 


Loh 


548 ENTERTAENING ° ~ Parr VII, 
haye he received in fhillings, fixpences, shucepillinads por 
twopences, for exhibiting the Leyden experiment. 
_ Anp if we only confider what it is in| objeéts that lake 
them capable of exciting that pleafing aftonithment, which 
has fuch charms for all mankind; we fhall not wonder at 
the eagernefs with which perfons of both fexes, and of ne 
age and condition, run to fee electrical experiments. 
we fee the courfe of nature, to all appearance, pore 
verfed, in its moft fundamental laws, and by caufes feemin, oe 
the flighteft imaginable. And not only are the greateft effeéts 
produced by caufes which feem to be inconfiderable, but by 
thofe with which they feem to have no conneétion. Here, 
contrary to the principles of gravitation, we fee bodies attraét- 
ed, repelled,, and held fufpended, by others, which are. 
to have acquired that power by nothing but ayery flight . 
tion ; while. another _body,:. with the very ; fame friétion, re> 
verfes all its, effects. Here we fee a piece of cold 1 or 
even water, orice, emitting {trong {parks of. fire, fo .as to 
kindle many inflammable’ fubftances ; and ‘in vacuo its, light is 
prodigioufly diffufed, and copious; fo as exactly,to, refemble, 
what it-really is, the lightning, of heaven. Again, , what can 
feem more-miraculous than to find, that a common glafs phi- 
al or jar, thould, after-a little preparation (which; however, 
leaves no vifible effect, whereby. it, could, -be diftinguithed 
from other phials or jars) ;be capable-of giving a perfon fuch 
a violent fenfation,, as-nothing elfe in nature can, give, -and 
even of deftroying animal life ; and this; fhock attended» with | 
an explofion like thunder, and a flath Jike that of. lightning? 
Laftly, what would the antient philofophers, what would 
Newton 


a 
} 
j 
% 


RNA TT a ROM 


Newton’himfelf have fald, cto fee the prefent race “of ‘ele 
ciahs-imitating in miniature all-‘the known effects of that tre 
mendous power, ‘nay difarming' the thunder of its: power of 
doing mifchief, and, without any apprehenfion ‘of danger” to 
themifelves, drawing lightning from the clouds into a:private 
room} and amufing themfelves at their leifure, by’ performing 
with itcall the: experiments Mar are poems: ed —e 
machines: ofl? oF 
i So far‘are: philofophers fon! tation to: poche aftoiths 
ment of the ‘vulgar at thefe experiments, ' that ‘they: cannot 
help viewing them*with equal, : if ‘not! greater aitonifhment 
themfelves. Indeed, all the eleétricians of the prefent age 
can well remember the time, when, with refpect to thefe 
things, they themfelves would have ranked among the fame 
ignorant ftaring vulgar. 

‘Besrpes, fo imperfeétly are thefe ftrange appearances un- 
derftood, that philofophers themfelves cannot be too well ac- 
quainted with them; and therefore fhould not avoid frequent 
opportunities of feeing the fame things, and viewing them in 
every light. It is poffible that, in the moft common appear- 
ances, fome circumftance or other, which had not been at- 
tended to, may ftrike them ; and that from thence light may 
be reflected upon many other electrical appearances. 

Wueruer philofophers may think this confideration worth 
attending to or not, I fhall, for the fake of thofe electricians 
who are young enough, and; as it may be thought, childith 
enough, to divert themfelves and their friends with ele€trical 
experiments, defcribe a number of the moft beautiful and 
farprifing appearances in eleétricity ; that the young operator 

. may 


550 EXPERIMENTS witnour Parr VIL. 


may not be at a lofs what to exhibit when a company of gen- 
tlemen or ladies wait-upon him, and that he may be able to 
“partaran tine tspevtianeth: ssi aaeth08 Hr 
sgprinsineg tis enieianSeaeag tinete Dea / 
To make this bufinefs the eafier to the young operator, T 
Gill cobalt: its, cofeenienibe in the order in which I thall 
relate the experiments, beginning: with-thofe which 
quire fimple electrification, then | proceeding to thofe n 


win moet 
wings 
tec 2 Me Be 


Jiiwns pee 


pear hi oe ae 
*: lo Ubi oaehe 


ruoHTiw: 2TYIM! 


lo VNLSOMIOS £50 W UNCIBAS OF JEW o! te od tol vam 


Seo. 4 Tee weber: re PHIAL ; a3 


juodiw. oysiaeybs Jiom 


ear que 
Se Orr t-O-N I. 


fey ere 8 


ENTERTAINING EXPERIMENTS IN WHICH TRE LEYDEN 
PHIAL IS NOT USED. 


HE phenomena of electrical attraétion are fhown in as 

pleafing a manner by the tube, as they can be by any 
methods that have been found out fince the later improve- 
ments in electricity. It is really furprifing to fee a feather, or 
a piece of leaf gold firft attracted by a glafs tube excited by 
a flight friction, then repelled by it, and held fufpended in 
the air, or driven about the room wherever the operator plea- 
fes; and the furprife is increafed by feeing the feather, which 
was repelled by the fmooth glafs tube, attracted by an excited 
rough tube, ora ftick of fealing wax, &c. and jumping from 
the one to the other, till the electricity of both be difcharged, 
Nor is the obfervation of Otto Guericke the leaft pleafing 
circumftance, viz. that in turning the tube round the fea- 
ther, the fame fide of the feather is ners prefented towards 
it. 


Bur 


: 


is 
aids 


552 EXPERIMENTS ‘wituovt Pans'VM 


Bur fince eleétrical fubftances part with their cletsicty 
but flowly, the more rapid alternate attractions ee 
are fhown to the beft advantage at the prime conduétor. ; 
Thus prefent a number of feeds of any 9 grains of fand, | 1 
quantity of brafs duft, or other light fubftances in a 
dith (or rather in a glafs cylindrical veffel ftanding « 
tal plate) to another plate hanging from the condu 
n and o PI. ii.] and the light fubftances will be a 
repelled: with: inconceivable rapidity, fo as to 3 
fect thower, which, ‘in the dark ‘will be all luminous 

SusPEND one plate of metal to the conduétor, and p 
metal ftand, of the fame fize, at the diftance of a few 
exaétly under it, and upon the ftand put the figures 
animals, or whatever elfe thall be. imanineds, ¢o it in. paj 
leaf gold, and pretty fharply pointed at t bo 
and then, upon electrifying the. upper th 
a dance, ‘with j amazing aa of aston 
diverfion of the. fpeGators. 


hig manner, it will be attracted : and —- 
ing celerity, that both its form & and m 
that is to” be <difcerned being, its -colou: 


are: 


Ir a piece of ‘leaf gold t be =" wit 
one extremity, and a. ry ac aia 


no lower plate, but will, ting! 
diftance from ‘the e condor, an % 


Sec... THe LEYDEN PHIAL. 553 


motion of its lower extremities, will have the appearance of 
fomething animated, biting or nibling at the conductor. It is 
therefore called by Dr. Franklin the golden ji/b. 
To the dancing figures above-mentioned, it isvery amufing 
to adda fet of erecTRICAL Betts... Thefe confilt of three 
{mall bells, the two outermoft of which are fufpended from 
the conductor by chains, and that in the middle by afilkenftring, 
while a chain connects it with the floor; and two {mall knobs 
of brafs, to ferve inftead of clappers, hang by filken ftrings, one 
between each two bells... In. confequence of this difpofition, 
when the two outermoft bells, communicating with the con< 
duétor, are electrified, they will attract the clappers, and be 
ftruck by them. The clappers, being thus loaded with elec- 
tricity, will be repelled, and fly to difcharge themfelves up- 
on the middle bell. After this, they will be again attracted 
by the oute bells ; and thus by ftriking the bells alter- 
raately, a continual ringing may be kept up as long as the o- 
erator pleafes. In the dark, a continual flafhing of light 
swvill be {een between the clappers, and the bells; and when 
whe electrification is very ftrong, thefe flathes of light will be 
™€0 large, that they will be tranfmitted by the clapper from 
enc bell to the other, without its ever coming into. actual 
eontact with either of them, and the ringing will, confe- 
«quently, ceafe. When thefe two experiments of the bells 
and the figures are exhibited at the fame time, they have the 
appearance of men or animals dancing to the mufic of the _ 
bells ; which, if well conducted, may be very diverting. 
Ir a piece of burnt cork, about the bignefs of a pea, cut 
into the form of a fpider, with legs of linen thread, and a 
4B grain 


554 EXPERIMENTS wirnovr Parr VII. 


grain or two of lead put in it, to give it more weight, be 
fufpended by a fine filken thread, it will, like a clapper be- 
tween the two bells, jump from an electrified to an unelec= 
trified body and back again, or between two bodies poffeffed 
of different eledtricities, moving its legs ‘as if it were alive, 
to the great furprize of perfons unacquainted with the'con- 
ftruction of it. This is an American invention, and i is s de 
{eribed by Dr. Franklin. * 

SEvERAL very beautiful experiments, » which dcbdiadiie on 
electrical repulfion, may be fhown to great advantage by bun- 
dles of thread, or of hair, fufpended from the conduétor, or 
prefented to it. They will fuddenly ftart up, and feparate 
upon being ele¢trified, and inftantly collapfe when the elec- 
tricity is taken off. — If the operator can manage this experi~ 
ment with any degree of dexterity, the hait will feem to the 
company to rife and fall at the word of command, _ is 

Ir.a large plumy feather be fixed upright on an eledtrified 
. ftand, or held in the hand of a perfon eleétrified, it is very 
pleafing to obferve how it becomes turgid, its fibres extend- 
ing themfelves in all direCtions from the rib; and how it 
fhrinks, like the fenfative plant, when any unelettrified body 
touches it, the point of a pin or needle is eee yea 
the prime conduétor with which it is conneéted. 

Bur the effects of electrical repulfion are Aachen tip 
furprifing manner by means of water iffuing out of capillary 
tube. If a veflel of water be fufpended: from the conduétor; 


and a mae fyphon be put into it, the water will, iffue . 


ie 


* Letters, p. 17+ es 


it. 


See-l...qg THE, LEYDEN PHIAL: «sss 


flowly, and: in, .the forny of large drops from the lower leg of 
the fyphon ;. but, upon elegtrifying this little apparatus, in« 


‘ftead of;drops, there; will be one,continued ftream of water s 
and if the electrification :be ,ftrong;,, a. number of ftreams, in 


the form of:a cone, 'the apex.of which will be at the extremi- 
ty of the tube; and this beautiful fhower will be igenthouyi in 
the dark. oflt. o18 bonoiin: 

LASTLY» Mr. -Rackftrow’s pie (ssi it isigenérally calls 
ed) i is.a ftriking inftance of electrical attraction and repulfion, 
and, at. the fame: time, exhibits a very pleafing {pectacle. 
Electrify a hoop of metal, fufpended from the prime con 
duétor., (or fupported; with \fmall pieces, of fealing wax, , éoc.) 
about half an.inch.above,a plate of umetal, and parallel to it, 
Then place, a,round glafs bubble, blown very light, upon the 
plate, 1 near the hoop, .and it will be immediately attracted to 
it. ,In confequence of this,. the part of the bubble which 
touched the hoop . will ; ‘acquire. fome electric virtue, and be 
repelled ; andy the eledtricity not: being diffufed over the 
whole furface.of the glafs, another part of the furface will be 
attracted, while the former goes to difcharge its electricity 
upon the place. This will produce a revolution of the bub- 
ble quite round the hoop, as,long’as the electrification is con- 
tinued, and will be either way, juft as. it-happens to fet out, 
or as it is driven by the operator. If the room be darkened 
the glafs ball will be beautifully illuminated. Two bubbles 
may be made to revolve about the fame hoop, one on the 
infide, and the other on the outfide ;, and either in the fame, 
or contrary directions. If more hoops be ufed, a greater 
number of bubbles may be made to revolve, and thus akind 

4B2 of 


5 


_ $36 EXPERIMENTS) wirkoor Pa 


of planetarium or orrery might be conftructed, and a ball h 
over the center of all the hoops would ferve to reprefe 
fun in the center of the fyftem. Or the hoops 
elliptical, and the fun be placed in‘one of the , 
_ bell or any metallic veffel inverted would fery 
fingle hoop. tt he 
_Axt the motions above-mentioned are the 
fe& of eleétrical attraGtion and ‘repulfion, 
amufing experiments are performed by ‘giving! 
dies through the medium of air, i. e. by firt pu 
in motion. Let the eleétrician provide himfelf v 
_ Yanes, made of gilt paper or tinfel, each about two 
length and one in breadth. | Let) thefe’'be’ ftuck’_ 
which may be fufpended from a magnet by n ean 
and then, if they be held at a {mall diftance « oni 
end of a pointed wire proceeding from th 
will be turned round with great rapidity by 
which flows from the point. If the vanes 
the other fide of the point, the motion will 
and begin again with the fame rapidity in aco 
and thus the motion may be changed at ple: 
periment may be diverfified by vanesicut in 
of a fmoke jack ; when, being held over the 
wire, turned upwards, and -eleétrified, they 
round very {wifty, by the current of air floy 
If they be held under a point projeéting d 
will be turned the contrary way.” 
On the top of a finely pointed wire, rifing 
from the conduétor, let another wire fharpened 


‘ 


| See. I. tHe LEYDEN PHIAL. 557 


be made to move freelyas onacenter. If it be well balanced, 
and the. points be bent horizontally, in oppofite directions, it 
will, when eleétrified, turn very {wiftly round, by the re- 
ation of the air againft the current which flows off the points. 
Thefe points may be nearly concealed, and horfes or other 
figures placed upon the wires, foas toturn round with them, - 
and look as if the one purfued the other. | Thisexperiment 
Mr. Kinnerfley calls the ELecTRICAL HORSERACE. If the 
number of wires proceeding from the fame center be increaf- 
ed, and different figures be put-upon them, the race will be. 
more complicated and diverting. If this wire which’ fup- 
ports, the figures have another wire finely. pointed rifing from 
its center, another fet of wires, furnithed with other figures, 
‘may be made to/revolve above the former, and either in the 
fame, or in a‘contrary direction, as the operator pleafes. 

Ir fuch a wire, pointed at each end, and the ends bent in 
]ppofite directions, be furnithed like a dipping needle with a 
mall axis fixed in its middle, at right angles with the bending 
©@f the points, and the fame be placed between two infulated 
wwire ftrings, near and parallel to each other, fo that it may 
@turn on its axis freely upon and between them; it will when 
electrified have a progreffive as well as circular motion, from 
one end of the wires that fupport it to the other, and ‘this 
even up a confiderable afcent. 

A variety of beautiful appearances may be exhibited by 
means of electrical t1cHT, even in the open air, if the room 
be dark. Brufhes of light from points ele¢trified pofitively, 
and not made very fharp, or from the edges of metallic plates» 
diverge in a very beautiful manner, and may be excited toa 

great 


558 EXPERIMENTS /wituour Part VIL 


great length, by prefenting to them a finger, or the palm of — 
of the hand, to which they fecllikefoft lambent flames,.vwhich 
have not the leaft pungency; ‘nor give a/difa 
of any kind. It is alfo amufing to obferve the difference there 
is between brufhes of light from. sceaiins serene 
pofitively, or negatively,  . + nage boaclepaniiaga: 
In the ele@trical horfe race dhiniseiicaicial a fimall. fame 
will be feen in’ the dark at every point of the ene wires 5 £0 a 
that, if the operator can contrive to make the wire te ih, 
in the horfe’s tail, it will feem to be all on fire. 
circular plate of metal be cut into the fhape ofa ftar,. 
every point may be at the fame diftance from the center, 
the center'be made to'turn freely on a point; like | 
in the preceding experiment, a {mall flame will be de 
very point ; and if the ftar be turned round, . it: will 
the appearance of a lucid oo without any" yori 
of'the light. gaiggih & sudtinwe? yd 
“OAs the motion of | vet seo} nisi enfe 
neous, a variety of beautiful appearances may bei x 
by a number of {mall electric {parks, difpofed in variou 
This may be done by means of a board and a 
in the following manner. Let two holes bem : 
the board, about a eahreek cas inch on each fide of t 
where a fpark is defired. Let the extremities of th 
neatly rounded, come through thefe holes, and: be 
near together, exa@tly over the place’; and let’ the 


{park muft take they all in the fame circuit. 
are thus prepared, all the points will appear lumir 


; * 
See. Tun LEYDEN PHIAL: 559 


whenever a {park is taken by them at the prime.condudtor. 
In this manner may beautiful reprefentations be made of any of 
the conftellations, as of the great bear, Orion &c ; and in this 
manner, alfo, may the outlines of oa degre, as. of fave 
in, tapeftry,, be exhibited. ; 

Tue force of an electric {park in fetting fre ie vicdoien lalen 
fuser was one of the firft experiments that. gave-an, eclat to 
eleGtricity, and it is ftill repeated .with pleafure.. Spirits of 
wine a little warmed are commonly made ufe of for this, pur- 
pofe. . The experiment will. not fail. to fucceed, if a pretty 
trong: fpark be drawn, in. any. -manner,) or dire@tion. what- 
ever, through any part of it: and this. may eafily be done 
many ways, if it be contained in.a metal fpoon with. a pretty 
wide mouth. ;A candle newly blown out) may be lighted a- 
gain by the electric {park pafling through the grofs part of 
the fmoke, within half an inch, of the fnuff; ‘though it is 
perhaps blown in again by the motion given to the air by the 
force of the explofion. Alfo air produced by the effervefcence 
of fteel filings with oil of vitrol diluted with water, and many 
other fubftances, which throw out an inflammable vapour, 
may be kindled by it. 

Tue ftrong phofphoreal or fulphureous {mell, which may 
be perceived by prefenting the noftrils within an inch or two 
of any electrified point, makes a curious experiment, a it 
does not give a pleafing fenfation. 

Lastiy, the moft entertaining experiment that can be 

' performed by fimple eleétrification, is when one or more of 
the company ftand upon an infulated ftool, holding a chain 
from the prime conductor. In this cafe, the whole body is, 


in 


* 


560 EXPERIMENTS wits Part VII. 


in reality, a part of the prime conduétor, and will exhibit/all 
the fame appearances, emitting {parks wherever it is touched 
by any perfon ftanding on the floor. If the prime conductor 
be very large, the fparks may be too painful to be agreeable, 
but if the conduéter be fmall, the eleétrification moderate, 
and none of the company prefent touch the eyes, or the more 
tender parts of the face of the perfon te the 2% 
ment is diverting enough to all parties. ' 

~ Most of the experiments above-mentioned may alfo be 
performed to the moft advantage by the perfon ftanding upon 
the ftool, if he hold in his hand whatever was direéted to be 
faftened to the prime conduétor. Spirits of wine may be fired 
by a {park from a perfon’s finger as effectually as in any other 
way. Care muft be taken that the floor on which the ftool 
is placed be free from duft, but it is moft advifable to have s 
large fmooth board for the purpofe. aj 


SECTION 


See THR drenionie PHIAL. 561 


ot bas (band ‘one AP spaie bat cai yattiic eas”: 
ghiissiavinines YoPabad> yes x0 “Waid 3 $dz to stiw Bits tones 
obslii sd “Yue Sood sis 10 “bard wsilro od catve et die. 
abit toddaiw ybog ie Pe is TON’. Ge ont Aag a: 
omit idgdord od asilio ox bas siaq tedr Gist SHY parhebs 
is obit 20 snort Dig fu ord odd doidw gues sae SH? 
swedig Silt U2 Lateig 22 


ee ET see pad deat a lacb TALSco A 
R wade! BY 


rreree 
Salerie 


Bey 

od*yeot cok Ng 0 oP wae JOR Pe te 

to sbiltwo 5 eel 9Mm103 tad? Suw ots yaresIzo3 Yd >: 

eomod doictw otiw ody gnioalg Baa” joqizd = ods webau teuty =: ae 

od jadi , yew e"nohiog & Mi Wanker s doit nt obiiai’ods moi 
odgda aenoga baed vid gaindq mot mitd ox squirt né 


pe ce keener anfwer the joint igi 


itahantanal caida ial. - All the varieti 
20fi eléétrical:attraétion and tepulfion obey exhibited; either 

by the wire, or the coating of it;and. if the knobs of two 
awires, :one cémmiunicating “with the infide, sand: the- het 
owith theiodtfide of the phial,’be ‘brought within four'o 
inches»of oné:another, ‘the elestrical *{pider’ ceaeisbans Aa 
swill:dartsfrorh:the ‘one to theother in’a'very fiarprifitig man- 
netjotill the phiahbe difcharged. But the peculiar ‘advantage 
ofthe Leydén experimentis, that, by this means; the éleétri- 
-¢al flat, ' reportjvand: fenfations| -with all their effects 
ancréafed!toralmoft! anydegree-that is defired) ¥ 20! dove! 
to Wyen-the!phial, orthé jar, ischarged, the thock is'given 
through a perfon’s arms and breaft, by directing him to héld 


a ok 4 © a 


962 EXPERIMENTS witn’  PaarVIl. 
a chain communicating with the outfide in one hand, and to 
touch. the wire of the phial, or any conductor : 
with it, with the other hand. Or the thock may be made 
to pafs through any particular.part of the-body without much Te 


affecting, the reft, if that part, and no other, be t into t 
the circuit through which the fire muft pats from of 
the phial to the other. any ita" 


A crear deal of diverfion is often occafioned-by.givi 
perfon a fhock when he docs not expect it; wh <b ma 
done by concealing the wire that comes from t 
the phial under the carpet, and placing the wire which mes. 
from the infide in fach a manner in a perfon’s way ; that he 
can fufpect no harm from putting his hand upon it, at the 


be executed by a little contrivance. botgeed shoei 
taken that thefe thocks be. noyt tang ssh sat ghey Seal 
given to-all perfons promifcuonfly,, =) 
Wuen.a fingle perfon receives -the thiock, the <n 
diverted at his fole-expence 5but all contribute: 
the cntertainment, and all. partake of it alike, .when 
company forms a circuit,..by.joining their hands; ‘andi when, 
the operator.directs.the-perfon, whois at one.extremityiofithe 
circuit to hold.a chain which communicates with the coating, . 
while.the, perfon .who.is. atthe other extremity of théicirduit. 
touches the wire. As. all.the:perfons who. form: this!circuit: 
are ftruck:.at the fame. time,,- and with the fame degree off: 
farce,,,it.is, often very. peetaans to fee.them, Rart-at, the-fame. 
moment,. 


Sec. 1. te | LEYDEN’ PHIAL 563 


eterna compare their fenfations, and canine 
the taccounts'they ‘give of it. v4 
Tits experiinent may be agreeably varied, if the égemes 
inftead of makifig’ the company ‘join hands; dire@ them to 
tread upon each others toes, or Jay their hands upon each o- 
thers heads ; and if, inthe latter cafe, ‘the whole company 
mhould ‘be fertick' to" the° ground,” as it happened when Dr. 
Franklin’ ohce’ gave the fhock to'a number oF. ae ‘ftout robutt 
men, the inconvenience arifing from ‘it will be vety inconfi-. 
derable, | ‘The' company which the Dodtor ftrack‘in’ this man- 
ner neithet Heard ‘not felt the'ftroke, “and! ee got’ up’ 
again, without Knowing what ha happened. ~ sig 
Tue moft pleafing of all the furprifes that ae gies by the 
Leyden phial is that' which Dr. Franklin’ calls the maeic 
prctune, which He ‘deftribes in the following manner. 
Having a targe metzotinto, with a frame and glafs (fuppofe 
of the kifig) take out’ tHe ‘pfint; and Cut a pannel out offi, 
near two inches diftant from the frame all found. © If the cut 
be through tlre” nail it is not'the worfe. With thin pafte, 
or gum water, fix the board that" ‘is\ cut off on- the infide of 
the glafs, bata ee. and dott, ‘then fill up*the: vacan-’ 
cy, by gilding” plate well’ With ‘leaf gold, or brafs.: 
Gild likewife the inhal edge of the back of the frame all'round, 
except the top part, and form a communication ‘Between that 
gilding and ‘the gilding” behind! the ‘glafs; pat in’ the 
board, anid that fide is finifhed.  Turn’up' the glafsy"and gild 
the forelide ‘ekaélly over the back gilding; ‘and! when: it is 
dry, cover it, by pafting on the: pannel of 'the’ picture that 
has been cut out, obferving to bring the cortefpondent® parts: 
4:2 of 


54 EXPERIMENTS wita. ParnVil. 


of the board’ and picture together, by’ which, the picture will, 
appear of a piece as at/firft,. only. part, ,is.. 
and part before; ‘Laftly,, hold the pi¢ture horiz “i 
top, and pees a Aiashe anarepiie ait iia , king's. 
heady jes soqu chnev! tad > dost gage t 

Ison: Geepiome bassedlsapianienieaal , 
perfon take hold of the frame with.one hand, fo.that issn 
gers touch its infide gilding, andywith the overs 
vour to take off the crown, he will. receive. _— erri 
and fail in the attempt, ‘The operato 
by the upper end,. where the infide, sof the Fame 
to prevent its falling, . mothing of the. tho ki 
touch the face of the piéture without danger, whi | 
tends to be a teft of his loyalty. den tic 
thack among them, the ceperimant. is Sit ed the, eo SE 
TORS) aig ban veiw s Miw Lotntesta 

As wilh cleétric ‘deh -may,. be.made .to take wh se 
the operator hall pleafe to direét, it may -be 1 sit “ 
great variety of beautiful forms. ‘Thus, . Ir a Res 
be placed at one, extremity. of the gilding 
difcharge be made by a wire which touch 
mity,; the whole gilding will ibe. 
feveral. prety ftrong thacks be fent ae 
they will foon render it incapable of tran 
by breaking and feparating the ig 
electric conftellatig ama ns and figures, mentioned 
lighted.up, much more ftrongly, by. a 
{parks from the.conduétor ; ; only, th 3 
fo often.in this way. . 


ty “gid oF hiv vids 508 ST 
eee Oe | 


hb 


SdvIen! roe DEYDENPHIALS! — 565) 


- On: the fame principle that the wires -of phials‘charged’ dif-’ 
ferently ‘willsattra@>and ‘repel. differently, isomade an'rLec-* 
TRICAL! WHEEL, which Dr. Franklin -fays, ‘turns with con-: 
fiderable ftrength,vand ‘of »which he gives’ thei following-de-, 
{eriptions “A! {mall upright: thaft of woodepafies at right ‘ano 
gles throughya thin ‘round board)oof about twelve-iriches dia- * 
metet,and:tutas on alfharp point of iron fixed im:the lower? 
end 3 while a ftrong:wire inthe upper end, ‘pafling through'a> 
{all hole in’ a!thin :brafs:plate,-keeps the ithaft traly, vertical.» 
About thirty radii, of equal length,!made ofiifathglafs; cut’ 
inonartow flips, /iflueh6rizbntally from» the. circumference of 
the board ;.1the ‘ends ‘moft diftant fromthe cehter being about | 
four inches apart. » Onthe end of every: one~a' brafs thimble 
is Bxedwrn 2iil.- .gattizquil s10m cmeqqe gelgisning emst 
Ir now: thel wire of'a bottle, electrified in ‘thecommon way,’ 
Lnoxbroughit near the’ circumference! of this wheeluit will at=/ 
tradtthe neateft thimble, ° wna fo’ put the wheel in motion.” 
“What thimble, in’ paffing ‘byy receives, a’ fpark; and ‘thereby’ 
boeing electrified; is’ re sand fo drivett’ forwards,? while’ 
am fecond being’ evithe wire) receives afparks 
astd is driven pi et a 9 onj’ till the «wheelshas- 
gone oncé:tounds «when'ithe!thimbles .befdre eleétrified ap=: 
proaching the’ wire, ° itiftead of being‘attratted} as they were 
at firlt; are‘repelledp:and the! motion prefently-ceafesie? 10/4 
’ Bua if ‘dnother\ bottle; ! which) had-been! charged ‘through: 
the'coating;! be placed ‘ica the’ farne wheel, <its wire’ willeat~" 
tract the thimble repelled by the firft, and thereby double: 
the:force that: carries the‘wheel round ; “and? not ‘only taking 
out the fire*that' had beet eommunicatedioby«the thimblesoto: 
siiw the 


566. EXPERIMENTS wirn,.,; ParaVik 


the firtt bottle,’ but, even. robbing them’ of their.natural.quan- 
tity, inftead of being repelled when-they come againtowards: 
the firt bottle, they are more ftrongly attracted’; forthat the 
wheel mends its pace; till it goes with great, rapidity, - twelve: 
or fifteen-rounds ‘in! a- minute, ‘and’ with, flich ftrength,; that) 
the weight of ‘foo Spanith dollars, with which weionceload~ 
ed. it, didnot inthe leat feem :to retard its-motion, This is: 
called. an ELECTRICAL Jac, and, if a large fowl was {pitted: 
on the upper thaft, it would be carried. round. before:a fire, 
with a miotion’ fit forroafting..! |, Lyse gagidggtned sé 
Bur this.wheel, continues the boasy, dikes: i sl 
by wind, moves by a foreign force, to wit that-of the bottles.: 
Tue sELF MoviNG WHEEL,. though \conftruéted. on the’ 
fame principles, appears more furprifing. Tt is made of ai 
thin round ‘plate of window glafs,' feventeen inches diameter, 
well gilt on both fides, all. but two inches: next the edge.’ 
Two {mall hemifpheres of .wood,are then. fixed with cement; 
to the middle of the upper and.under fides, centrally oppofites 
and in each of them.a thick ftrong wire, cight.or tenjinches! 
long, which together makes, the axis.of the, wheel. It-turhs: 
horizontally, on apoint at the, lower.end.of, its. axis): {whith 
refts on a bit, of, bras, cemented. within. a glafs.falt cellar., 
The upper end (off its axis pafies through: a hole ina thin’braf, 
plate, cemented, to a long and {trong picee ‘of-glafss which: 
keeps jit fix oy eight inches diftant Ripa 
has:a| final bal: bf mete metal on its topy to 
fire. nal daa a py tees 
Ina ohne on the table ‘whith Sapponts slveechnehs are fixed: 
twelve fmall pillars of glafs,,.at- about eleven’ oe 


eeaaeiaemminle <= aaa : : 


Sec. I re LEYDEN PHIAL. ‘6 
awith aithimble on the''top of ‘cach. ‘On the ‘efige of the 
wheel is a fmall leaden bullet;“coimunicating by a wire with © 
ahe gilding of the upper furfaceof the wheel; and “about fix 
Gnches ‘from it, is anothet bullet, onimunicating, i in ‘Vike | 
‘manner,’ with the oe toe "When the wheel is to be’ 
charged by the furface, a gra mult be made 
pr re re een Musod Som ni 7 
od Wen: it is well:charged,: idbegis: to move. - The bullet: 
mae to a pillar moves towards the ‘thimble on that pillar, ‘ 
and, pafling by, ele¢trifiesit,. and then pushes itfelf from it: 
The fucceeding bullet, which communicates with the other fur-~ 
face of the glafs, more ftrongly attracts that thithble, on account 
of its being ele&rified before by the other bullet; and thus 
-the wheel increafes its motion, till the refiftance of the air re- 
gulates it. It will go half an/hour, and make, one minute 
awith another, twenty turns ina minute, which is .600 turns’ 
an the whole, the bullet of the upper furface giving sin: each - 
turn twelve fparks to the thimbles, which makes 7200 fparks, 


and the bullet of the under farface. receiving as many from 


-the thimble, thofe bullets moving in the time near 2500 feet. 
The thimbles are well fixed, andin {-exatt a circle, that the 
bullets may pafs.within.e very {mall diftance of cach of them. 

- Ip inftead of two, bullets, you! put cight, four communi- 
cating with the upper furface, and four with the under fir- 
face, placed alternately, (which eight, ‘at about fix itches ° 
diftance, complete the circumference) the force and fwiftnels: 
will be greatly increafed; the wheel making fifty turns‘in a 
minute, — = it will - coltinge: moving fo long. 
serisigors fe “Thitse- 


568 EXPERIMENTS» wits . Parr VII. 


iTupse wheels, the Doctor adds, may; be, applied: perhaps 
adenmaigs chimes, and.moving light made.orretiés. *, 
3 AL pantie’ the moft beautiful appearance whet: itis 


‘charged. withont,aagnensting! on the. outfide, » by, putting’ the 


hand, or any conduétor;/to it, forthen, at whatever, part of 


the jar the difcharge is, made, the fire will, — 
from it in moft beautiful . ert Ahiirciieas i 


othe light will be fo intenfe; ‘that. the minuteft of alae 


may ibe feem in-open day lights:v'o2 s2v00 welliq © ot Domeen — 


Tue difcharge of adlarge electrical battery ig’ ‘rather ancaw= 
fal than a pleating experiment, and! the effects oF it, in'rend- 
sing various ‘bodies, in ‘firing’ gun fpowder, “in mel 
-and imimitating all'the? éffetts of lightning, Revere #8 Be 
viewed with aftonithment.' In order’ to fire ‘gun’ po 


mutt:be made up'into a {mall eatridge;) with ho 


ferted-atdeach'end;’ and-brought withih ‘half’ an “i 
‘other, ‘through ‘which thethock mutt’ ‘pafs or? a's ety fin i 
wire may be‘drawn' through the’ cériter of it, “and the"exple 
fion will be made’ by its melting. * A’ ‘commen ‘jar-w -eafi 
ftrike a holethrough a’thick”cover of a-book, ‘or'many leave 
of paper,” and it is‘curidus'toobferve the’ bir raifed on b 
fides, ‘as if the-fire had!datted both ways ‘from ~aceeneted 
"Av consrpER aise num ber of experiments with af Medtfical 
battery, fome of which exhibit fine appearances} will be par- 
. ticularly idefcribedin the lat part of theworks eoe!¢ Oot 


eSaftiwt baa sox0t 2A (sonorstmadiis sat qwalqmos sad 
s of enw? ith ¢ gai tees’ Mera hetienoci yloaong tau 
ina dte fed tines tom iw af ns ae od ‘sig 


CTION 


_ eed VARIOUS INSTRUMENTS 569 __ 


gaaialsit thenbiv himpoaisoReidT plier ct rovoitie dy wB¥i23 
*geado) _liawaiscos gperdoidv. alu vin duliussd, to MK AE 
sig Sige 2.0 ogae aeikpup Geysnitigg, Sime see 
Liyiptdmgnn aint cgomer bop dou od ysfe th, w9acam ga 
“ib gopnab: «wikao, ybod Sinsb-yisv & 3o.S20pqge. odr gavig 
Apes 042 aundsivy-antivony oe! Fo s991899-0088. vt — 
—-ENGERTAINING BxreRni sabes A 66 INAS 
“BION OF PHILOSO HCA “awe - 
ofl alee ai shogh yitva .ebaudediod yd hediaig od Jofyyods- ii 
Wawoiwstem sik'ods le ba e pee thoig 8 Io nowslled ort 


2 aoipostal 1 3n.4 N » sebusds: J 
rN.o1 crt tex ie fe fae citi SEperiopente 
U the « operator mutt call toh tp philofophical inftru 


ments, partis FPR machine, and the air pump. 
ees air be infulated, and 


“Ae eto SR NE sen into 
thou n L equal aia ans 4 erethibaes € of ground, 
she one is ele 3 and by only laying a finger 


_Upe: 25 pig. (off, again, the operator 
may Rade sae ei aerig! ftream, or the divided ftream 
es Paha oid I, lied Brean apps ut 

spa pt ena eledtcie light, i is, ; feen 7 dadateae te 

Take a. tall r receiver very dry,, and in, the: of i iti with, 
cement a wire not very acutely pointed. ‘Then. exhauft. the 
receiver, and pr | prei fent t the knob of the wire to, the conduator, 
and. every. park w ill L pals through the the vacuum, in; abroad 
ftream 1 of light, vifi ble through the whole length of the re- 


sith 4D ceivers 


570 EXPERIMENTS wirs Parr VII. 


ceiver, beitever fotall. This ftream often divides itfelf into 
a variety of beautiful rivulets, which are continually chang- 
ing their courfe, uniting and dividing again, in a moft plea- 
fing manner. If a jar be difcharged through this vacuum, it 
gives the appearance of a very denfe body of fire, darting di- 
re@tly through the center of the vacuum, without ever touch- 
ing the fides; whereas, whena fingle {park paffes through, 
it generally goes more or lefs to the fide, and a finger put on 
the outfide of the glafs will draw it wherever a perfon pleafes. 
If the veffel be grafped by both hands, every {park is felt like 
the pulfation of a great artery, and all the fire makes towards 
the hands. This pulfation is felt at fome diftance from the 
receiver ; and in the dark, a light is feen betwixt the hands 
and the glafs. 

Aut this while the pointed wire is fuppofed to be eleatri- 
fied pofitively ; if it be electrified negatively, the appearance 
is remarkably different. Inftead of ftreams of fire, nothing is 
feen but one uniform luminous appearance, like a white 
cloud, or the milky way in a clear ftar-light night. It fel- 
dom reaches the whole length of the veffel, but is a gently 
only like a lucid ball at the end of the wire. 

A very beautiful appearance of electric light ina darkened 
room may alfo be produced by inferting a fmall phial into the 
neck of a tall receiver, fo that the external furface of | the 
glafs may be expofed to the vacuum. ‘The phial eis 
coated on the infide, and while it is ‘charging, at every fp 
taken from the conduétor into the infide, a flath of lig 
feen to dart, at the fame time, from every part ‘of the ¢: 
furface of the jar, fo as quite to fill the receiver. Upon m: 


Src. WI. VARIOUS INSTRUMENTS. 571 


the difcharge, the light i is een to return in a much clofer 
body, the whole coming at once... 

Bur the moft beautiful of all the experiments that can be 
exhibited by the electric light is Mr. Canton’s aurora Bo- 
REALIs, of which the following is but an imperfect defcrip- 
tion.  Make'a:torricellian vacuum inia glafs tube, about three 
feet long, and-feal it hermetically, whereby it will be always 
ready for ufe. Let one end of this tube be held in the hand, 
and the other applied to the conductor, and immediately — 
the whole tube will be ,illuminated, from end to end; and 
when taken from the conduétor, will continue liminous 
without interruption for a confiderable time, very often above a 
quarter of an hour. If, after this, it be drawn through the hand 

either way, the light will be uncommonly intenfe, and with- 
ut the leaft interruption from one hand to the other, even to 
mts whole length. After this operation, which difchargés | it 
zan a great meafure, it will fill flahh at intervals, though it be 
Hheld only at one extremity, and quite ftill; but ifit be grafp- 
«xd by the other hand, at the fame time, in a different place, - 
=ftrong flathes of light will hardly ever fail to dart from one 
-end to the other; and this will continue twenty four hours, 
-and perhaps much longer, without freth excitation. Small 
and long glafs tubes exhaufted of air, and bent in many irre- 
gular crooks and angles, will, when properly eleétrified in the 
dark, beautifully reprefent flathes of lightning. 

I thall conclude this defcription of entertaining experiments 
with an account of the manner in which Dr. Franklin and 
his friends clofed the year 1748. The hot weather coming on, 

4D2_ when 


72. NEW EXPERIMENTS" Paar VI 


wher eleétrical experiments *were not fo agreeableythey putan 
end to them for that feafon, as’ the Dostor fays; fomewhat hu- 
mouroufly in a’party of pleafure on’ the banks of 
Firft, {pirits were fired by a {park fent from fide to fide through 
the river, without any other condu@or then the ‘water: A 
turkey’ was’ killed for their dinner’ by the electrical-thock, -and 
roafted by the eleétrical jack,’ before a'fire kindled by the elec. _ 
trified bottle, when the healths of all the i 
in’ England, Holland, France, ‘and Germany, 4 
in eleétrified’ bumpers, Retemnnlantn ae of guns ‘from the 
He Re liw sapiouhte, ort. most apdatunnglin 
‘Happy would the ‘author of this treatife be:to-fee all the 
pene ele@ricians of Europe, or even thofe in 
fuch an occafion, and efpecially after. having made difcoveries 
in electriciey of equal importance with thofe ma 
delphia in the year referred ‘to. » With pleafi 
obey a fummons to fuch’a rendezvous, though it wereto fe 
the illuftrious company in the capacity of operatory or eve 
in the more humble office of waiter. © Chearfulnefs anc 
intercourfe do, ‘both of them, admirably fuity " 
the true fpirit of er 1G 7 2 beet todo eam 


7 bani <)Sehor Sey 


‘in. ELECTRICITY. 573 


Sioa iljantto-gaidh Bab loi. suiguioliie ¢a0} toda 
‘ ‘ 2 é6na-2 2 
63) liegt oa-< yaxa c ~ { 
Jf Bf (ol HOR? Ty, ¢ eerie: 
Savon sebturdwedh day Vide 
: > yrtai Jn) ¢ Paodwein : @ 
<a ne yi u 


NEW EXPERIMENTS IN ise tobi “MADE IN 


‘THE YEAR 1766. 
Gog shi a 


BE SR i gd of) Qa sis No} HER ~elacaw 
ele . > . =f ) + - > : 
’ SHALL, in the'laft part of this work, prefent my reader 
with an account of fuch new experiments in electricity as 
this undertaking has led me to make.’ ‘I hope’the perufal of 
this work may fuggeft many more, and more confiderable 
ones to my readers, and then I go> not. think that I have 
written in vain, biti, 2 
* To make this account: hho more: o° wlefal to. vchach perfons.2 as 
may be willing to enter into philofophical inveftigations, I 
fhail not fail to report’ the real views. with which every ex- 
periment was made, falfe and imperfect as they often were. 
I was always greatly pleafed with the extreme exaétnefs and 
fimplicity of Mr. Grey, and fhall, therefore, imitate his art- 
Tefs manner. And though an account of experiments drawn. 
up on this plan be lefs calculated to do an author honour as a 
philofopher; it will, probably, contribute: more to make 
other 


574 NEW EXPERIMENTS Paar VIII 


other perfons philofophers, which is a thing of much more 
confequence to the public. | 
Many modeft and ingenious perfons may be engaged to 
attempt philofophical inveftigations, when they fee, that it 
requires no more fagacity to find new truths than they them- Oe 
felves are mafters of ; and when they fee that many difcoveries 
have been made by mere accident, which may prove as fa- 
vourable to them as to others. Whereas it is a great difcou- . 
ragement to young and enterprifing geniufes, to fee phi 
phers propofing that firft, which they themfelves attained to 7 
laft ; firft laying down the propofitions which were the refult 
of all their experiments, and then relating the facts, as if 
every thing had been done to verify a true preconceived theory, 
Turs fynthetic method is, certainly, the moft expeditious 
way of making a perfon underftand a branch of f{cience but 
the analytic method, in which difcoveries were sally mal 
is moft favourable to the progrefs of knowledge. 
I wave, indeed, endeavoured to make the whole precntiog: 
hiftory of electricity ufeful in this view, by not contenting 
myfelf with informing the reader what difcoveries have _ been ins 
made; but, wherever it could bedone, scqnelating Hae y 
they were made, and what the authors of them had i 
when they made them. In general, this has not been « 
cult to do, the facts being recent, and moft of the 
concerned now living. And perhaps, in no branch of feience 
has there been lefs owning to genius, and more to acci 
fo that no perfon, who will give a little attention to th 
ject, need be without hopes of adding fomething to the cc col 
mon fteck of eleétrical difcoveries. Nay it wees bees sei 


in ELECTRICITY. 575 


ordinary, if, ina great number of experiments, in which 
' things were put into a variety of new fituations, no new fact, 
worth communicating to the public, thould arife. 

Tue method I propofe will, likewife, give the moft plea- 
fure to thofe perfons, who delight in tracing the real progrefs 
of the human mind, in the inveftigation of truth, and the ac- 
quifition of knowledge ; as I hope it will carry with it fuffici- 
ent evidence of its own authenticity. For this progrefs, we 
may affure ourfelves; has, in all cafes, been by eafy fteps, 
even when it has been the moft rapid. Were it poffible to 
trace the fucceffion of ideas in the mind of Sir Ifaac Newton, 
during the time that he made his greateft difcoveries, I make 
no doubt but our amazement at the extent of his genius would 
a little fubfide. But if, when a man publifhes difcoveries, he, 
either through defign, or through habit, omit the intermedi- 
ate fteps by which he himfelf arrived at them; it is no won- 
der that his {peculations confound others, and that the gene- 
rality of mankind ftand amazed at his reach of thought. If 
a man afcend to the top of a building by the help of a com- 
mon ladder, but cut away moft of the fteps after he has 
done with them, leaving only every ninth or tenth ftep; the 
wiew of the ladder, in the condition in which he has been 
pleafed to exhibit it, gives us a prodigious, but an unjuft idea 
of the man who could have made ufe of it. But if he had 
intended that any body fhould follow him, he fhould have 
left the ladder as he conftrutted it, or perhapsas he found it, 
for it might have been a mere accident that threw it in his 
way. It ispoffible he had even better have deftroyed it en- 

‘ tirely 


576, NEW: EXPERIMENTS | Parr Vill. 


tirely 5_ as, in fome cafes, a perfon would more eafily make @ ‘ 
new ladder of hisown, than repair an old and damaged one.) 
Tuart Sir Ifaac Newton himfelf owed fomething to a cafual 
turn of thought, the hiftory of his aftronomical difcoveries 
informs us;, and where we fee him moft in the, character: of - 
an experimental philofopher, as in his optical ing 
the method of his treatife: on that. fubje€t issby noumeans 
purely analytical) we may eafily conceive that many perfons, 
of equal patience and induftry (which are not called qualities 
of the underftanding) might have done what he did. And 
were it poflible to fee in what manner he was firft led to;thofe 
{peculations, the very fteps by which: he purfued them, the 
time that he fpent in making experiments, and all the uns 
fuccefsful.and infignificant ones that he made in stiegentiniat: 
them ; as our pleafure of one kind would be neon cade) 
miration would probably decreafe, Indeed he himfelf 
candidly to acknowledge, thatifhe had done mere 
men, it was owing rather toa ‘habit of ane 
to any thing elf... 3 of Spon 
I po not fay thefe-things to cmt from the m 
great. Sir Ifaac Newton, but Lthink that the interef 
ence haye-fuffered by the exceflive admiration and: 
with which feveral firft rate philofophers are:confider 
that an opinion of the greater equality of mankind, in p 
of genius, and powers. of underftanding, would bed: 
fervice in the prefent age. It would bring more Jabc 
to the common field ;.and. fomething moteadt 
certainly be done in confequence of it. ..\For th 
means think that RaleRo difcoveries are wna a 


In HUENCT RICE TY: f 577 


think the progrefs:might be quickened, if ftudious and mo- 
deft perfons, inftead of confining themfelves to, the difcove- 
ties of others, could be brought to entertain the idea, 
that it was poffible to make difcoveries themfelves. _ And, 
perhaps, nothing would tend more effectually to: introduce 


‘that.idea, which is at prefent)very remote from the minds of 


many, in which.it ought to havea place, than a faithful hif- 
tory of the manner in which phalofephical difcoveries have 
actually been made by others. 

Tuat this fidelity has been, preferved in the, following 
narrative, I make no doubt of its being its own voucher. 
Its imperfections will be a fufficient evidence.. The fame 
fidelity will alfo oblige me to relate feveral facts as appearing 
new to myfelf, which the courfe of the preceding hiftory will 
fhow to have been difcovered by others, though I was not 
then aware of it. . Of fuch after difcoveries, however, I have 
mentioned only thofe which, it will be feen, I have purfued 
fomething farther than the original authors, having attended 
to circumftances overlooked by them; or, at leaft, having 
made the experiments with much more exatnefs; fo that the 
reader may expect fomething really new under every article, 
And the experiments which prove the fame thing will be 
found confiderably different from thofe of others, and to fur- 
nifh additional arguments of the fame general propofitions. 
This repetition of old difcoveries, and this variety in the ex- 
periments by which they were made, were both occafioned 
by a fituation which is more or lefs common to every electri- 


‘cian in England; whereby we are ignorant of a great deal of 


what has been done by others. 
4E ’ In 


$78 NEW EXPERIMENTS |: Pax VIL. 
“In ‘the following’ narrative’ will alfo be found an 4 
not only of experiments which ‘are complete, cl 
fome new faét, and from which fomething re 
neral theory of éleétricity may be conéluded 
that are incomplete, which produced no. 

and from which nothing Ppofitive could ‘be 
eleGtricians in general had done this, they ‘woul 
one another a great deal of ufelefs labour, and 
had more time for making experiments really new, ain 
amight have ‘terminated in confiderable difcoveries. i: 
if things be really put into new fituations, - though 
poftive can be ifferréd from the experiment,” 
thing gt Atay ; and: this cannot hie 


I Make no ante for’ Wecthge vad dl a 
ments imperfect, and for publithing this account of 
they have been purfued fofar as it’ ‘may, perhaps, © 
they deferve. I’ rather’ ‘think ‘the generality of 
ought to make an apology to the public, for ddhayi 
munication of ‘their experiments ' and” ‘difeoveries 
they ‘have done. It is'poffible I may never ‘have! 
lcifure or opportunity to purfue them, ‘and others ma 
command both ; whereby: the difcoveries’ willbe 
‘brought to their’maturity, “and'the progrets Of this ‘br: 
philofophy accelerated.’ The genuine fpirit of phil 
furely, not'that of mechanicks, who make the motto 


little improvement in their arts, and never divulge: Bie il ig 


“po l.t iw BLEGPTRICLTY. 579 


they can make no more advantage of them themfelves. If I 
could. this day communicate to any fellow-labourer a hint, 
which it was more probable he could immediately purfue to 
advantage than myfelf, I would not defer it till to-morrow. 
Nor do I think it is any great boaft of a philofophical indif- 
ference to, fame to make this declaration... The great Sir Ifaac 
‘Newton feems to have had no idea of the purfuit of fame. 
He deferred the communication of his important difcoveries 
‘through real modefty, thinking it impertinent to trouble the 
public with any thing imperfect. I make no pretenfions to 
‘that kind of modefty ; -whether-it be of a true or a falfe kind, 
I think it manifeftly injurious to the progrefs of knowledge. 
Like thofe who contended in one. of the games of antient 
Greece, I fhall immediately deliver my torch to any perfon 
who can carry it with more dexterity. If others do the fame, 
it may come into my" hands again feveral timiss: before we 
each the goal. 
Ir may be faid, that I ought, at leaft, to sii wiited till 
T had feen the connection of my new experiments with thofe 
that were made before, and have fhown that they were agree- 
-able to fome general theory of eleétricity. But when the 
facts are before the public, others are as capable of thowing 
that connection, and of deducing a general theory from them 
. as myfelf. If but the moft inconfiderable part, of the 
temple of fcience be well laid out, or a fingle ftone proper 
for, and belonging to it be collected; though at prefent it be 
ever fo much detached from the reft of the building, its con- 
nection and relative importance will appear in due time, when 
the intermediate parts fhall be completed. Every faé has a 
4E 2 real, 


580 EXPERIMENTS on Parr VIII. 


real, though unfeen conneétion with every other fact: and 
when all the faéts belonging to any branch of fcience:are 
collected, the fyftem will form itfelf. In the meantime, 
our guefling at the fyftem may be fome guide to us in the 
difcovery of the fats; but, at prefent, let us pay no attention 
to the fyftem in any other view; and let us mutually com- 
municate every new fact we difcover, without troubling our- 
felves about the fyftem to which it may be reduced. 

I ruinx I fhall give the moft diftin& view of the few 
things that I have obferved, in the fhort courfe of my elec- 
trical experiments, if I relate them pretty nearly in the order 
in which they occurred, only taking care not to intermix 
things of a very different nature. The earlieft date\in my 
experiments is the beginning of the year 1766; when, in 
confequence of forming an acquaintance with fome gentlemen 
who have diftinguithed themfelves for their difcoveries in’ 
electricity, and of undertaking to write the preceding hiftory, 
my attention was firft‘turned towards making fome original 
experiments in this part of Natural Philofophy, which had 
ferved for my occafional amufement fome time before, 


SECTION 


Sec. I. CONDENSED AIR. 58x 


SECTION IL 


EXPERIMENTS on EXCITATION, ParTicuLARLy oF 
TUBES IN WHICH AIR IS CONDENSED, AND OF LARGE 
GLASS GLOBES. 


INDING by my own experiments, and thofe of others, 
that’a glafs tube, out of which the air was exhaufted, 
difcovered no fign of electricity outwards, but that all its ef- 
fe&ts were obferved on the infide; I imagined that, if the air 


_was condenfed in the tube, it would operate more ftrongly on 


the outfide; fo that an additional atmofphere would give it a 
double virtue. But the refult was the very reverfe of my ex- 
pectations. 

SoMETIME in the month of January, when the weather 
was dry and frofty, I took a glafs tube, fuch as is generally 
ufed for electrifying, about two feet and a half in length, and 
an inch in diameter, It was clofed at one end, and by means 
of a brafs cap at the other, I fitted a condenfing engine to it; 
and when the tube was very dry, and in excellent order for 
making experiments, I began to throw in more air, At 
every ftroke of the pifton I endeavoured to excite the tube, 

but 


582 EXPERIMENTS on ParrVill. 
but found its virtue diminithed. It was obliged to be] ne 


nearer than before to attract light bodies, and gave lefs ight 
when rubbed in the dark; till, as near as I could judge, | “t 


had got one additional atmofphere into the tube ; when its 


power was fcarce difcernible. Letting out the air by deg res, 
I obferved it gradually recovered its power. It attracted light 


bodies at a greater diftance; it gave louder fhappings and 


s 


more light in the dark; and when the additional air 
wholly let out, its power was immediately as great as it had 
been before any air was thrown in. This I tried feveral 
times with the fame fuccefs. pelt 


CommunicaTING thefe experiments to Dr, Franklin ain, 


Watfon, thy fuggefted to me, that thé non-excitation. of the 
tube above-mentioned might be owing to moifture intr 
along \ with the air, and adhering to the infide of the | 
This conjecture was rendered more probable by another 
periment I had made in the mean time. wher 

REPEATING my attempts to excite the tube above-menti- 


oned, I found that, after very hard rubbing, it began to act 


a little ; and that its virtue encreafed with the labour. Think- 
ing it might be the warmth which produced this effect, I 
‘held the tube to the fire, and found that when it was pretty 
hot, it would aé& almoft as well as when it contained no more 
than its ufual quantity of air. I conje€tured that the \ 
might expel the moifture from the fides of the glafs, or make 
the enclofed air capable of holding a greater quantity oF water 
in a ftate of perfe& folution. heii 
WIL tinG to determine whether the additional quanitity of 
| air 


Sec. I. CONDENSED AIR. 583 


air, with the moifture it occafioned, aéted in all refpeéts like 
a non-eleétric coating, I tried the experiment with condenfed 
air, that Dr. Defaguliers did with fand. After condenfing 
the air, and finding the excitation of it impoflible, as ufual, 
I let the air fuddenly out, to fee whether the tube would 
then fhow any effect of the preceding fri@tion; but it had not 
acquired the fmalleft degree of electricity; though the firft 
ftroke of the rubber, immediately afterwards, made it give 
fparks to the finger at the diftance of two and three inches. 
Perhaps the degree of moifture it had contra&ted was very 
flight, and expelled by the act of excitation. 

. Upon being defired to repeat this experiment with a par- 
ticular view to the moifture; I obferved that not the leaft 
cloudinefs could be perceived to adhere to the glafs, at the 
time that it was abfolutely incapable of excitation. When 
one part of the tube was made warm, and the other left cold, 
the fame ftroke of the rubber would excite the warm part, 
without in the leaft affe@ing the reft. But {till the cold part 
of the tube appeared not in the leaft more cloudy than that 
which was'warm; and the moment the air was letiout, the 

firft ftroke of the rubber made the whole ftrongly electrical. 
Witiine to afcertain whether the condenfing of air necef- 
farily introduced more moifture in’ a glafs: vefiel than the air 
could hold in perfeé folution, I conftructed a glafs condenfer 
in fuch a-manner, that I could charge and difcharge {mall 
phials in the infide of it ; concluding, that if the additional 
air brought more additional moifture, it would be impoflible 
to charge a phial at all in thofe circumftances; whereas, if 
' , the 


584 EXPERIMENTS on Part VIL 


the air was free from moifture, it would make the phial hold 
a greater charge, double in two atmofpheres, treble in three, 
&c. Accordingly, I charged a tube about three quarters of an 
inch in diameter, and coated about eight inches, in the glafs 
vefiel, containing about two atmofpheres;. and it received a 
much greater charge than it could be made to take in the o- 
pen air, and as near as could be judged, by the report and 
flath, twice as great. At laft the tube burft by a {pontane- 
ous difcharge, after being charged and difcharged three or 
four times, in the condenfed air. It is not at all probable, ‘ 
that it could have been broke by any charge it could have 
held in the open air. This experiment feemed to determine, 
that there was no very great degree of moiftaresaeeaeneas: ‘ 
into the glafs veffel by the condenfation of air, = 
I arTERWARDs found that experiments on condented 
had been made by Mr. Du Faye and others, but not w. 
the circumftances above-mentioned. wlontt semuibesete 
Some of my electrical friends are of opinion, pate the rea- 
fon why a tube with condenfed air in it cannot be exci 
that the denfe air within prevents the electric fluid 
ing forced out of the infide of the tube, without wh 
can be forced into the outfide; and that heating the 
makes the air within lefs eletrical, and the tube alf 
confequence of which, it more eafily parts with pre 


Imacininc that a greater quantity of eleétric fi 
be produced from the friction of larger globes than th 
the ufual fize, I provided myfelf, on the 24th of Aaa 


Sec.11. =~ =«=LARGE “GLOBES, 585 


with a globe feventeen inches and a half in diameter.” It had 
only one:neck, and was made exceeding well; only being 
rather too large for the mouth of the furnace, a fmall coal 
had ftuck to its equatorial diameter, which, when it was ftruck 
off, made a {mall hole in it. This, in fome meafure, dif- 
figured the globe, but I never imagined it could prevent its 
excitation in any great degree; fo that I ftill indulged hopes 
of acquiring, by its means, a prodigious power of eleétricity. 
But what was my furprize when, after I had got it mounted 
in the beft manner poffible, and after trying, for hours to-~ 
gether, every method of friction, in the moft favourable cir- 
cumftances for excitation, I could fearce get the appearance 
of fire from it; the {parks from the prime conductor being 
barely vifible. 

Acquaintine Dr. Franklin eith my iGiyiphikannent he 
advifed me to get the firft coat of the globe taken off with 
emery; as it had often been obferved, that many globes 
would not work well, till after a confiderable time, when 
the glafs-houfe coat, as it may be called, is worn off. This 
operation I accordingly performed upon it, and incredibly la- 
borious it proved; which greatly increafed my difappoint- 
ment, when I found that it had all been labour in vain, for 
the globe had no more electrical power than before. - 

DisparrinG of making any thing of this globe, I laid it 
afide, and, on the 22d of May, got another, about fourteen 
inches.in diameter. In blowing this globe, every circum- 
ftance that I could imagine had, in the leaft, contributed to 
my ill fuccefs with the former, was carefully avoided. The 
former was made late in the week, when the metal had been 
long in fufion; becaufe I had been told, that globes made in 

4F that 


586 EXPERIMENTS on Part Vili 


that ftate of the metal were always the beft for ele@trical pur= 
pofes. This was blown early in the week, when the work- 
men fay the metal is moft tranfparent, and freeft from ‘all 
kinds of imperfe@tion. The former was warmed in the 
courfe of making it, in a place.in which wood and coals were 
frequently thrown, to keep up the heat. | This was kept free 
from the fumes of any fewel whatever. \ Nothing could be 
finer than the metal of this globe, nothing more perfect in 
its form: It was alfo very well mounted, and I did not 
doubt of fuecefs. But, after all, this globe, if poffible, gave 
lefs fire than the former. I had recourfe to every method of 
excitation that I had ever heard of, or could myfelfimagine, 
but all in vain. The thing looked like enchantment. + 
Wuutsr I was thinking over every thing that I could 

imagine might poffibly be the caufe of my ill fuccefs with a 
thefe globes, I recollected, that another globe, which I had 
got made for a friend, in the fame ftate of the metal with my 
laft, and only an inch and half lefs in diameter, - 
ceeding well; and that there was no other appare 
between them, but that his had two necks, and ¢ 
quite through it; whereas mine had only one n 
axis at all. Willing to try every thing, I refolved 
brafs cap of my globe perforated, and a fmall wite ints 
to ferve inftead of an axis. This was done; but, in 
the perforation, it happened, unfortunately, .as I then thoug 
but the moft fortunately in the world as it prov 
lump of hard cement, about’ the bignefs of @ fina l w 
was pufhed into the infide of the globe... Vexatious 
circumftance was, I was impatient to ttyimyin 
ment, and immediately began’ to whifl the globe, 


l 


= 


SecvT. LARGE, GLOBES. — 587 


faccedanium.of.an axis, though the cement wes all the while 
rattling, and fouling the infide. . 

I nap not whirled the globe long, in there co tind 
before I plainly perceived that its power increafed. After 
fome.time, it was pretty confiderable, and I did not doubt 
but it was, owing to the axis; nay I had formed a pretty 
plaufible theory, to account for an axis, being neceflary to a 
globe of fuch a fize. Willing, however, to verify the faa, 
and afcertain my new hypothefis, I took out the wire; but, 
to. my furprife, found the virtue of the globe not at all di- 
minifhed. , On the contrary, it continued increafing, and by 
the time that the cement was well broken, and difperfed, fo 
as to have given a kind.of lining to.the globe, its power was 
exceeding ftrong, and jit adted.as well as any globe I had ever 
feen. In this ftate, I obferved, that after exciting any part 
of the furface, the {mall-pieces of cement in the infide, to the 
diftance.of about two inches, would jump.from the finger, or 
any conduétor, prefented on the outfide. 

Havina, in this unexpected manner, made a perfect cure 
of this fmaller globe, I remounted-the larger, and confidering, 
that the cement could probably a& only as any other ele€tric 
lining, I introduced into it fome pounded fulphur, mixed 


with fome flower of brimftone; and found that, as foon as 


there was enough to render it femi-opaque, it acted very 
owell. 
In this fate, the appearance of the globe was, in- (eiverad 
axefpects, very remarkable. The part that was rubbed had 
none of the fulphur upon it, except thofe places where the 
ipolith ,had.been, in fome-meafure, taken off by the emery, 
-in the firft operation. Thefe being circular, the brimftone 

4) Fea lay 


588 EXPERIMENT S,;on; £4Parr VIL 


lay upon them, like the belts of Jupiter, The ‘hemifphere 
oppofite to the neck had twice as much fulphur upon it as 
the other; and, in both hemifpheres, the fulphur lay thicker, 
as it receded from the equatorial diameter... . ~~ 
I arTERWARps put as much more fulphur into it, which 
doubled the lining equably every where; but left two or three 
great heaps, in particular parts of the equatorial diameter, 
where it was rubbed, and where I could perceive no defe& 
of polifh. Whirling the globe, upon this, I found ‘the -yir- 
tue almoft quite gone, and even the amalgam: could not re- 
vive it. Endeavouring to take the fulphur out of the globe, 
I broke a great hole into it; and alfo the new globe was 
broken the fame day, by a lump of hard cement, in the infide, 
falling from the top to the bottom. Thefe accidents renders 
ed my experiments incomplete. iy 
I THEN propofed to get another large globe, with one 
neck, and a large hole in the oppofite fide; by means of 
which I could eafily put different fubftances into it, and-take — 
them out again, in order to find the caufe of the appearances 
above-mentioned. But apprehending this courfe of experi- 
ments might prove a little too expenfive, and after all, ter- 
minate in nothing, I unwillingly defifted. j 
I wAp afterwards, however, an opportunity of trying a few _ 
experiments upon a glafs fpheroid, about twelve inches in 
diameter, in one end of which I had got a pretty large hole 
made, through which I could introduce my hand into the in- 
fide, and which, when it was whirled, I could leave open or - 
clofed at pleafure. The other end was furnifhed with a brafs 
cap and aor to adapt it to the machine. The experiments I » 
made 


~~ 


See. I. LARGE GLOBES. ° 589 


“made with it could not afcertain what I wanted to difcover, 
mamely the ‘reafon of the non-excitation of the large globes 


in the circumftances above-mentioned ; becaufe this {pheroid 
was excited without any electric lining. But, however, it is 
poffible, that the reader may think them, on other accounts, 
worth communicating. . a 

I rirst put my handkerchief,’ and various other non-elec- 
tric fubftances, into the infide; and obferved, that while 
they kept in one piece, and did not difperfe to different fides 
of the globe at the fame time, the excitation was very little 
impeded ; but when my handkerchief &c. opened, and {pread 
over the furface of the fpheroid, the excitation was nearly 
ftopped. hTdyj 

I pur a quantity of quickfilver into it ; and while the mo- 
tion of the {pheroid was moderate, and allowed the quick- 
filver to remain at the bottom, or to afcend but a little height 
on one fide, the excitation was much impeded; and ftill 
more if it fpread further, over a confiderable part of the in- 


’ fide furface, though without partaking of its motion. But 


when the motion of the fpheroid was rapid, and entirely 
‘communicated to the quickfilver, fo that they had no motion 
with refpeé to one another, the virtue always revived a lit- 
tle; but ftill the excitation was inconfiderable. 

Pounnep glafs, and other electrics had no fenfible effect ; 
neither had any number of quills, or a great quantity of 
downy feathers; though they inftantly difperfed themfelves, 
and covered all the equatorial parts of the {pheroid. 

I suaxt add to this fection, on the fubje@ of excitation, 
that I once whirled a very, thin globe; about fix or feven 
inches in diameter, which was made to weigh air, and not 

one 


- doi, ld bas ER -. 2551 


590 A CURRENT OF AIR Parr VII. 


one fourth part fo thick asa’ common:Flotence flak. It-was 
excited very powerfully by a piece of leather which had been 
foaked in a mixture of tallow. and bees wax, and into which 
@ quantity of amalgam had ‘been worked. ‘With this globe 1 
could make my common jar idifcharge itfelf over ‘more!ithan ‘i 
five inches of the external furface, which Ireckon to bea 
-confiderable’ proof of its power. It {cems to follow from this 
experiment, that the thinnefs of glafs globes, ‘or tubes, is by 
no means any obftruétion to their electric power. 
In the courfe of thefe experiments I had read’Mr. Berge 
‘man's begqant ofbis curing a globe by a lining of melt if 
phur, and had propofed to try that Heenepeerss. ce, on-ac 


in dliaimanpesidelcriben abso: iup to: gain 


Sec. II,. | From! ELECTRIFIED POINTS.» 594 


Hogi 


“SECTION TL 


ExprRIMENTS WHICH PROVE A CURRENT OF AIR 
“FROM THE POINTS OF BODIES ELECTRIFIED EITHER 
POSITIVELY OR NEGATIVELY. 


divert fome of my friends, one of | the. company hap- 
Pened to prefent a pointed wire to my | hand, as I was ftand- 
ing upon the ftool; when I was furprifed to perceive a cool 
Blaft proceeding from it; though, according to Dr. Frank- 
Lin’s theory, the current of the fluid went from my hand to 
the point. I then prefented my noftrils to the point, and 
perceived the fame ftrong phofphoreal fmell, as if the point 
had been electrified pofitively. Thefe facts made me enter- 
tain fome doubts about the direétion of the current, and the 
principles of Dr. Franklin’s theory, and led me to the fol- 
lowing courfe of experiments ;_ which prove nothing againft 
that theory, but eftablith a real current of air from the points 
of all eletrified bodies. 
To afcertain the courfe of the eledtric fluid, T began with 
Glifcharging large thocks through a quantity of water, in 
which 


594. ° A CURRENT OF. AIR Part VIII, 


which duft was floating; and I eletrified pointed wires, 
inferted into clofe receivers full of fmoke; &c. but thefe 
determinigg nothing, I, at laft, “recollected, that, of all 
things, flame is the leaft fenfibly affected with eleétrical at- 
traétion or repulfion, but moft eafily with the leaft breath of 
air; and did not then doubt, but that the current of air 
would be in the direGtion of the fluid, being, as it were, 
impelled by it. : 

Wiru thefe views, on the 25th of February, I prefented 
the flame of a candle to a pointed wire, eleétrified negatively, 
as well as pofitively. The. blaft was fo ftrong (in both cafes 
alike) as to lay bare the greateft part of the wick, the flame 
being driven from the point; and fometimes a Pretty large 
candle would be actually blown out by the blaft. ’ But, in all 
cafes, the effect was the fame whether the clei fluid ifued 
out of the point, or entered it. 
~ Pracine the flame: between two points, one of pe 
communicated with the prime conduétor eleétrified politively, 
and the other with the floor, the flame was blown from that 
which communicated with the conductor upon: the | 
but fiot to fo great a diftance: as if the other had been : 
Changing the points, ‘the effe& was ftill the fame, 
that which communicated with the cohdutor was the a: 
tharp, of the more blunt of the two, the flame way reced- 
ing from it. te 

Reversine this experiment, and making one of the points 
communicate with the rubber, and the other with the oor, 
the former always blew the flame towards the latter, | 
evident, however, that the point which communicated 
the floor blew likewife; for it counteracted the other, an 


Sec Il... 7 From ELECTRIFIED POINTS: 593 


would, when brought near the flame, raife it almoft perpen- 
dicular, when it had been blown quite afide by the other. 

Pracinc the flame between two points, one of which 
communicated with the rubber, and the other with the con- 
ductor, it was equally affe&ted by both, being always blown 
from the point which was neareft to it. 

Ir was very obfervable, that, notwithftanding the current 
of air from the points affected the flame fo remarkably ; 


yet a {mall portion of it, when it: was brought very near the 


point, would. be ftrongly attracted by it, at the fame time 
that the greateft part of the flame was, by the current of air, 
blown the contrary way. This effect was always the fame, 
whether the point was electrified pofitively or negatively ; 
though, I fancied that the negative point attracted the flame 
more fenfibly than the other. 
To make the points blow more ftrongly, in a direé& line, 
I fometimes inclofed them in fmall tubes of glafs. 
-ArTERWARDs I diverfified this experiment in the follow- 
ing manner. I charged the infide of a {mall jar pofitively ; 
then fetting it upon a glafs ftand, in contact with a pointed 
wire, I placed the flame of a candle within an inch of the 
point, and touched the wire of the jar, with a brafs rod 
which I held in my hand. At every touch the flame was 
blown ftrongly from the point. Sometimes it would be 
blown out; but another point, being held oppofite to it, 
would fupport the flame; and more ftrongly, if that point was 
joined with the rod with which I touched the wire of the jar. 
Charging the jar negatively in the infide, all the effects were 
the very fame. Difcharging the jar through the points, with 
4G “the 


4 A CURRENT OF AIR*: Part VIII. 


the flame in a right line between them) it was aifturbed, but 
not blown to one fide-more than the other. °° ii 
“To take of all'the eff@@ of eleattical bitrate sia al 
fion, and léave the’curtent of’ air to a& fingly, T intetpoted 
pieces of brafs wire communicating with the earth, between 
the points of the wire and the fame; and’ found ere 
be rather increafed than diminifhed thereby. * Ahlan 
“Havin communicated thefe expetittients to “DE. Prank 
Tin, ‘he advifed me to try tHe force’ of this curretit upon p 


vanes, fach as he‘has defcribed in his letters : for, with hitn, i 


they feémed ’to turn one way or the ‘otherlindifferently, juft 
as they Happened to fet out. Accordingly'T todk’a'c ze y and 
ftuck into the ‘des of lit'thirteen vanes, each being ‘half 

card; well Gried, “and each proceeding ‘from’ the’ center of the 


cork. Into the cork I ftuck a needlé, by which 53 ‘fafpenidea 


the whole on a mdgnet. 


TueseE vanes I Keld two or three rea froma he Bat ; te 


a wire, comitiunicating with the butfide’ coating “of th 
placed upon an electric ftand, in the mantiet defied above 
and obferved, that whenever I took a {park from’ the wire 
communicating with the infide, ‘the vanes “were ftrong 
blown upon, and made to turn, as if the current of a 
flowed from the point; at the fame time that, acco : 
Dr. Franklin’s theory, the eleéttic fluid was entering ap 
they were made to turn the contrary way, the current foon 
ftopped them, and never failed to bring them | ‘bac + and 
make them move as before. , 

WueEn wires communicating with the floor were placed 1 a 
tween the vanes and the point, to take of all the eleétrical at- 

traction 


FG 


Spc. Il. +! rrom| ELECTRIFIED, POINTS. 595 
traction andrepulfion, the vanes rfGill aneved as britkly as 


ever. 

Wuen the jar was charged pretty high, the motion might 
be made:fo: fwift; that the feparate vanes. could: banilly be dif- 
tinguifhed, as the whole fet gurned round. 

I) moreover obferved, that the vanes were pare very 
brifkly, not only when -held near the point, but alfo when 
held any where within the diftance of fix or feven inches from 
the fides of the wire, which I madefometimes of a confidera- 
ble length. The ftream would turn the vanes one way on 
one fide of the wire, and the contrary way on the other; and 
being removed quickly to the different fides, the direGtion of 
their courfe might be changed: feverahtimgte i in $5 diteharge 
of one fmall jar. 05 en 1 

I mabe points to projec two ways at she aia time, and 
obferved, that the ftream was the fame from both, and alfo 
when the points were made. to. project.at right angles from 
one another. In this pofition of the wires, it was amufing to . 
obferve, that the vanes would move one way, when held 
near one of the wires; and immediately turn about and move 
the contrary way, if removed near the other. 

Hiruerto I had made my vanes of exceeding dry paper, 
in order to make them lefs affected by electrical attraction 


and repulfion, that fo the current of air might be the more 


indifputable;' but Mr. Canton defiring me to try vanes that 
were conduétors, I firft dipped my paper vanes in water, and 
afterwards made a fet of tinfel, of the fame form with the 
other.  Thefe vanes, being conductors of eleétricity, pro- 
moted a freer current of the electric matter, and confequently, 
occafioning a greater motion to be given to the air, they 

4G 2 whirled 


596 A’ CURRENTOF AIR” Part VHT 


whirled about with more rapidity than the former. When 
they were infulated, they were affected juft as the a“ teers 
vanes had been. 
~ Wiru thefe vanes, I diverfified the experiment/in:aman- 
ner which fhowed the famenef$ of the current, notwithftand- 
ing ‘the change of eleétricity, in a clearer manner than before. 
I infulated a jar, with a wire projecting from. the: coating, 
and held the tinfel vanes near the extremity of it, All the 
time the jar was charging, the vanes turned with great rapi- 
dity, as if by a blaft from the point. Keeping the jar, the 
pointed wire, and the vanes in the fame fituation, the-gradual 
difcharge of the jar, made by now and then touching the 
wire which commynicated with the infide,; made the vanes 
ftill turn the fame way, and, as far as could. rE 
with the fame force. Ta 

To diverfify this experiment, I placed a changed} ou 
a ftool which had glafs feet, a pointed wire projecting from 
the coating, a quantity of brafs duft before the point, and a 
brafs chain communicating with the ground on the other fide 
of the duft. In this fituation, every attempt to difeharge the 
jar threw a confiderable quantity of the duft from the point, 
being raifed about feven or eight inches, and blown to acon- 
fiderable diftance. Removing the pointed wire from the 
coating of the jar, and conne¢ting it with the chain, the fame 
‘attempt to difcharge it blew the duft upon the jar. | Ufing 
two points, one at the jar, and the other at the chain, the 
duft was difturbed, and raifed up, but not blown one way 
more than the other. Fine flour anfwered nearly as well. > 

Lastiy, I made the experiment of the current with vanes 
in the form of a fmoke jack, which anfwered as well as the 

others: 


Sse. Il. | rrom “ELECTRIFIED POINTS. 597 


others. ‘They were moved when held more than a foot a- 
bove the point, and likewife at a confiderable diftance below 
it, when it was turned downwards. 

' Arter thefe experiments, I read'in Mr. Wilfon’s treatife 
on eleétricity, that the vanes would not turn in vacuo. This 
I tried, and found it to be true, and at the fame time I found, 

‘they would not turn in a clofe receiver, not exhaufted, where 
the air was confined, and had not a free circulation. 

Tue current of air from the points of bodies, electrified 
‘plus or minus, is not more difficult to be accounted for on 
Dr. Franklin’s hypothefis of pofitive and negative eledtricity, 
than any other cafe of electrical repulfion. The, particles of 
the atmofphere, near the points of eletrified bodies, having, 
by their means, become poffeffed of more or lefs than their 
natural fhare of the electric fluid, muft, according to the rule 
above-mentioned, retire to places where they can difcharge or 
replenifh themfelves, as occafion may require. If it be afked 
why the particles of the atmofphere do not, in the fame man- 
ner, recede from all the parts of the electrified body, as well 
as from the points; it is anfwered, that, as the preflure of 
the atmofphere will prevent a vacuum, and as electrical at- 
traction and repulfion are moft powerful at the points of 
bodies, on account of the eafier entrance or exit of the fluid 
at the points (upon whatever principle that effect depends) 
the electrified atmofphere (whether negative or pofitive makes 
no difference) muft fly off at the points preferably to any other 
places, and the weight of the atmofphere will force the air of 
the neighbouring places upon the flatter parts of the eleétri- 
fied conductor, notwithftanding the real endeavour it may 


have to recede from it. 
SECTION 


~ 


398 EXPERIMENTS own ~ ParvVillt 


SPOT Oe 
: ' Nes O93 Ist. pay 
of bait fines ; 
On Deg af} " ira 7 
Ries eee on MEPHITIC AIR, AND CHARCOAL. 
THOMA. 
hy ‘ 
sean 
I HAVE related feveral inftances of felf-deception in oer 
perfons: to fhow that I do not mean to fpare 
fhall now relate one of my own. However it is a © 


that I fhould not have troubled the reader with, — “An 
terminated in a real difcovery. (DS MORE | > 
Havine read, and finding by my own expe ments, that == 
a candle would not burn in air that’ had paffed 
charcoal fire, or through the lungs of animals, 
that air which the chymifts call mephitic; I was ea 
what kind of’ change it underwent, by pafling ¢ ) } 
fire, or through the lungs, &c. and whether it 
‘fible to reftore it to its original ftate, by fome ops 
mixture. For this purpofe, I gave a great degree’ 
motion to it; I threw a quantity of ele@tric matter 
point of a conduétor into it, and performed vy D 
operations upon it, but without any effet. 
Amonc other random experiments, I dippe 
phial into it; but, though I could not [sew 


ey 


3 


Sell.) MEPHYITIC ALR... 599 


duced any effect upon the air, I was furprifed to find, upon 
taking out the phial, that it was wholly difcharged. I ima- 
gined, however; at that time, that the difcharge was owing 
to fome imperfection: in the manner ‘of making the experi- 
ment, which I-could not eafily remedy. 

AFTERWARDS, concluding, from fome experiments of my 
own, and others of Dr. Macbride that this mephitic air 
swas not any thing that had ever been:common air, but a fluid 
Sui generis, that ‘had, feveral properties very different from 
thofe of common air; I-thought of refuming my experi- 
ments, to afcertain whether it was not different from>com- 
mon air with refpect to electricity ; mephitic air being per- 
haps)a conductor, .as:;common air was a non-conductor. 

_ /AccorDINGLY, fome time in the month of January 1766,. 
I filled a receiver, which was open at the top, and which 
held about three pints, with air from my lungs; and, with 
every precaution I could think. of, dipped a {mall charged 
phial intoit; and, upon taking it out after continuing there 
_about two feconds, . found it quite difcharged, juft as might 
have been expected from dipping it into water. I repeated 
the experiment feveral times, and always with the fame fuc- 
cefs, Left I thould have difcharged the phial, fome way or 
other, in paffing the neck. ofthe receiver; I. changed the air, 
and then introduced the charged phial as before, feve- 
ral times ; but never found it in. the leaft difcharged.. Hence 
I concluded, that, in the former cafe, it, muft have been dif- 
charged by the quality of the air in the receiver. - 

As there. ftill remained, fome fufpicion, that the phial 
might have been difcharged by the moiffure which was mixed 
wwith the air as expired from my lungs (though I did not 

doubt 


600 EXPERIMENTS ow Parr VIII. 


doubt but that what moifture there was in it was quickly at- 
tracted by the fides of the glafs veffel, fo as to leave the cen- 
ter free from it, and imagined that no quantity of moifture 
which the air could be fuppofed to contain could be able to 
difcharge the phial fo quickly) I immediately repeated the ex- 
periment, with air which I thought could not be fuppoted to 
contain any moifture. 

I ritxeEp the fame receiver with air from the center ve 
charcoal fire, and dipping the charged phial into it, as I had 
done before, found it as effectually difcharged as in the for- 
mer cafe. I repeated this experiment alfo a great number of 
times,and always with the fame fuccefs. Upon ch 
the air alfo, and then introducing the phial, I found 
it not difcharged. There feemed, therefore, to be no doubt, 
but that air in which flame would not fubfift was a conduc- 
yor of electricity. 


I was confirmed in this opinion by placing a citi phial 


in a receiver filled with mephitic air, and finding that it was 
abfolutely impoffible to charge it in the fmalleft degree, in 
that fituation; though it was charged very well, the moment 
I took it out of that air, without any wiping; which feemed 
to fhow, that the incapacity of charging had not been ome 
to any moift vapours that adhered to the glafs. 

I was alfo confirmed in my opinion of the conduéting 
power of mephitic air, by confidering, that all metallic bo- 
dies, which are the moft perfect conductors we know, confift 

of a vitrifiable earth, and what the chymifts call phlogifton, or 
probably nothing more than this fame mephitic air in a fixed 

ftate. 
Ix 


OPA high | 


i a et 


Sec, III, MEPHITIC AIR» 601 


In this confidence of having ‘made a complete difcovery, 
and one of fome importance, after having repeated the above~ 
mentioned experiments, and many others to the fame purpofe, 
a great numberof times; I once happened to change .the 
mephitic for common air in my receiver, without wiping the 
infide of the glafs, which had been my ufual' method, though 
I had done it with no other view: than more effectually to 


. change the air; but now, though the air was. fufficiently 


changed, by moving the receiver feveral times up and:down, 
I had no fooner dipped the charged phial intovit, than'I found 
it difcharged, in the fame manner‘as it had beer done-in the 
mephitic air. . The ‘difcharge ‘had; after all, ‘been made by 
the moifture on the infide.» To afcertain this, 1 moiftened 
the infide of the receiver with a {punge, .and: found: that “no 
phial could remain charged in it for the leaft. {pace of. time. 
his: thowed, | that, the snaiicd above recited were:am. 
biguous. d x ily got 

»Dr.. FRANKLIN, to tars I had cfiumeaabidesea hae ex. 
periments, recollected them when he was this laft fummer at” 
Pyrmont, where.a large body of. mephitic air always lies:upon 
the furface of the medicinal {pring (for this ait is! evidently 
{pecifically heavier than common air, and;does not eafily mix 
with it) but not having a proper apparatus, and the company 
there making experiments inconvenient, he did nothing that 
was decifive; though, from the little that he had an oppor- 
tunity of doing, he imagined it was nota conductor. 

Turse experiments on mephitic, air, deceitful or, at leaft,: 
ambiguous as they were, led, however, to a difcovery, . 
which may poffibly throw fome new light upon fome of the. ° 
moft fundamental principles of eleGtricity; and which certain- 


. 4H ly 


602 EXPERIMENTS Part VIIL 


ly ftrengthen the fufpicion, that mephitic air mr ftill be a 
conduétor, at leaft in its fixed ftate. , 

Finpine that I could make nothing of inaphitia aiesitialk 
(for I had endeavoured to procufe it in a variety of ways, but 
without fuccefs) I confidered that it was from charcoal that 
I procured it in the greateft quantity, and thought I would 
try charcoal itfelf in fubftance. Accordingly, on May the 
4th. 1766, I tried the charcoal, in a variety of ways and 
ftates ; and found it to be, what I had fufpected, an excellent 
conduétor of electricity. 

PRESENTING a piece of charcoal to the prime condagtor, 
together with my finger, or a piece of brafs wire, I con- 
ftantly obferved, that the eleGric fpark ftruck the char- 
coal before either of the other conductors, if it happened to 
be advanced ever fo little before them. _ Having a very rough 
furface, the charcoal did not take a denfe {park from the 
conductor, till it was made a little fmooth, and brought 
within about half an inch; when, to all appearance, it did 
quite as well as any piece of metal, there being a conftant 
ftream of denfe, and white eledtric fire between the conductor 
and it. I tried the charcoal in every ftate of heat: aenolds 
and found no alteration of its conduéting power. 

I pLAcEp a great number of pieces of charcoal, not ele 
than twelve or twenty, of various fizes, in a circuit, and dif- 
charged a common jar through them ; when, to all appear- 
ance, the difcharge was as perfect, as if fo many. pieces of - 
metal had been placed’ in. the fame manner: Two:of the 
pieces, about the. middle of the circuit, I placed about an 
inch and a half from one another; but, upon the difcharges 
the fpark paffed the interval: very full and ftrong. A piece 

. of 


Séev il. ox ‘CHARCOAL. 603 


of charcoal .alfo made the difcharge at the wire with one 
fpark, but the report was not fo loud as when the difcharge 
was made with a piece of metal. It was obfervable, that a 
black grofs fmoke rofe from between each of the pieces of 
charcoal; at the moment of the difcharge; but the ignition 
was momentary, and the fire could not be shee si on the 
charcoal. 

To make the experiment of the pecndatiine power of 
charcoal in the moft indifputable manner, I'took a piece of 
baked wood, which I had often ufed for the purpofe of in- 
fulation, being an excellent non-conductor, and putting it 
into a long glafs tube, I-thraft it into the fire, and converted 
it into charcoal. In this operation, a very great quantity of 
grofs {moke rofe from it, fo that, feeming to part with more 
of its moifture, one would have expected it would have come 
out a better non-conduttor ; but, upon trial, its electric pro- 
perty was quite gone, and it was become a very good con= 
ductor. 

Tae experiments aborecméntioned:1 were firft made with 
wood charcoal, of which I found pieces of very different dea 
grees of conducting power; but the moft perfe& conductors 
Ihave found of this kind are fome pieces of pit charcoal. 
Thefe feem to be, in all refpeéts, as perfect conductors as me- 
tals. They receive a ftrong bright fpark from the prime 
conduétor, though feldom at above an inch diftahce, on ac- 
count of the roughnefs on their furface, which cannot be 
taken off; and in difcharging a jar through them, or with 
them, no perfon can imagine any difference between them 
and metal, either in the colour of the electric fpark, or the 
found made by the explofion. When they are broken, they 

Apes exhibit 


. 04 EXPERIMENTS Part VII. 


- exhibit an appearance which very much refembles that of 
broken fteel. There is however a great variety in the elec- 
trical properties of different. pieces of this kind of charcoal ; 
and for want of proper opportunity I have not yet fucceeded 
in afcertaining, with fufficient certainty, the circumftances, 
in the preparation, &c. on which this variety depends. 

I woutp have preferred the examination of wood. charcoal 
on many accounts; particularly, as the fame fubftance is, in 
this cafe, converted from a perfect electric to a perfeét con- 
ductor; and all the degrees of conducting power may be 
found in different {pecimens of it; whereas pit coal is itfelf a 
conduétor, though an imperfect one: but not having any op- 
portunity, I procured fpecimens of all the varieties I could 
imagine in the fame heap of pit charcoal, with refpe& to 
their nearnefs or diftance from the furface, &c; but though 
I examined them with all the care and attention that I could 
apply, and in every method that I could think of, the diffe- 
rences were fo exceedingly fmall, if any, that I could not fix 
upon any circumftance that I could depend upon for the 
_caufe of them. { 

Even common cinders from an. open fire, of the kind of 
coals which we generally burn, I find to be very little inferior 
to charcoal; which is fuffered to flame, but covered very 
clofe as foon as it is well burnt, and before any athes are 
formed. Coals and cinders froma common fire, being a very 
commodious fubje& for experiments, I did not fail to make 
as many upon them.as I could imagine would be of any ufe; 
except that I had no opportunity of trying a fufficient variety 
of coals. I took feveral out of the fire after they had done 
blazing, fome of which I covered with afhes, fome I quench- 


ed 


Sec. III. ons CHARCOAL. 605 


ed in water, and fome I left to cool in the open air. I alfo 
reduced fome of the coals to cinders in a glafs veffel, without 
fuffering them to flame; and I treated in the very fame 
manner various pieces of oak, cut from the fame plank ; 
but when I examined them, I found their differences, with 
refpect to their power of conduéting electricity, very incon- 
fiderable, if any. I thought the cinder of a coal which we 
call kennel, and which is remarkable for flaming much while 
it burns, to be a better conductor than a cinder from a com- 
mon coal: but the difference might be owing to its more 
uniform texture, and fmoother furface. Charcoal made of 
coals which yield a ftrong fulphureous fmell when they are 
burnt, and of which the charcoal itfelf is not quite divefted, 
was, to all appearance, as good a conductor as that of the 
other kind, which is more efteemed. 

In this courfe of experiments I have found myfelf much at 
a lofs for a fufficiently accurate method of afcertaining the dif- 
ference of conduéting fubftances, andI with that eleétricians 
would endeavour to’ find fuch a meafure. One of the betft 
that I am acquainted with, and which I applied among others 
on this occafion, is by the refiduum of difcharges, meafured by 
Mr. Lane’s eleGtrometer. It is well known, that the worfe 
the conduétors are that form the circuit, the greater refidaum 
will be left in a jar after a difcharge; and Mr. Lane’s elec- 
trometer, which meafures an explofion, will likewife meafure 
the refiduum, To apply this method with accuracy, I put 
pieces of charcoal, é&c. of the fame length into the circuit, 
I ufed the very fame chain in every experiment, and the fame 
difpofition of every part of the apparatus ; I alfo made the explo- 


fions exa¢tly equal, and after every difcharge compleated the 


circuit 


606; EXPERIMENTS Parr VHIy 


circuit by the chain before I took the refiduum and laftly, 
I was careful to take up the fame time in each operation, which 
I repeated very often. This method of meafuring the con- 
ducting power of fubftances I learned of Mr. Lane, to whom, 
if what I have faid be not quite intelligible, I muft refer my 
reader. On the other hand, if I have fiid too much of it, 
that ingenious electrician muft blame his own backwardnefs 
to publith an account of his electrometer and its various ufes. 

In the profecution of thefe experiments on charcoal, I 
burned a piece which I had found to be a moft excellent con- 
ductor, firft between two crucibles, and then in the open fire, 
and tried it at different times till it was almoft burned away; 
but, contrary, to my expectations, I found its property very 
little diminithed. I was, likewife, furprized to find that 
Joot whether of wood coal, or pit coal hardly conduéted 
at all. I made five or fix inches of the foot of pit coal. part 
of the celeétric circuit, which compleated the communi- 


cation between the infide and outfide of a charged jar for feye=_ 


ral feconds; and yet found the charge not much diminifhed. 
A piece of wood foot, which is a firm fhining fubftance, 
which does not foil the fingers, and which feems to break in 
a polith in feveral places, would hardly condu& any part of 
a charge in the leaft fenfible degree. When rubbed againft 
my hand, or my waiftcoat in frofty weather (though it was 
difficult to find any part of it that was large and fmooth 
enough for the purpofe) I more than once thought it attraéted 
the thread of trial. The fnuff of a candle would not conduc& 
a fhock, though it was placed in the middle of+the circuit, 
and it was eafily fet on fire by the explofion of a fmall jar. 
Bur notwithftanding my want of fuccefs, I make no doubt, 


but © 


Sec. III. on CHARCOAL 607 


but that any perfon of tolerable fagacity, who has an oppor- 
tunity of making experiments in a laboratory, where he 
could reduce to a coal all kinds of fubftances, in every variety 
of method, might very foon afcertain what it is that makes 
charcoal a conduétor of eleétricity. In all the methods in 
which I could make charcoal, the fume of the bodies was fuf- 
fered to efcape ; but let trials be made of fubftances reduced 
toa char without any communication with the open air, or 
where the vapours emitted from them hall meet with diffe- 
rent degrees of refiftance to their efcape, afcertained by ac- 
tual preflure. j 

Cuarcoat, befides its property of conducting electricity, 
is, on many other accounts, a very remarkable fubftance ; 
being indeftruétible by any method befides burning in the 
open air; and yetit feems not to have been fufficiently ftudied 
by any-chymift. A proper examination of it promifes very 
fair, not only to afcertain the caufe of its conduéting, and, 
perhaps, of all conduéting powers; but to be an opening to 
various other important difcoveries in chymiftry and Natural 
Philofophy ; and the fubjeét feems to be fairly within our 
reach. 

Pir coat, and probably all other fubftances, at the fame 
time that they lofe much of their weight, increafe confiderably 
in their bulk in the operation of charring. Does it not feem to 
follow from hence, that its conducting power may poffibly 
be owing to the largenefs of its pores, agreeable to the hy- 
pothefis of Dr. Franklin, that ele€tric fubftances have exceed- 
ing {mall pores, which difpofes them to break with a polith. 

Or, fince the calces of metals, which are electric bodies, 
become metals, and conductors, by being fufed in contaé& 

with 


608 EXPERIMENTS 


coal? Is not this the eptgt air; as the 
fuppofe, that this is all that the metallic 
their revivification ? 

Tuts courfe of experiments, however, 
one of the earlieft, and, hitherto, ‘univerfally 
ims in eleGtricity, viz. that water and aittalt 


fabftance, which is clearly nether water, n 
yet a good conductor. 5 ; 


Sse IV... 5 wo. NOW YRC Ribs 609 


pide uinaais atid Ge toad Ma 


pa tasers on THE CONDUCTING POWER. or 
VARIOUS SUBSTANCES. 


INDING fome contrariety of opinion among electricians 

about the nature of ice, fome faying it was a conduc- 

tor of eleétricity, and others a non-conduétor, fo as even to 

be capable of being charged like glafs, I took the opportunity 

of a pretty fevere froft, in the month of February, to amare 
miyfelf of the fac. 

In order to this, I took a large piece of ice, wafhed it very 
clean, and feraped off all the harp points about it. After 
‘this, when’ it was again perfeCly frozen, I infulated it, at 
night, in the open air, whither I had carried my machine on 
purpofe, at the fame time that it was freezing intenfely. 

Wuen, by drawing a feather over its furface, I found it to 
be perfe@ly dry, I eleétrified it, and fetched large fparks, 
not lefs than an inch in length, from all parts of it. Icharged 
a jar at it, almoft as well as at the prime conductor; I alfo 

41 _  difcharged 


. theds which had been ufed to prove it were on to 


610 “EXPERIMENTS, ON Part VII. 


difcharged the jar through ‘ts and along the furface of it, in 
feveral places; fo that I had no doubt, but that ice was, - 
nearly, as good a conductor of electricity as water. To try 
the fame to more advantage, I took a charged jar into the = 
open fields; and, by means of a great length of chain, dif= = 
charged it along a large. furface of ice on a 
the furface was very dry, and the froft continued » 
intenfe. But the ice being not fo. good ae 
if the chain communicating with the outfide of the jar hap~ 
pened to lie five or fix inches from the knob of = ive 
communicating with the infide, the fire would ftrike to the 
chain, along the furface of the ice, without entering it. ; 

Snow is evidently not fo good a conductor as ice; 
becaufe its parts do not lie in contact with mn noth 
thofe of ice. , i 


about the conducting power of bot glafin and 


tion; fince, when the eleétricity was comm 
the outfide of the glafs, it might be faid- that the } 
not the hot glafs was the conductor ; it occurred to 
the following experiment would 4d detseiw is 


means of mercury in the infide,. and tinfoil ont 
charged about nine inches of the lower Reha 
carefully flipping off the tinfoil, and pouring out | 
try, I heated the charged part of the glats 

found, upon replacing the coating, that it was “ti 


Sec. VI. HoT GLASS - 611 


I mape the.experiment a fecond time, with the fame fuc- 
cefs; fo that I had no doubt, but that glafs, when red hot, 
was pervious to the electric fluid. It could not have goné 
round from the infide to the outfide, without going over a 
furface of fix feet of glafs, the greateft part of which was 
kept very cold, and all exceeding dry. 

Tuar the charge had not been loft by changing the acini 
filver was evident : for when I repeated that part of the expe- 
riment, without heating the glafs, the charge was found 
to be very little diminithed. 

Some time after, when I was preparing fome baked: wood 
for the purpofes of infulation, I found, that if I ufed them 
foon after they were taken out of the oven,- they would not 
anfwer my purpofe at all. The electricity went off by them 
to the floor. But when they had ftood, in the very fame 
fituation, till they were cold, they infulated very well. 

Upon this, I made a piece of baked wood, which I had 
formerly ufed for infulation, pretty hot; and when it was fo 
hot, that I could hardly hold it in my hand, it took a flender 
fpark from the conductor, about an inch long ; but it would 
not difcharge a jar at oncer It did it however filently, 
pretty much like moift wood. 


Tue confideration of the conducting power of charcoal, 
and the manner in which it is made, namely, by burning © 
inflammable fubftances in a clofe place, and generally without 
flaming, led me to make a few experiments on the conduc- 
ting power of the effluvia of flaming bodies, at the very time 
of their emiffion : for whatever thofe effluvia be, they feemed 
in fome meafure to contain the conducting principle. That 
fubftance, or principle, or whatever it be called which can 

eae only 


612 Tur CONDUCTING POWER Par? VIII, 


only be exhaled in flame, and not in fmoke, does in this 
cafe make a body a conduétor; whereas if it be fuffered to 
~ efcape, the conduéting power is diminithed. ) 9 

Tur conduéting power of the flame of a candle was ob: 
ferved very early; but it was not compared with that of o- 
ther things, and it had by fome been fuppofed to be nothing 
more than the heat communicated to the neighbouring air, 
The experiments I am going to recite feem to overturn this 
hypothefis, and to eftablifh that mentioned above. 4): 

Marcu the 14th. a fmall charged phial held not longet 
than: a fecond within two or three inches of the flame of a 
candle, either above or below it, where the heat was alto- 
gether inconfiderable, and the rarefaction of the air in aman- 
ner nothing, was totally difcharged. The event was the 
fame when I ufed the flame of a wax candle, or the flame of 
fpirits of wine. When it was held much nearer to a red hot 
poker, it was-not difcharged’ near fo foon; and when it was Ay 
held exceeding near to a piece of red hot glafs, it ‘was not 
difcharged at all, except by one explofion, feemingly conduc-’ 
ted by the hot glafs. Similar experiments Weta 
placing the candle, the poket, and the hot glafs n 
prime conduétor. It was alfo found, that the avon 
above-mentioned could not be difcharged in the focus of a 
concave mirrour. About the fame time I obfervec BY 
this phial was much fooner difcharged by being ¢ 
through fteam, than through fmoke. 

Bur the fmall jar above-mentioned was difcharged in 
experiments filently ; and though they feemed to be « 
in favour of the conducting power of the effluvia 
off in flame, there was nothing very ftriking in 


Sec. IV. op EF FLUVIA 613 


afterwards, when I had conftruéted an eleétrical battery, I 
repeated the experiments in-a much more ftriking and con- 
vincing manner. 

‘December the 15th. I brought the flame of a candle be- 
tween two brafs knobs, one communicating with the infide, 
and the other with the outfide of the battery; and obferved, 

~ that as the flame advanced towards them, it began to be put 
into a quivering motion, exceeding quick, and was ftrongly 
drawn both ways towards each knob, leaving the wick bare 
at the top; and as foon as the flame was quite between the 
rods, the battery difcharged at once, at the diftance of three 
inches and an half. This is a very fine experiment. The 
interpofition of the flame between the two brafs rods is like 
putting fire to a train of gunpowder, which explodes imme- 
diately. 

To compare the conduéting power of thefe effluvia with 

other fubftances, I made the denfe vapour from the fpout 
of a boiling kettle pafs between the two brafs rods above- 
mentioned, when they were very near the diftance at’ which 
the battery explodes through the air, but it did not promote 
the difcharge ; neither would the fmoke of rofin, nor that of 
= candle juft blown out: but when I advanced the ignited 
’ wick towards the rods, it was ventilated exceeding brifkly ; 
and when it was put between them, when feparated’ to about 
“the diftance of an inch, the difcharge was made, and the 
candle blown in again. 

To compare the conducting power of flame with that of 
other bodies, which had more heat but Iefs effluvia, I put a 
red hot poker between the two rods, but it did not promote 
‘the difcharge of the battery till they were brought within a- 
: bout 


614 OIL, SHOWN TO BE ParrVul 


bout an inch and_an half of one another; | fo. that the explo 
fion was made at about twice the ufual diftance, allowi 
the {pace occupied by the poker itfelf; and Forthaninieely 
neighbourhood of the poker was more than ten ti werk 
than in the neighbourhood of the candle, confiderin 
tance at which they were, held from the rods. "Both 
the hot poker were marked with an imperfect 
thofe that were impreffed on each of the knobs ; 
of which will be given hereafter. 
I rueEn interpofed a piece of red hot glafs, w 
great a heat as the iron, but emits lefs effluy 
did not promote the difcharge till the brafs rods y 
within an inch of one another, which was fo ne 
glafs almoft touched them both. : 


As I was diverfifying the experiments concerning 
fage of the electric explofion over the furfaces « 
dies, as will be mentioned hereafter, I accidenta 
how exceedingly poor a conductor is oi/ of ever 
much that I think it ought rather to be claf 
tric fubftances; and what I faid page 435 of 
ftate of fluidity, except air, being conductors, ough 
retracted; though at that time I had no doubt a 
true; and imagined that oil did not differ very : 
water with refpe& to its conducting power, Alf 
upon Dr. Watfon’s experiment with oil of turp 
mutt be retracted, as unjuft. Ihad been led into 
by fome experiments of Mr. Wilfon, who h 
advanced) the propofition above-mentioned ; -an 
the tourmalin is poffeffed of a fixed kind of 
pable of being condutted away, becaufe it re 


Src. IV. A NON-CONDUCTOR. 615 


rate power of each of its fides, though furrounded with melt- 
ed greafe; whereas I find, that nothing of an oily nature will 
condu& electricity. 

Layine a chain which communicated with the outfide of 
my battery in a difh of melted tallow, I brought a brafs rod 
communicating with the infide towards it, in order to make 
the difcharge, by tranfmitting the explofion over the furface 
without entering it; when I was furprifed to find, not only 
that the electric matter would not take the furface, but that, 
though it attracted a column of tallow at the diftance of about 
three quarters of an inch (which was thicker in proportion as 
the rod was brought near the furface) and though I continued 
amufing myfelf with this column of tallow a confiderable 
time ; in which ftate it formed a complete communication 
between both fides of the: battery, yet the charge was very 
little diffipated. I repeated this experiment, with the fame 
event, with oil of olives, the thinneft oil of turpentine, and 
even ether. A plate of common oil of olives. connected 
fhe infide and outfide of the battery for near ten minutes, 
without my being able to perceive that the charge was more 
diffipated, than it would have been without that communica-. 
tion. Ether is the lighteft fluid in nature next ‘to air; yet, 
being properly an oil, it proved. no better a condudtor. than 
the moft tenacious. Iwas moft furprifed that the ether did 
not take fire by this treatment, as nothing is more inflamma- 
ble; and if the electric matter-can.pafs through it, nothing 
fires fo foon. 

From thefe experiments, and thefe above-mentioned, on 
ice, I concluded, that fluidity, as fuch, contributes nothing 

tho the conducting power of fubftances, feparate from the heat 
which 


616 Tue CONDUCTING POWER © Parr VIII: 


which makes them fluid. To complete my experiments on 
oils, I filled phials with all kinds of oils, according to their - 
chymical diftin&ions, including the fineft efential oils, the 
ftrongly empyreumatic, and thofe that are termed mineral, as off 
of amber ; and found them all incapable of giving a fhock. But 
I found that this method of trying the condu@ting power of 
fubftances, viz. by inclofing them in phials, and endeavouring 
to give fhocks by them is very inaccurate, fhowing them to 
be better conductors than they really are. Pounded glafs, 
flour of brimftone, and other electric fubftances gave a confi- 
derable fhock ; but a bottle containing nothing but air gave 
a greater fhock than any of them; though the wire inferted 
into it was very blunt, and was kept in the center of the 
bottle. Finding, by thefe experiments, that oil plainly con- 
duéted much lefs than air, I endeavoured to charge a plate of 
oil like a plate of glafs; and for this purpofe I perforated a 
glafs falver, and thereby gave a coating of tinfoil to both fides _ 
of.a quantity of oil poured into it; but the brim of the falyer 
would not contain enough to give it a fufficient thicknefs ; 
otherwife, I make no doubt, but that a fhock might be given 
by it better than by air. 

I sHatx juft mention upon this fubject, what [lately ob- 
ferved, and do not know whether it has been noticed by any 
writer, that ice of oi/, contrary to ice of water, is fpecifically 
heavier than the fluid fubftance, and finks in it. 

FinpinG fo great an agreement, with refpec to eleétric 
properties, in this whole chymical clafs of bodies, I began 9 
kind of courfe of chymical ele¢tricity ; but had not leifure, or 
opportunity to purfue it as it deferved. The few hints that I 
Collected may poflibly be of fervice to future inquirers ; and 

for 


Sec. IV. * or VARIOUS SUBSTANCES. 617 


for this reafon I fhall note them juft as thiey memarnet, ee 
they contain little that is remarkable. 

Att faline  fubftances that I examined proved, in geheral, pret= 
ty good conduétors. I tried moft of them by making the dif- 
charge of the battery through them when infulated ; which 
appears to me to be a very good method, indeed the only one 
that can well be dependedupon. Indifcharging the battery with 
a piece of a/um, the explofion was attended with a peculiar 
hiffing noife, like that of a {quib.. Rock fa/t conducted pretty 
well, but not quite fo well as the alum. The eletric fpark 
upon it was peculiarly red. Sa/ ammoniac exceeded them both 
in its conduéting powers, but it would not take the leaft fen- 
fible {park ; fo that it feemed made up of an infinite number 
of the fineft points. Volatile fal ammoniac | only tried in a 
phial, when it gave a {mall thock. Salt petre did not con 
duét fo well as fal-ammoniac. Endeavouring to make the 
eleétric explofion pafs over its furface, it was difperféd into a 
great number of fragments in all dire€tions with confiderable 
violence, fome flying againft my face. Selenitic falt conduc 
ted a fhock but poorly. Vitriolated tartar gave a {mall thock. 
White Sugar {eems to be an‘exception to this rule: for it may 
be fairly faid to be no conduétor; as the charge of the battery 
would hardly pafs through it in the leaft degree. 

Tue metallic falts in general conducted better than o- 
ther neutrals: d/ue and green vitriol Conducted: very well, 
though they would not tranfmit a fhock. 

Tuar ores in which the metal is‘really ina metalline ftate 
fhould be very good conductors might naturally be expected. 
Thus a piece of gold ore from Mexico was hardly to be dif- 
tingullaete in this refpect, from the metal itfelf ; and a piece 

4K “of 


6:8 Tue CONDUCTING POWER» PakrrVIIt 


of filver ore from Potofi, though mixed with pyrites, con= 
duéted, very well. But.even ores in which the metal is 


mineralized with fulphur or arfenic, as the ores of lead and. 


tin, and cinnabar the ore of quickfilver were little, if at all in- 
ferior to them. The cinnabar that I tried was factitious; but 
there can be no doubt of its being the fame as the ora 
When I made the explofion of the battery pafs through it, it 
was rent into many pieces, and the fragments difperfed in all 
direétions. Ores, however, that contain nothing but the 
earth of the metal conduét electricity but little better than o- 
ther ftones; though I thought that all the fpecimens of i aes 
ore that I tried conducted better than marble. 

I examinep fome é/ack fand that came from the coaft of 
Africa, which is a good iron ore, and part of which is affect- 
ed by the magnet as much as _fteel filings; and found it to 
condué eleétricity, but not a fhock. Separating with a mag- 
net all that would be eafily attra¢ted by it (about one fixth of 
the whole) it conducted a fhock very well. The reft would 
hardly condaé at all. 

Tuovon I think I may venture to fay, that the true and 
proper ores of the more valuable metals might be known by 
their property of condudting electricity, I cannot fay that e- 
lectricity wilt furnith any rule to afcertain the value of the 
different ores of the fame metal. I tried two pieces of cop- 
per ore, one the moft valuablethat is known, and another of 


only about half the value; but they were hardly to be diftin- | 


guifhed from one another in their conducting power. 

Brack “ead in a pencil conducted a thock feemingly like 
metal or'charcoal. A fmall lump of it took as full and ftrong 
a {park from the prime conduttor as a brafs knob. 


ALL 


Sec. IV. or VARIOUS SUBSTANCES: 619 


- Aut the fony fubftances that I tried conduéted very well, 
though dry and'warm. Even a piece of polithed agate, though 
femi-pellucid, received the eleéric fpark into its fub- 
ftance; though it would pafs over about three quarters of an. 
inch of its farface to reach the finger that held it, and it dif- 
charged the battery but flowly.  Limeflone, and lime juft 
burnt were equally imperfect conduétors, hardly to be diftin- 
guifhed from one another. Lapis hematites, and touckftone 
both conducted pretty well; as did a piece of gypfum, and 
plaifter of Paris, only the latter, having a {moother furface, took’ 
a ftronger fpark. A piece of flate, fach’as is commonly ufed’ 
to write on, was a much better conductor than a piece of 
free ftone, which conduéted very poorly. Marbles alfo con- 
dugted confiderably better than freeftone. I found very little 
difference among any of the {pecimens of marble that I tried, 
in which was a piece of Egyptian granite. - A piece of Spa-~ 
nif chalk, which is’ a + seta 62y eye much Tike 
marble. 

A LARGpP piece of wshesppi>, erik a tinge of blue, and 
femi-tranfparent, would hardly conduét in the leaft degree. 
I took pretty ftrong fparks from: the nope i ss aa while it 
was in’contaét with it. 

A piece of pyrites of a black colour’ took’ fpatks at'a’con=. 
fiderable’ diftance from the prime conduétor, like fonie of the 
inferior pieces of charcoal. Another piece of pyrites, which’ 
had’ been part ofa tegular fphere, confifting of a fhining me-' 
tallic matter, did’ fot condu@ néar fo well, thotigh’ much: 
better thar any other ftony fubftance. It was a kind of me- 
dium betwixt a ftone and an ore. 

ait PIECE of afb eftos from Scotland, juft as it is deter from 

4K2 its 


620 Tut DIFFUSION or ParrVIll. 


its bed, would not conduét. It was in contaé with the con- 
ductor, while I took {parks at the diftance of half wa inch 
with a moderate eleétrification. 

Or hquid fubftances, oil of vitriol conducted pretty well, ar 
the moft highly rectified /pirit of wine gave a fhock valeting like 
water, but perhaps not quite fo well. 

Tuts courfe of experiments on the condtwiting leas bop 
fubftances, according to their chymical claffes, would, ‘pro= 
bably, be very ufeful, if purfued with care. Thofe mention- 
ed above were generally fingle experiments, whide are not fo. 
much to be depended upon. 

Tuere are fome other mixed fubflances BE abdiieing 


power I have tried, and becaufe I think it would not be eafy 


to fay, 4 priori, to which of the two claffes they ib 
fall juft mention the refult of my experiments oon 
nearly in the order in which they were made, |) 
Dry glue, which is an animal fubftance, inmate 
electricity, but does not conduét a fhock. hesaptt 


PounveED gla/s mixed with the white of an egg, andy 


had ftood till it was perfectly dry, was a conductor. I dee f 


put it upon fome broken jars, thinking that the « 
would be an eleétric fubftance, and that it would an 
jars hold a charge again. ; meee Be 


Paint, made of white lead and oil, very olf ands e 


proved a conductor. I tried it in a china veflel whi 
been firmly pieced with it. A part of the yeflel, thro 
which there was no crack, would ieceive a charge 
but a piece in which there was a crack, and which r 


filled with this Pras could not be eee at all. os eae ; 


goals 


SECTION — 


Sec. V. ELECTRICITY on GLASS. 621 


SECTION Vv. 


wet : f / 
ExperIMENTS ON THE DIFFUSION OF ELECTRICITY 
OVER THE SURFACES OF GLASS TUBES, CONTAINING: A 

NEW METHOD OF GIVING THE ELECTRIC sHOcK. 


| 


& = yenals Vor} 


T had been obferved by many eleétricians, that new globes 
are often difficult to excite; but Ihave made fome experi- 
ments, which prove ‘this fact, and other differences between new 
and old glafs, in amote diftin&@ manner than any thing elfe I 
Have yet met with ; but they leave the caufe ftill unexplained. 
Tue moft remarkable property of new flint glafs is the eafy 
cliffufion of eleétricity over its furface.’ I have ‘feveral times 
got tubes made two or three yards long; ‘terminating in: folid 
rods. Thefe I have taken almoft warm from'the furnace, in 
‘the fineft weather poffible, have immediately infulated them, 
and hanging pith balls at one extremity, have always’ found, 
that they would feparate the moment that the wire of a: charg- 
ed phial was applied to the other end. This’ I ‘had reafor 
to think would be the cafe at almoft any diftance at which 
the experiment could be made. I-have even charged a phi- 
al very fenfibly, when it was held clofe to the glafs, at the 
cLiftance of a yard from the wire of acharged phial, held clofe 
to 


~ 


622 Tar DIFFUSION or Part VIII. 


to another part of it, the coatings of both phials being held 
in my hands. When the fame tubes were a few months 
older, I found that the eleétric virtue could not be diffufed 
along their furfaces farther than about half 4 yard. 

Some tubes, which I have tried the day they were made, 
I have found impoflible to be excited in the leaft degree, 
even with the ufe of oiled filk and amalgam, for an hour to- 
gether; when a fingle fttoke of the fame rubber,has rendered 
other tubes highly eleétrical, and two or three have made 
them to:emit fpontaneous pencils, The fame new tubes, up- 
on being much rubbed, have begun to be excited, and in a 
few days have acted pretty well. ' 

Bur that the firft coat of new glafs is, in fome meafure, a 
conductor of electricity, was moft evident from fome experi 
ments. which I made with long and very thin. tubes, w: w. i 
were blown fome time in the month. of March. - Thee, to. 
amufe myfelf, I coated in different places, and the diffufion, 
of electricity, fron the coated part to: that. which’ was not 
coated, appeared to me very extraordinary. I think my read~ 
er will not. be difpleafed if f relate a few. of, the particulars.. 

I procured a.tube, open at both ends, about a yard in| 
but of very unequal width... About three inches of the middle 
part of it I coated.on both fides; and charging it, by means)of a* 
wire introduced.at one of the. ends; I perceived, not only that 
the part through which I had introduced the wire was ftrongly 
eleétrical on the outfide, but that at the oppofite end, where 
there was neither coating nor wire, the fire crackled under 1 my, 
fingers, as I drew the tube:through them, and a flame feem- 
ed to iffue continually out.at both the ends, while it was at 


fet 


Ste, V. - ELECTRICITY on GLASS, 623 


reft and charged. N.B. One end of this tube was broken, 
and rough, the other was fmooth. ; 

I procureEp another tube, about an inch i in diameter, and 
very thin. It was about three feet and a half in length, -and 
clofed at one-end. About nine inches below the mouth, I 
coated three inches of it, both on the infide and outfide. 
This part I charged, and then obferved the whole jtube, to 
the very extremity of it, to be ftrongly clerical, crackling 
very loud when I drew my hand along it, and giving {parks, 
as from, an excited flee at about the diftance an inch, 
all the way. 

To give the reader a better idea of thefe experiments, I 
have given a drawing [PI. i. fig. 7.] of one of the tubes with 
which they were made. It is open atone end, and the part 
[2] is coated. 

Arter drawing the whole tube Si caiah my hand, all the 
electricity on the outfide was difcharged ; but, upon putting 
my finger within the mouth of the tube, an effort’to difcharge 
itfelf feemed to be, produced, which thowed itfelf by a light 
ftreaming vifibly from the coating, both towards the finger 
and likewife as vigoroufly towards, the oppofite end of the 
tube. After this I found all the outfide of the tube loaded 
with eleétricity as before, which might be taken off, and re- 
vived again many times, with the fame orgical charge; only 
it was weaker every time, 

Hoxpine this tube by the coated part, and prefenting the 
uncoated outfide, near the clofe end of the tube, to the prime 
conduétor, the infide became charged as well as the outfide ; 
and, upon introducing a wire, a confiderable explofion was 
made. 


Tue 


624. Tue DIFFUSION. oF. Pant VIII. q 


Tue difcharge made the outfide ftrongly electrical, . ae 2g 
taking this electricity off, the tube was changed again 
fenfibly. 

Hotpinc it by the uncoated part, and prefeating ha coats 
ed part to the conduttor, the infide became charged as before. _ 

Havine firft perfectly difcharged this tube, I clofed the 
‘open end with cement, made of bees wax and turpentine, an 

“inch or more in thicknefs ; but ftill, by applying the outfide _ 
of the tube (either the coated or the uncoated part) to the. 
conduétor, I found it manifeftly charged, but not quite fo 
high as when the end was left open, though the difference 
was not great. 

I provipED myfelf with another tube, about an Ae aan 
a quarter wide, and three feet long; but it was drawn out 
one foot more very fmall ; and another foot at the extremity 
was folid, fo that it was in all five feet long. I coated about 
four inches of this tube, two feet below the mouth of it. The — 
balls being hung at the extremity of this tube, or rather of the 
folid rod in which it terminated, they feparated the moment 
I began to charge the coated part. The difcharge brought — 
them together, though not immediately, but a fecond dif- 
charge would generally do it. 

Tue refiduums of any of thefe tubes, of which fo fall a a 
part was coated, were very confiderable. I thought that all 
of them might be equal to the firit difcharge. In the laft 
mentioned tube, there was a refiduum after a great number 
of difcharges, I believe twenty or thirty. 

Imacinine that the-diffufion on the furfaces of the tubes 
above-mentioned depended upon the newnefs of the glafs, I 
preferved them fix or feven months; having obferved, by 

examining 


Seé.IV. | ELECTRICITY on’ GLASS: ° 625 


examining’ them at proper intervals in’ the mean time, that 
this property, andothers depending upomit gradually leffeneds 
and before this time it was quite gone. There was no-dif- 
fufion of eletricity over their furfaces, and they were as eafily 
excited as other tubes, at the fame time that they received a ~ 
very good ‘charge. 

- ArT length, by fome elie or other, all the thes on 
which I had made thefe experiments were broken; except one; 
which was clofed at one end, and’ which, ‘indeed, was the 
moft remarkable of them all. Upon this tube, in the month of 
November, I began to renew my experiments, comparing it 
with others which I got made at that time, in order ‘to 
afcertain on what circumftances: this diffufion of eleétricity 
depended. . Thefe I thall diftinétly relate, noting the time 
when each experiment was made, and every other circum~ 
ftance which I can imagine could see have may influence 
in the cafe. 

Novemser the 13th. I once more endeavoured to sapeat 
the experiments above-mentioned with the old thin tube, 
with as much care and precaution as poffible, but without the 
leaft fuccefs. At the fame time I charged two other thin 
tubes, one clofed, and the other open, after they had been 
made about fix weeks, but without being ufed in the mean 
time, and they anfwered exaétly as the former tube had done, 
when it was new. The charge froma {mall coated part dif- 
fufed itfelf all over the tube ; fo that at the diftance ofa yard 
from the coating, it gave {parks to’ the finger of an inch in 
length, and in all refpeéts exhibited the appearance of a tube 
frefh excited. On this occafion I firft obferved, what after- 
wards drew my attention in a more particular manner, that 

4.1L when 


626 Tue DIFFUSION oF: Parr Vik 
when my finger was brought to the tube about two inches 


above the coating [as at 4. Pl. i. fig. 7.] it difcharged a great j 


quantity of that diffufed electricity ; and my or arm was 
violently fhocked. 

Novemser the rgth. After heating the old tube, and 
endeavouring to repeat the former experiments, both while 
very warm, and after it was cold again, but to as little pur- 
pofe as before; I took it to the glafs houfe, and got it made 
red hot all over, fo that it would eafily bend any way; and 
‘as foon as it was cold, I tried the old experiments, and 
found that it had completely recovered its former property. 
Charging a fmall coated part, the electricity was diffufed to. 
the end of the tube, over three feet of dry glafs, and it gave 
{parks at the diftance of an inch in any part of it, exattly as 
if it had been excited with the beft rubber. When it was 


drawn through my hand, whereby that. diffufion was taken. 


off, it prefently returned again ; and the extremity of the tube 
would get loaded while its communication with the coating 
had been cut off, by my hand being conftantly held on the 
middle of it. 

I axso obferved, that the middle part of this tube, ‘wiih 
had been ofteneft heated, in melting the whole over again, 
one half at a time, had a-much ftronger diffufion than the o- 


ther parts. It was no fooner taken off, than it appeared again, 


fo that it gave a continual {tream of fire. 

Tue quantity of refiduum after a difcharge of this tube was 
prodigious, fo that the outfide coating would, immediately 
after, give almoft a conftant ftream of fire to any conductor 
prefented,to it, for a confiderable time. 
Tuts 


Sec IV, | ELECTRICITY! oy “GLASS. 627 


aut 

~ "Tuts tube'was now, as*it’had been at thefirtt, | sbfoluely 
ineapable of being excited with ‘the’ beft-rubbers’  \ 60°” 

January the 6th. 1767. Examining ‘all the tubes ‘with 
which I had made the experiments’ of the diffufion, I found 
that ‘property either quite, ‘or very nearly gone. ‘One of them 
I reftored by ‘heating it 'red’ hot. ‘Another I ‘heated “only at 
the end moft remote from the coating ; but there was no dif- 
fafion upon it, when the coated part was charged; the part 
which had not been made red hot intercepting it. ‘ 

Novemser the'24th. In order to determine whether ‘this 

tyof diffufion depended in any ‘theafure upon the fmooth- 

nefs of the furface, I’made a circular part of one of ‘the thin 
tubes, about half a yard beyond the coated part, quite rough 
with emery, about three inches in length; but this did not 
prevent the diffufion in the leaft ; both that rough part, and 
the fmooth glafs beyond it were as much ae a eh 
‘City’ as the reft. 
~ I THen took the polith off a line the whole length of the 
tube, from the coating to the extremity of it; but ftill the 
effeé&t was the fame z and I make no doubt would have been 
fo if I had made all the furface rough. 

In order to afcertain whether this property ‘depended upon 
the thinnefs. of the tubes, I got one made of a twelfth of an inch 
thick, and ufed it immediately ; the diffufion was very fenfible, 
and it was incapable of being excited.’ This, however, © was 
not always the cafe with tubes of fo great a thicknefs. 

\ Novemser the 25th. “Willing tocarry this experiment a lit- 
tle further, Igot another tube four feet long, and of the eighth of 
an inch thick. I coated a {mall part of it in the fame manner 
as I had done the others, namely ‘about:three inches, at the 

4L2 diftance 


. 


«628 A NEW METHOD OF GIVING Parr VIIl. 


diftance of nine inches below ‘the: orifice, .and-obferved the 
diffufion to be very remarkable in proportion to the charge it 
received, which was very moderate. It could not be fenfibly 
excited in the leaft degree ; except that, in the dark; an ex- 
ceeding {mall light was vifible near the finger, when it touch- 
ed any part of it, immediately after excitation; but not the 
leaft {napping could be perceived; nor any sniiteTe with shy 
finger. 
To find whether this property depended upon id Iisa ‘08 

well as the newnefs of the glafs, I, afterwards, coated a part 
of a very thin glafs of the common bottle metal, but I found 


_ no diffufion upon it at all. It was what is commonly called 


a finging glafs. I would have purfued this experiment by try- 
ing the fame glafs in other forms, and by trying otlies kinds 
of glafs, but I had no opportunity. {A Fat, See 
_ Toxservep, in all the tubes which had the difaion,. that 
in drawing my hand from the extremity of them towards. the 
coating, after they were charged, fo as to take off the diffufi- 
on, there was aconfiderable noife at the orifice, as if the tube 
had been: gradually difcharging itfelf, and this sali pe 
apparently leffen the charge. aa 
In the dark the electric fire feemed to bocce perpetually 
from the open end, or both the ends, if they were both 
open ; and whenever I, drew my hand over it, the fire ftream- 
cd from the coating towards my hand in)a very beautiful 
manner. ts ayaubfetion 
It was very sespatkdhle that, the firft time I charged any 
of thefe tubes after they had {tood a while, the diffufion was 
the moft confiderable, and that it leflened, every, fucceflive 
siege 3 till, at laft, it was exceeding {malls hes sie 


‘See. lV. "THE ELECTRIC SHOCK. © : 629 
tube had ftood a few hours wechecguind it was as rigonyst as 


_ €ver. 


Decemser the ift. I, for the. fart Saris took particular 
notice, that, in charging a thin tube, and afterwards holding 
the coating in one hand, and drawing my other hand, fo as to 
grafp the tube; beginning at that end which was moft re- 
mote from the coating; that fometimes, when my hand came 
near the coating [as at 4, Plate i. fig. 7.] I received a very 
confiderable fhock through both my. arms and in my. breaft, 
exactly like what is felt from the Leyden phial. 

Tur fame day, I felt a fimilar fhock from another thin 
_ tube; and what was more:remarkable, I did not receive it til] 
the third time of drawing my hand over the tube,. having 
.. miffed the ftroke the two firft times; though I moved my 
hand, as near as 1 could judge, in the fame manner. This 
| fhock was not very great, but fenfible in both arms, 

Decemger the 3d, I received another fhock, the third 
time of drawing my hand over the tube, and much more vio- 
Tent than the laft ; it affecting both my arms and breaft. At 
this time I obferved very exactly,, that my hand was near two 
inches and an half from the coating, and that a ftrong light 
was vifible under my hand, and extended to the coating, The 
diffufion at this time had not been very great, and the tube 
feemed to be about half difcharged after the fhock. _ . 

Ar that time I could not think of any plaufible theory to 
account for this fhock; but prefently after I accidentally re- 
ceived another fhock, in fome refpeats fimilar to this, the 
theory of which I have been fo happy as to inveftigate, and 
which mens! throw fome light upon this, 

; sp Plas di bla Degas 


60 A NEW METHOD OF GIVING Pax VIM. 


Decemser the 21ft, I made a torricellian vacuum ‘inva 
tube about a yard in length [Plate i. fig. 8.] 2 adagoat - 
end of it in my hand, I prefented a part near the other. end 
to the prime conduétor; and obferved, that, while the elec- 
tric fire. was pouring along the whole length of it, I felt 
fome peculiarly {mart twitches every now and then in my 
hand, juft fuch as are felt when a thin uncoated phial is held 
in the hand, while it is charged at the prime conduétor, but 
more pungent.. On removing the tube from the prime con- 
ductor, it threw out fpontancous fparks from the place where 
it had touched the conduétor, exattly like thofe which iffue 
from the wire of an over charged phial ; but they were longer, 
and much more beautiful. Then, bringing my other hand 
near the place where the tube had touched the conduétor, I 
received a very confiderable fhock in both my arms and breaft, 
exactly like that which I had received before from the thin 
tubes; and, as with them, the thock was rather ftronger in 
the hand which was brought to the tube than in that which 
held‘it. If, without bringing my other hand to the tube, I 


only prefented it to the table, or any other conductor, it 


would throw out from the fame place feveral ftrong fparks, 
attended with a flafh of light, which filled the whole length 
of the tube. Thefe {parks refembled thofe which iffue from 
the wire of a charged phial, when it is prefented to the like 
imperfect conduétors, and at the fame time held in the hand. 
I arTeRwarps obferved, that the ftrongeft fhock which 
this tube could give was felt when one hand continued in the 
‘place where it held the tube, in order to charge it, and the 
other was made to touch the tube, an inch or two above it 
{as at c. Pl. i. fig. 8.] and at the inftant of the ftroke, a very 
denfe 


io 


Sec.IV. | THE ELECTRIC SHOCK. 631 


denfe {park of electric fire was feen darting the whole length 
of the tube, When three perfons befides myfelf joined hands, 
it fhook all our arms greatly. 

Tue tube could not be difcharged by putting one hand fo 
near the other, unlefs that part of the tube had been brought 
to the conduétor in charging it; and if any particular part of 
the tube only, had been brought to. the conduétor, the 
difcharge could not be made without touching that part. 

Wuen the tube had given a fhock from any one place, it 
would give one or two more fmaller thocks, from ‘other 


places. 
Tue experiments I duit with this tube being certain and 


invariable, and the fhock I received from the other tubes 
precarious, I gave more particular attention to this, in order 
to afcertain the nature of this fhock; thinking that, if I 
could accomplith this, it would affift me in the inveftigation 
of the other. Accordingly, I coated about fix inches, near 
each end of the tube, [a and 4 Pl. i. fig. 8.] leaving the . 
fpace of about half a yard of uncoated glafs between the coat- 
ings; and obferved, that when I held one of thefe coatings in 
my hand, and prefented the other to the prime conductor, it 
always received a confiderable charge, and was difcharged in: 
ene bright fpark at the diftance of above an inch, and fome- 
times two inches, if, befides the coated part, I had likewife 
prefented the: uncoated part to the prime conductor; and. 
fometimes the uncoated part would difcharge itfelf by a bright 
flath to the lower coating, leaving the coated part charged as 
before. If{I held the tube by the middle, where there was 
no coating, and prefented one of the coatings to the tepaete 
tor,. it received a pretty good charge. 

I THEN 


632 A NEW METHOD OF GIVING Parr VIII, 


I TEN ftood upon an infulated ftool, and prefenting one of 
the coatings to be charged, while I held'the other ; I obferv- 
ed, that it received not more than one fourth part of the 
charge it had before; upon which I immediately concluded, 
that the lower coating muft have been charged negatively, 
whilft the upper was charged pofitively. This was quite con+ 
firmed by obferving, that {parks could be drawn from my 
body, while I ftood upon the ftool prefenting the tube to be 
charged, but no longer than till the tube had received its 
full charge; and that then the explofion was as ares as ‘ithad 
been when I ftood upon the. floor.” 

'-Wuen infulated the tube, by placing it in a glafs vette, 

it was ftill lefs capable of taking a charge than when I ftood 
upon a ftool and held it, this method making a more perfe& 
infulation. If any conductor was prefented to the lower coat- — 
ing while the other was held to the prime conduétor, {parks 
iffued from it very plentifully, till it had got a confiderable’ 
charge; when thofe {parks entirely ceafed, and the yr bp 
trial, gave a very great explofion. 

THESE experiments make the theory of this new method 
of giving the electric fhock pretty obvious. The eleétric 
matter thrown upon the upper coating repels an equal quan- 
tity from the infide of the tube oppofite to it; which, pafling 
freely through the vacuum, (as is vifible in the dark) is ac- 
cumulated on the infide of the other extremity of the tube, 
and thereby repels a-quantity from the lower coating : fo that 
the two coatings being in oppofite tates, though on the fame 
fide of the tube, the fame kind of hock is given by them, as 
if they had been on oppofite fides. a) 


és 


Bee 


Sec. V. THE ELECTRIC SHOCK. 633 


BeinG fully fatisfied with the experiments made by thefe 
two coatings, and the theory of them, I amufed myfelf with 
coating the middle part of the tube in various ways. 

Wuen the three coatings were about the fame fize, and 


placed at equal intervals ; which ever of them was held in ~ 


the hand, the other two were charged and difcharged fepa- 
rately. If the coating of one of the ends was held in the 
hand, and the other two were charged, the greateft explofion 
was from that which was difcharged firft. If thofe two coat- 
ings were placed near one another, they were both difcharged 
by the attempt to difcharge either of them, and a flath of 
light was feeri betwixt them both. In this cafe the explofion 
was fometimes made at the diftance of two inches and a half. 

Wuen the middle coating was made very large, and placed 
contiguous to the upper, the explofion was lefs ; a {pontaneous 
difcharge being foon made to the lower coating. 

Wuen the middle coating was taken away, it often hap- 
pened that, in drawing the whole tube over the prime con- 
ductor, beginning at the upper coating ; when it came tothe 
lower, by which I held it, a {park would dart to it from all 
the uncoated part of the tube, which difcharged the eleétri- 


city of that part, while the upper coating ftill retained its 


proper charge. 
Wuen this fpontaneous difcharge was not made, the ex- 


" plofion might be made at twice, once at the naked glafs, 


near the lower coating, and again at the upper coating. If 


the difcharge was firft made at the upper coating, there remain- _ 


ed very little for the lower part of the tube. And if the ex- 
plofion was made about the middle of the tube, the whole 


was difcharged at once, and in avery beautiful manner. 


4M I must 


634. EXPERIMENTS RELATING TO Pans Vi 


’ I must leave my reader to compare the theory of th 
with that given by the long and open tubes, as I am not ab 
to do it to my entire fatisfaction without more | 
which, as I obferved, are protic, and which | 7 bad'bot 
leifure to attend to. $ ‘nt eee hyMiy / 
As this courfe of experiments was begun by an atci 
obfervation of the different electric properties of 1 
glafs, I thall (after this long excurfion, which I 
conclude with an experiment or two relating n 
ately to the original fubjeét of them. va 
Imacrninc that the difference between nev 
might be owing to the larger fuperficial pores 
which made it approach to the nature of a_ 
which contraéted with time; I thought it might 
determined by the experiment of the metallic tinge, 
wider pores receiving it better than the fmaller ; a 1 
not difappointed in my expectations. No r tl 5 
I feveral times laid two glafs tubes, one a very 
the other quite new, clofe together, with a piece 
or copper between them ; ‘and though I vari 
of them in every way that I could think of, © 
tubes for others; I always fourid the new glafs 
much fairer, more beautiful, and indelible im 
the old glafs. Twice the quantity of eis ea y 
the cafes ftruck into it. 


. 


Sec, VI. §. BECCARIA’s THEORY. 635 


8. C TD ON. OVE 


EXPERIMENTS TO VERIFY SEVERAL PARTICULARS OF 
SIGNIOR BECCARIA’s THEORY or ELECTRICITY; 
PARTICULARLY CONCERNING THE ELECTRIC MATTER 
CARRYING INTO ITS PATH LIGHT SUBSTANCES TO ASSIST 
ITS PASSAGE. 


EING greatly ftruck with Signior Beccaria’s theory con- 
cerning the paflage of the electric matter from the earth 
to the clouds, previous to a thunder ftorm, and thinking his 
xperiments to prove the power of electricity to condu& into 
its path light fubftances that could affift its paflage not quite 
Latisfactory, I endeavoured to afcertain the fa& in a better 
rnanner, and {hall lay before my readers the refult of my ex~ 
periments. ; ; 
Novemssr the gth. I difcharged frequent fhocks, both of 
a common jar, and another of three fquare feet, through 
trains of brafs duft, laid on a ftool of baked wood, mak- 
ing interruptions in various parts of the train; and always 
found the brafs duft {cattered in the intervals, fo as to connect 
4Ma2 the 


636 EXPERIMENTS RELATING TO Parr VIII. 


the two disjoined ends of the train: but then it was likewife 
fcattered nearly as much from almoft all other parts of the 
train, and in all directions. The fcattering from the train 
itfelf was, probably, occafioned by {mall eleétric {parks. be- | 
tween the particles of the duft; which, caufing a vacuum 
in the air, drove all that light matter to a confiderable dif- 
tance. But the particles of the duft which were ftrowed in the 
intervals of the train, fome of which were, at leaft, three 
inches, could hardly be conveyed in that manner. — wh | 
Wuen fimall trains were laid, the difperfion wie the ‘mot 
confiderable, and a light was very vifible in the dark, illu- | 
minating the whole circuit. It made no difference, ‘ins rd 
of thefe experiments, which way the fhock was di 
Wuen I laid a confiderable quantity of the duft at the ends — 
of two pieces of chain, through which the fhock paffed, a 
diftance of about three inches from one another, the 
always difperfed over the whole interval, but chief 
fo that the greateft quantity of it lay in arch 
both ways, and leaving very little of it in the mi he 
path. It is probable, that the electric peti 
{pread it equably, but that the vacuum made in th 4 
paffage of the fluid from one heap of duft to the» 
perfed it from the middle part. + tii DORM 
I ruen infulated a jar of three fquare feet, and 
adjoining glafs ftand laid a heap of brafs duft; and 
tance.of feven or eight inches a brafs rod communica 
the outfide of the jar. Upon bringing another rod, ce 
ting with the infide, upon the heap of duft, it was 
in a beautiful manner, but not one way more than’ a 


Shc 


Sec. VI. §. BECCARIA’s THEORY. ~~ 637 


However, it prefeatly: reached the’rod. communicating with 
the outfide. 

Maki1nc two Babs shang eight inches afunder, I brought 
one rod’ communicating with the infide upon one of them, 
and another. rod) communicating with the outfide upon the 
other. Both: the heaps were difperfed in all directions, and 
foon met; prefently after which the jar was difcharged, by 
means of this difperfed duft, in one full explofion. When 
the two heaps were too far afunder to promote a full difcharge 
‘atonce, a gradual: difcharge was made franee the (catered 
particles of the duft. 

Wuew-one heap Hy duft was lei: in mthe center of the fiand, 
and the two. rods were made to approach on each fide of it, 
they each attracted the duft from the fide of the heap next to 
them, and repelled it again:in all dire€tions. When they 
‘came. very: near the heap, the difcharge was made through it, 
‘without giving it any particular’ motion. 

Axx thefe experiments fhow that light oilice, poffeffed of 
a confiderable fhare of electricity, difperfe in all direétions, 
carrying the electric matter to places not abounding with it ; 
-and that they fometimes promote a’ fudden difcharge of great 
quantities of that matter from places where it was lodged, to 
-places where there was a defect of it. But an accident led me 
to a much more beautiful, and. perhaps a) more fatisfactory 
manner of demonftrating the laft part of this propofition, than 
-any that I hit upon while I was purfuing my experiments 
with that defign. 

. . Decemser the 11th. eee a drop of water upon the 

‘Knob of a brafs rod communicating with the infide of my 
‘battery, in order'to obferve what variety it might occafion ‘in 
ik Ga » the 


638 EXPERIMENTS RELATING TO Part VIL 


the:circular fpots, which. will be mentioned hereafter; Iwas 
greatly furprifed to find the explofion made all. shmnsee i, 
the diftance of two inches. De ‘as 

I, aFTERWARDs, put fome brafs duft upon acgingeol me 
tal communicating with the infide of the battery, and making — 
the difcharge through the duft, it exploded at the diftance of 
an inch and a half. The duft rofe towatds the difcharging 
rod, and from thence was difperfedin all directions. 

Turse experiments are the more remarkable, as they 
demonftrate’ fo great a difference between the diftance at 
which the battery may be made to difcharge at once, by the 
help of thefe light bodies, and without them. The difcharge 
of the battery by the knobs of brafs rods, in the open air, is 
at the diftance of about half an inch; \ but, by this means, 
we fee it made at three or four times’ that diftance. 

Untess a perfon try the following experiment, he 
hardly conceive the extreme probability of the clouds and 1 
rain being poffefled of an electric virtue, in order to their 
uniform difperfion, according to Signior Beccaria’s theory. 
Put a quantity of brafs duft into acoated jar, and when it 
is charged, invert it, and throw fome of the duft out. It is’ 
very pleafing to fee with what exact uniformity it will be 
fpread over any flat furface, and fall juft like rainor fhow. In ~ 
no other method can it be fpread fo equably. fs 


Ay 


‘ 5 (TF 

Ir is taken for granted by Signior Beccaria and others, 
that perfons are fometimes killed by lightning without being 
really touched by it, a vacuum of air only being fuddenly 

made near them, and the air rufhing out of their lungs to 
fupply it; and with fo much violence, that they could never 
recover their breath. As a proof of this, he fays, that the 
lungs 


Sec. VI. S. BECCARIA’s THEORY. 639 


lungs of fuch perfons are found flaccid ; whereas, when they 
are properly killed by the eleétric thock, the lungs are found 
inflated. This account’ always appeared to me. highly impro- 
bable. It determined me, ‘however, to make a few experi- 
ments, inorder, if poffible,' to afcertain the fact iwith fome 
degree of exaétnefs. The refult was as follows. 

DescemBer the 18th. I placed that part of an egg thell in 
which is a bladder of air within’ an inch of the place where I 
made the explofion of the battery, on the furface of fome 
quickfilver'; when the bladder was inftantly burft, and the 
greateft part of it torn quite away. The thell was quite dry; 
fo that ‘the bladder could not‘ ftretch in the'leaft.) 

- [7 is evident from this experiment, that there is’ a fenfible 
expanfion of the neighbouring air, ‘to fill a vacuum made by 
the electric explofion’; but that this is fo confiderable as to 
occafion the’ fuffocation and death of any animal,’ is, = 
very improbable from the following facts. 2351 

‘IT pur a cork as flightly as poffible in the mouth of a fenall 
phial s but, though I held it exceeding near the place of the 
explofion, it was not drawn out. 

I mape the explofion pafsiover the furface of a moift blad- 
der, ftretched on the‘mouth of a galley-pot ; ‘but it produced 
no fenfible effe@ upon it. “I alfo‘held at one time the bill of 
a robim red breaft, and at another time the nofe of amoufe 
pear the eleétric explofion, but they did not feem to be at all 
affected by it. In order to examine the ftate of the lungs, I 
killed fmall animals by fhocks difcharged both through the 
brain, and through the lungs; but when they were diffected 
there appeared no difference. The lungs were inthe very 
fame ftate as when they were killed in another manner. 

To 


640 EXPERIMENTS RELATING TO Parr VIII 


To thefe mifcellaneous experiments, intended to verify fe- 
veral particulars of; Signior Beccaria’s theory of electricity, I 
fhall add a {mall fet, which, though they were begun before 
I had feen that.author, are in fome refpects fimilar to his cu - 
rious experiment-of difcharging)a plate of glafs hanging by a 
filken ftring without giving motion to it ; his being defigned 
to afcertain the effect of ‘the difcharge upon the glafs, and 
mine refpecting the, aerate fubftances that formed: the 
circuit. 

OcroseEr the el To ietabiade. if poffible, ‘thedise@ion 
of the electric fluid in an electric explofion, I hung feveral brafs 
balls by filken ftrings, and difcharged fhocks through. them, 
when. they. were\as much at reft as I could make them; but 
I could not perceive that any motion was given to them by 
the ftroke. Afterwards, I difcharged a jar a great number 
of times. through {mall globules of quickfilver,, laid on a 
{mooth piece of glafs ;, but could not perceive that they were 
driven one’ way, more than another, though they were often 
thrown into diforder ; probably. by the repulfion of the air, oc 
cafioned by the vacuum of the explofion, 

I ruen placed four cork. or pith balls, at equal “difances, 
upon a ftool of baked wood, with a piece of chain at the 
fame diftance from the outermoft balls; and obferyed, that, 
upon every attempt to make a difcharge, the two middle balls 
were driven clofe together, while the two outermoft were 
each of them attracted to the piece of chain that was next to 
it. Then, laying a great number of bits of threads i in the 
fame manner upon the ftoo], feveral of the pieces that. lay 
near the chain ftuck to them, and a great number of thofe 
that lay in the middle were driven together i inaheap. 

‘THE 


SecyVI..© S.. BECCARIA’s » THEORY. 643 


Tue attraGtion to the chains I attribute to the electricity 
given to them by their connection with the jar, which would 
be greatly encreafed by the attempt to make an explofion ; 
and the crowding together of the pieces in the middle of the 
circuit, I attribute to the current of air blowing them toge- 
ther from both the extremities of the chain. Thus part of 
the flame of a candle next to an ele¢trified point will be at- 
tracted by the power of electricity, while the reft of the ecg 
will be repelled from it by the current of air, __ 

THESE experiments led me to make.a difcharge through an 
infulated bell, in order to obferve in what manner it would 
be affected by the electric fhock only, when it was not 
touched by any thing elfe. Accordingly, I made the dif- 
charge of the battery through it feveral times; and by each 
explofion it was made to ring, as loud as it could be made-to 
do with a pretty fmart ftroke of ones finger nail, sy uf 

I atso made a difcharge of the battery through the oitelis 
nal coating of a glafs jat, - bur without touching i it with the 
difcharging rods; and it plainly, unica the fame, tone, -as 


whien it was rung BY pereuffic ion, dest 


sidunin sew 1 Jd18s srt’ 4 


. 4 : t.- ane 
(ia stiiw 5808 yrenib p10 e1 


gn? “SECTION 


62 EXPERIMENTS Wits” PARP VEE 
$ ‘ th yd igtie yp eementane Rhein iy 00 4 


ot odd 3 yo GSuy oflemig 

at Veber) pa ait wis ‘Sieh i ; 
. op SANG 25s atib veers mili les ’ 

rd ean ihioniin ‘y 

8 ” c T aS ° w : vy” a a 

: obamen ~ lbs Sedaeaeaeal 

siidold to cote MEP to Riba - 


s fei thin, shave ‘occurred, in| 
periments, r ne ‘to, charging « 
commion jars and large cleetical atteries, w 
feeh in the writings of any electricians ; % le 
faéts are not eafily accounted for, T fhall mentior 
more remarkable of them, juft as they happened. ilo 
 Aprix the 28th. As I was amufing myfelf with « 
three jars of the ordinary fize, while they ftood u; 
plate on the table, with their wires at different di tt 
the fame prime conduétor, which was fixed on Di 
ed wood; I obferved, that whenever one of the. 
ftood next to the conduétor, difcharged Sa 
would difcharge themfelves too; though they | 
having received their full charge, being placed at 
tance from the common conduétor, and onfeque: 


~~ 


Sec. VII. ELECTRICAL EXPLOSIONS. 643 


taken but few nets in comparifon of that which nee the 
neareft. 

- A variety of experiments feem to fhow, that, while a 
jar continues charged, the electric -matter is continually infi-- 
nuating itfelf farther and farther into the fubftance of the 
glafs, fo that the hazard of its burfting is the ene fome 
time'after the charging is over. 

May the 26th. After having charged forty one jars together, 
each containing about a fquare foot of coated glafs, I let 
them ftand about a minute and a half, while F was adjufting 
fome part’ of the apparatus, in order to make the difcharge ; 
when they exploded by the burfting of one of the number. 
I obferved alfo, that the jar which was bur{t was at a confi- 
derable diftance from the place where I faw the flafh at the 
wires.: It was'alfo broke through in two different places. 

For the fame reafon, there is no being’ fure that jars, 
which have ftood one difcharge, will bear another equally 
high. I am confident that feveral of mine have burft with a 
much lefs charge than they’ had aCtually held before. 

| June the agth. A jar of an otdinaty fize, which had been 
in conftant ufe for feveral months; and which had difcharged 
itfelf more than a hundred times without any injury, at length 
burft, as I was difcharging it at the prime conductor. ‘Fhe 
hole was at a different place from that at which the diftharge 
was made, » but this:does not always: happen. The tip of my 
little finger happened to lie very lightly on’ the place, and T 
felt it was burft by a fmall pricking, as of a pin, though: the 
explofion at the-conduétor was nearly. equal’ to that of any 
other-difcharge. ‘The coating of a jar contiguous to one 4 
is burft is always: melted by the explofion, 

I 4Na2 pan 


644 EXPERIMENTS | wire) Parr Villy 


, June.the 2sth..A {mall thin.phial, which had been charged, 
fingly as high as it could bear, fo as to have difcharged itfelf,, 
and alfo in conjunction with four others of its, own fize, ,burft 
by. a fpontaneous explofion, when it was cheers in, conjunc; 
tion with a battery. t Ushi yinitoun 

_ I wap never heard of a jar busting’ in more than one places, 
or more than one jar in a battery, burfting at.the fame. time ;, 
but. I have often found, to my coft, that this. event is very 
poflible. In this cafe, there muft be a/difcharge at more, 
places than one at the fame time: .and,.. befides, , it feems to, 
follow.from it, that. whenever, there, is a. folicitation, as, we 
may fay, to difcharge at one place, the effort to,difcharge at, 
every other place is encreafed at the fame time. 

Ir has frequently happened with me, that jars havejbeen, 
burft_at_the inftant that. I was making the difcharge inthe, 
common way ;and when I have come to charge them 
have appeared.to be burft, in fome place of the battery where I 
never expected it. Two inftances of this kind happened inthe: 
ree mentioned above; . but the moft remarkable | 

this kind happened the 31ft.,of May, when a battery of about 
forty jars, each containing a fquare foot of coated: glafs dif-: 
charged itfelf. 6.3, pine tts 

Upon examination, I found that fix of the jars: were burft, 
one had the tinfoil coating on the outfide quite melted, in a 
circular {pot about half an inch in:diameter; and in. ide 
it was burned quite black,.near.an inch’ and an half. A:fe- 
cond was melted, on the outfide, about three quarters ri 
inch in diameter, and the: black {pot inthe infide wa 
inches. A third had one hole made in’the form of « 
more fmall cracks like radii proceeding from a enter 


Sec. VII.’ | ELECTRICAL EXPLOSIONS. 645° 


could be counted. And there was hardly one of the jars that 
was burft with a fingle hole. Some were burft in feven or 
eight different places, of which fome were very remote from 
others; but generally there ‘was one principal hole, and feve- 
ral {maller, but independent ones, in the neighbourhood of 
it, as within half an inch, an inch, or two inches from it. 
June the 14th. The above-mentioned battery difcharged 
itfelf once more; when three jars were burft, and one of 
them, befides its principal hole, had a circular row of frac- 
turés, quite round the hole, at the diftance of about half an 
inch. ‘This appearance ftruck me as fomething very femark~ 
able, but fome light may perhaps be thrown upon it by a 


fubfequent courfe of experiments. . Each of the fmaller’ frac~ 


tures was about a tenth of an inch in length. ‘ 

NovemsBer the17th. Having charged both my batteries, 
one of them, at that time, of thirty one fquare feet, and the’ 
other of thirty two, I made the explofion; when one jar in 
each battery was afterwards found to be broken. They broke 
at the inftant of the difcharge, fo that I did not fufpect what 
had happened. Both the batteries had frequently borne a 
much higher charge. In one of the fmaller jars, the coating, 
befides being burft oppofite to the hole, was rent about an’ 
inch and an half along a crack that was made from it. 

Wuen jars difpofed in batteries have been burft in this 
manner, I have never failed to obferve one circumftance. 
which appears to me truly remarkable. It is, that though,’ 
in this cafe, feveral paflages be opened for reftoring the equi- 
librium of the electric fluid, yet the whole feems to pafs in 
the circuit that is formed for it externally. At leaft, the ef-’ 
we of the explofion is not fenfibly diminithed, upon any’ 

fubftances’ 


66 EXPERIMENTS wars, Pane VIL. 


fubftances that are expofed to it, This I had a fair oppor- 
tunity of obferving when I was tranfimitting the explofion of 
the battery through wires of different metals, I found th 
the utmoft force of the battery would do little moi 
melt a piece of filer wire on which I was trying ie and yet 
it was, at one time, totally difperfed by Smee 
making which three jars were broke in cient g 
battery. 

Tue moft remarkable fracture I remember 
jar an eighth ofan inch thick, and which was ey fo 

long time, thought to be too thick for ufe. This jar, how 

ever, which had never held but a moderate char; 
{pontaneoufly ; when there was found in it one ho 
is commonly obferved, from which extended ty 
met on the oppofite fide of the jar, fo. that it 
parts : but, befides this, there were two other 
vifible to the naked eye, at fome inches difta 
principal hole, and confiderably diftant from. on 
Yet thefe holes, when examined with a. micr 
plainly fractures, like others. made. in the ; 
having a white {peck i in the middle, — One. of th 
the external coating, but not above the jnteznaly, 

I nap frequently been much farprifed. at th 
at which feveral of my jars would difcharge: thea 
of five inches being very common. . This induc 
at what diftance I could make that fpontancous di 

_ Fepruary 2ift. I got a jar, eight ie a I 
depth, and three in diameter, . Finding it difcharged 
very eafily, when coated in, the ufual, PAAR i 
four inches from the top; I cut. the coati : 
brought it within two inches and a quecter piety he 


Sec. VII. © ELECTRICAL EXPLOSIONS. 647 


when it ftill retained the fame property ; and; at length, it 
burft by a difcharge through a white {peck of unvitrified matter, 
an inch and three quarters above the top of the coating. 

I THEN procured a jar made blue with zaffre, feven inches 
and a half high, and two inches and an half in diameter. I 
coated of it only one inch and a quarter from the bottom, and 
yet it difcharged itfelf very readily. I afterwards, by degrees, 
cut the coating down to little more than half an inch from 
the bottom, and {till the difcharge continued to be made as 
before. This property it retained till the month of O@ober 
following, when it was broke by an accident. 

I nave another blue jar, of nearly the fame fize with the 
former, wich is almoft full of brafs duft, but has no coating 
at all on the outfide. Yet, if I fet this jar upon the table, 
in contaét with a fingle piece of brafs chain, going quite 
round it, and lying upon the table, it will difcharge itfelf the 
whole length of the glafs. N. B. The manner in which 
the uncoated part of thefe jars becomes charged exhibits an 
exceeding beautiful appearance, efpecially in the dark; the 
fire flathing from the top of the coating, in the form of bran- 
ches of trees, firfton one fide of the glafs, and then on the other, 
-and growing larger and larger till they go over the top. 

I Ave made fome experiments, to try how thick a plate 
of glafs may be charged, but I have not been able to af- 
Certain this circumftance with any degree of exactnefs : I only 
found, that I was not able to give the leaft charge to a plate 
of glafs half an inch thick, when it was not warmed. © It was 
the bottom of a large glafs tumbler; but meeting with it only 
upon a journey at the houfé of an ingenious eleGtrician, I had. 
NO opportunity of making many experiments upon it. “I ima= 
¢ ; ' ‘gine 


648 EXPERIMENTS wits Parr VIII. 


gine that warming it would have made it capable of being 
charged. Glafs. of a quarter el an inch. thick init ere a 
_pretty good charge. 
Mr. KInNeERSLEY’s experiments, p. 426. rats ‘me’ no 
reafon to doubt; but that Florence flafks were capable of 
receiving a charge like any other thin glafs, which might be 
made a conductor by heat, I imagined I could foon conftrué 
a very {trong and very cheap eleétrical battery out of them, 
Accordingly I procured a few, for a {pecimen, but was great- 
ly furprized to find that the electricity went through | them, 
when quite. cold, like water through a fieve, without mak- 
ing any fracture in them: for they continued to hold the 
fame {mall charge, which was different in different flatks, 
Mentioning this difappointment to Mr. Canton, he informed 
me, that he had met with the fame, and thatthe permeabi- 
lity of this kind of glafs to the electric fluid was owing 
{mall unvitrified parts which may be feen in them. I t ‘ 
it might be of ufe to publith this faét, as it may prevent o- 
ther perfons from being difappointed in the fame expectations, 
As glafs had generally been charged when it was fmooth, 
and eleétrics which had the property of rough glafs, when 
excited, were exceeding difficult to charge; I had the « curi- 
ofity to try what might be done with rough glaft itfelf. 
cordingly, I firft made part of a jar rough, conn 
infide with the outfide coating ;. thinking that the re 
might poffibly promote a fpontaneous difcharge ; but I 
it was not made in that place preferably to any other. 
terwards took the polith from all that part of the out! 
jar that was above the coating, but it was charged 
charged exactly as before. Laftly I made a plate 


Sec. VII. ELECTRICAL EXPLOSIONS. 649 


rough on both fides, taking off all its polifh, and found that it 
received a charge-as well as a fmooth plate. 

Tue manner in which tubes and plates of gla have 
broken, when I have failed to ftrike a metallic’ tinge into- 
them, by the difcharge of an ele€trical battery, have fome- 
times been attended with circumftances which I caniot eafily 
account for. The following are the faéts. 

-Decemser the 3d. Endeavouring to fix a metallic tinge 
upon .a flat piece of glafs, it was broken by the explofion, 
parallel to the line along which the metal lay, at about an 
inch diftance, but not where the tinge itfelf was. 

In attempting to give a metallic tinge to a part of a long 
glafstube, it broke, though not in the place where the tinge was 
made, but on the oppofite fide, which was fhattered all to 
pieces. The leaf gold had been bound tight to the glafs, 
under a piece of pafteboard, which covered the gold, but 
not all the tube. Another tube alfo’ was broken in large 
fragments where the metal had been put on, but into fmall 
{plinters on the oppofite fide; and for the {pace of fix or feven 
inches further, it was not broken at all on the fide of the 
metal, but very much on the other fide. 

Ar another time, in attempting the fame thing with ano- 
ther glafs tube; the end of it, which was near a foot diftant 
from the place where the metal was laid, and which was a 
little cracked in an oblique direGtion, broke off in a round 
piece. 

As few experiments have been publithed about melting wires, 
and procuring globules of metal by eleétrical difcharges, and 
as feveral things have occurred in my attempts that way, which 

RE AAO aipie perhaps 


650 EXPERIMENTS witn Parr VII, 


perhaps have not occurred to other perfons, I thall mention 
a few of the moft material circumftances. They will, at 
leaft, ferve as a dire€tion to thofe who may be difpofed ed 
attempt the fame thing. 

I nap frequently attempted to procure thofe beautifal 
globules of metal, mentioned, p. 293, fome of which I had 
feen with Mr. Canton; and for that purpofe had made the 
difcharge through {mall wires laid in the bottom of china 
bowls, &c. but always without fuccefs. At length, I 
thought of inclofing the wires in {mall tubes ; and this expe- 
dient fully anfwered my purpofe: for, November the rath. 


difcharging a battery of thirty two {quare feet through an iron © 
wire inclofed in a fmall glafs tube, I found innumerable glo- 7 


bules of the metal, of very different fizes.. The whole piece 
melted was about two inches. Breaking the’ glafs tube, I 
found the infide furface uniformly covered with thofe glo- 
bules, and a black duft, both fixed into the glafs; fo that 
they could not be feparated, without tearing bila pert of the 
glafs. Skauisiin 
THINKING to ienid this inconvenience, ‘I fixed the fimall 
wire in the center of a glafs tube, of, at leaft, a quarter of 
an inch in diameter; but, upon the difcharge, this tube, 
though much wider than the former, was uniformly covered 
with the globules, and the black duft, which: ftuck very 
faft to it, though the metal did not feem to have penetrated 
into the fubftance of the glafs. When the tube was 


I fcraped off part of the black lining, and the part. next. the fit 
“ig Ait. 


glafs looked like a thin plate of the metal. 
Imacininc that the melted metal would not 
clofely to a condu@ting fubftance, as it had to the gla 


FS sal 


Sec. VII. - ELECTRICAL’ EXPLOSIONS. 652 


inclofed the .wire im a paper tube:a quarter of an inch wide: 
Upon opening it after the difcharge, iit was found ‘uniformly 
covered: with that black duft, and the ftairiwas:every where 
indelible. Sparks of fire had been feen three feet from: the 
place of difcharge, ‘but no part of the métal could be fouhd. 

- I ruen confined the wire clofer, wrapping it tight “in pa. 
per. -Upon the difcharge, a gteat number of {parks were 
feen, for about a fecond of time, a quarter of a yard from the 
paper, which was burned through in feveral places. Very 
few pieces could be found; but thofe were pretty large and 
irregular. I now found, that, in order to produce thefe glo- 
bules, the charge muft be moderate, that when the charge 
was very high, the whole fubftance of the wire was difperfed 
in particles too fmall to be found; and, on the other hand, 
when the charge was not fufficient, the metal was melted 
into fragments too large to form themfelves into regular 
globules. 

Wirx the fame battery I once melted a piece of iron wire. 
one feventieth of an inch in diameter, when a piece of it was 
thrown quite acrofs the table, to the diftance of about fix 
feet; where it fell upon a bureau, then tumbled down to 
the ground, and continued glowing hot all the time. At o- 
ther times, fparks from melted iron have been thrown three 
yards, in oppofite direGtions, from the place of the fufion, 
and continued a fenfible {pace of time red hot upon the floor. 

Ar another time I had a very fine opportunity of obferving 
what part of the conduétors which form an eleric circuit 
are moft affected by the explofion: for, upon difcharging a 
battery of fifty one f{quare feet through an iron wire nine 
inches long, the whole of it was glowing hot and continued 

40.2 fo 


652 EXPERIMENTS Parr Vit. 
fo for fome feconds; the middle part | 
while’both the extremities were fenfibly red.‘ 
ning it ‘afterwards, both the extremities were 
melted; an inch or two of -the part next to them were ex- 
ceeding brittle, and crumbled into fmall pieces upon being 
handled ; eesenctyperiitereryit a 
bevlecesientriesigalide, onion ie here 


Sec. VIII. ON ANIMALS. 653 


ve, 8 cb ON Vill 


ExPeRIMENTS on ANIMALS, 


SI have conftructed an electrical battery of confidera- 

bly greater force than any other that I have yet heard 

of, and as I have’ fometimes expofed animals to the thock of 

it, and have particularly attended to feveral circumftances, 

which have been overlooked, or mifapprehended by others ; 

it may not be improper to relate a few of the cafes, in which 
the facts were, in any refpect, new, or worth notice. 

June the 4th. I killed a rat with the difcharge of two jars, 
each containing three fquare feet of coated glafs: The ani- 
mal died immediately, after being univerfally convulfed, at 
the inftant of the ftroke. After fome time, it was carefully 
difleted ; but there was no internal injury perceived, parti- 
cularly no extravafation, either in the, abdomen, thorax, or 
brain. . . 

June the 19th. I killed a pretty large kitten with the dif- 
charge of a battery of thirty three fquare feet; but no other 
effect was obferved, except that a red fpot,was found on the 
pericranium, where the fire entered. 1 endeavoured to bring 

it 


654 EXPERIMENTS Parr VIII. 


it to life, by diftending the lungs, blowing with a quill into 
the trachea, but to no purpofe. The heart beat a fhort time 
after the ftroke, but refpiration ceafed immediately. 

June the 2rft. I killed a {mall threw with the difcharge 
of a battery of thirty fix fquare feet, but no other effec was 
perceived, except that the hair of the forehead was finged, 
and in part torn off. There was no extravafation any where, 

. though the animal was fo {mall, and the force with which it was 
killed fo great. This faét, and many others of a fimiliar na- 
ture, make me fufpect fome miftake, in cafes where larger 
animals are faid to have had all their blood veffels burft by 
a much inferior force. 

In all the accounts that I have met with’ of animals killed 
by the eleétric thock, the victinis were either final quadrus 
peds, or fowls; and they are all reprefented: as killed £6 fud= 
denly, that it could not be feen how they were ‘affected *pre- 
vious to their expiration. In fome of my experiments, the 
great force of my battery has afforded me a pretty fair op- 
portunity of obferving in what manner the animal fyftem is 
affected by the eleétric thock, the animals which Ihave ex- — 
pofed to it being pretty large; fo that a better’ judgement 
may be formed of their fenfations, and confequently of ‘the 
immediate caufe of their death, by external figns:’ Ido not 
pretend to draw any conclufion myfelf from the following 
facts. I have only noted them as carefully as I could, for ties 
the ufe of phyficians and anatomifts. _ a i 

June 26th. I difcharged a battery of thirty eight {quare ae 
feet of coated glafs, through the head, and out at the tailof = 
a full grown cat, three or four years old. At that inftant, : ser! 
was violently convulfed all over. After a fhort refpite, there 


= 


Sec. VIII. ON ANIMALS. 655 


came on finaller convulfions, in various mufcles, particularly 
on the fides ; which terminated in a violent convulfive refpi- 
ration, attended with a rattling in the throat. This continu- 
ed five minutes, without any motion that could be called 
breathing, but was fucceeded by an exceeding quick refpirati- 
on, which continued near half an hour. Towards the end 
of this time, fhe was:able to: move her head, and fore feet, 
fo as to pufh herfelf backwards on the floor : but the was not 
able to move her hind feet in the leaft, notwithftanding the 
fhock had not paffed through them. While fhe continued in 
this condition, I gave her a fecond ftroke, which was attend- 
ed, as before, with the violent convulfion, the thort refpite, 
and the convulfive refpiration ; in which, after ae 
about a minute, fhe died. 
- Brine willing to tty, for once, the effect of a much greater 
fhock than that which killed the cat upon a larger animal, I 
gave an explofion of fixty two fquare feet of coated glafs toe dog 
of the fize of a common cur. The moment he-was’ftruck, 
which was on the head (but, not having a very good light, I 
could not tell exactly where) all his limbs were extended, 
he fell backwards, and lay without .any motion, or fign of 
life, for about a minute. Then» followed. conyulfions, . but 
not very violent, in all his limbs ; and after that a convulfive 
refpiration, attended with a fmall rattling in the throat. In 
about four minutes from the time that he was ftruck,. he was 
able to move, though’ he did not offer to walk :till about half 
an hour after ; invall which time, he kept difcharging:a great 
quantity of faliva; and there was alfo a great flux of rheum 
from his eyes,’ on which he kept putting his feet; though 
in‘other refpeéts he lay perfe@ily liftlefs. He'never opened 
iter his 


66 EXPERIMENTS Paar Vir 


his eyes all the evening in which he was ftruck, and the’ next 
morning he appeared to’ be quite blind, sre ee 
well in every other refpect. 

Havine difpatched the dog, by dsatiiig Sain through 
the hinder part of his head, Iexamined one of his eyes (both’ 
of which had an uniform bluifh caft, like a film over the pu- 
pil) and found all the three humours perfectly tranfparent, 
and, as far as could be judged, in their right ftate; but the 
cornea was throughout white and opaque, like a bit of griftle, 
and remarkably thick. 

Berore this experiment, I had imagined, that animals 
ftruck blind by lightning had probably a gutta ferena, on ac= 
count of the concuffion which is feemingly given to the 
nervous fyftem by the electric fhock ; whereas this cafe was 
evidently an inflammation, occafioned by the explofion being 
made fo near the eyes, terminating in a fpecies of the albugo; 
but which I fuppofe would have been incurable. One of the 
eyes of this dog was affected a little more than the other; 
owing, probably, to the ftroke being made a little nearer to 
one eye than the other. I intended to give the ftroke — 
an inch above theeyes. . 

In order to afcertain the effeéts of eletricity on an atin 
body, I, after this, began a courfe of experiments on the con- 
ducting power of its conftituent parts; and for fome time 
imagined that a piece of fpinal marrow of an ox conduéted 
fenfibly worfe than the mufcular flefh; but after a great 
number of trials with pieces of fpinal marrow from various 
animals, and pieces of mufcular flefh, of the fame fize and 
form, and in various ftates of moifture and drynefs, I gave up 
that opinion as fallacious; but I cannot help withing the ex- 

periments 


See. VIII. ON ANIMALS!” 657 


periments: were refumed:- with fome:more:accurate meafure of 
sehen power than hathyetbeen contrived2:{ 2°) 10 

Berne) willing: toi cbferves if ipoflible, vthe! inriabiatecsfee? 
of the ele&tric {hock 'on the heart dnd luhgs of animals, \I gave, 
June the sth: a thock from ‘fix fquare feet to a frog; in which 
the thorax had -beén) previoufly:Jaid: open, fo! that ithe: pulfa- 
tion lof the. heart might be feen:»: Upon 'receiving.the ftroke, 
thé; lungs ‘were-inftantly, inflated$ |\-ahd, together with :the 
other’ ‘contents: of the thorax, thrown quite out of the body. 
The heart, however, continued to beat, through very lan- 
guidly, and there was no other fign of life for about ten mi- 
nutes. After that, a motion was firft perceived under its 
jaws; which was propagated, by degrees, to the mufcles of 
the fides; and at laft the creature feemed as if it would have 
come to life, if it had not been fo much mangled. The 
ftroke entered the head, and went out at the hind feet. 

June the 6th. I difcharged a battery of thirty three {quare 
feet through the head and whole extended body of another 
frog. Immediately upon receiving the ftroke, there was, as 
it were, a momentary diftention of all the mufcles of the body, 
and it remained fhrivelled up in a moft furprifing manner. For 
about five minutes there appeared no fign of life, and the 
pulfation of the heart could not be felt with the finger. But 
afterwards, there firft appeared a motion under the jaws, then 
all along the fides, attended with convulfive motions of the 
other parts, and in about an hour, it became, to all appear- 
ance, as well as ever. 

Tue fame day, I gave the fame ftroke to two other frogs. 
They were affected in the fame manner, and perfectly re~ 
‘covered in lefs than three hours. 

4P THESE 


were? 


very of the frogs partly to the moifture, which a 
to cover their body, and which might tranfmit 
of the fhock; and partly to that provifion in. 
whereby they can fubfift a long time without t 
afcertain this, I would have given the thock to | se 
fithes, &c. and various ponupreaiiets nimals, but I ha 
‘ot an opportunity... Befides, it is paying dear for phillog 
cal difcoveries, to purchafe them atthe expence of hur ity 
3 : me 
ws) n tol wil dy ae? 4odjo.on as oroity, bag 
i bsvisvisg Wid" caw novo, s “et 
Sly <3 .2% > yd, bat ara 


if ; : 
I hiss j 
7 ih 96 390. 370-7 Bra 

25302 yi lo wisiiad 2 bs 

tone “Wo xbed / ee alodwy 

£ @ 
i bo 4 t 
‘3 : 
fi d od ton 


: ‘ iwicoudiiw bebopiae a i 
ihsuqe Is oa, witkeued 4i.<usos uu ae ut 


on 130 0 1.02 splot scat ¢ ds o¥eo Ti abs 
t 2 silt fe: bas I5 


boa oaagm ot 


a = ' 


Sec. EX... ELECTRICAL. EXPLOSIONS, 659 


aftil 


Ry 
SECT PONE 


EXxpERIMENTs ON THE CIRCULAR SPOTS mane on 
PIECES OF METAL BY LARGE ELECTRICAL EXPLOSIONS. 


N the courfes of experiments with which I fhall prefent 

the reader in this and the two following feétions, I can 
pretend to no fort of merit. I was unavoidably led to them 
in the ufe of a very great force of eleétricity. The firft new 
appearance, was in all the cafes, perfectly accidental, and en- 
gaged me to purfue the train; and the refults are fo far from 
favouring any particular theory or hypothefis of my own, that 
I cannot perfeétly reconcile the various phenomena to any 
hypothe fis. 

From the firft of my giving any alist attention to 
ele&trical experiments, I entertained a confufed notion, that 
a perfon would ftand the beft chance for hitting upon fome 
new difcovery by a greater force than had hitherto been ufed. 
Confidering the prodigious number of ele€trical machines that 
were in the hands of fo many ingenious men, in different 

4 P2 parts 


660 CIRCLES <|MADE) IBY! Paar VIII. 


parts of the world, I imagined that all that could be done iz 
little had been tried; ,and that the ufual experiments had 
been diverfified and combined in almoft every method pofli- 
ble; whereas, \fince electrical machines, I obferved, had, of 
late years, been gradually-reduced into lefs and lefs compafs, 
a great power of electricity would be almoft a new thing, and 
might therefore fupply the means of new experiments. Even 
Dr. Franklin’s force, I confidered, was fmall, in comparifon of 
what might eafily be, raifed, and without a very.great ex- 
“pence. 1ATAM. 10/eaDaFT 
Wirn thefe general and random expectations, I kept 
gradually increafing my quantity of coated glafs, till I got a 
battery of thirty, forty, fixty, and at length near eighty 
fquare feet ; and the reader will, in fome meafure, have feen 
already, that. Iwas not wholly difappointed in it., The fol- 
lowing courfes of experiments are more remarkable inftanc 
of the advantage I derived from this power of electricity. 


Tue firft remarkable fact that I was by this means led to difeo- ; 


ver, is that of the circles with which pieces of metal that receive 
electrical explofions are marked, I pretend not to account 
for. this phenomenon, by any theory of eledtricity. But, to 
enable the reader to account for it, I thall faithfully relate all 
the circumftances, and varieties in which it has been: exhi- 
bited, and the obfervations I have made upon it; and this I 
cannot do better than by writing the narrative, in the order 
in which the appearances occurred. 

June the 13th. 1766. After difcharging a battery, of about 
forty fquare feet, with a fmooth brafs knob, I accidentally 
obferved upon it a pretty large circular fpot, the center of 
which feemed to be fuperficially melted, in a great number 


of 


Sec. IX. ELECTRICAL EXPLOSIONS. 661 


of dots, larger near the center, and fimaller at a diftance: from 
it, Beyond. this central fpot was a circle of black duft, 
which was eafily wiped off; but, what I was moft ftruck 
with was, that, after an interruption of melted places, there 
was an entire and exact circle of fhining dots, confifting of 
places fuperficially melted, like thofe at the center. _The 
appearance of the whole, exclufive of the black duft, is re- 
prefented, plate i. fig. 5. No. 1. 

June the 14th. I ok the {pot upon fmooth pieces of lead, 
and filver. It was, in both cafes, like that on the brafs 
knob, only the central fpot on the filver confifted of dots 
difpofed with the utmoft exactnefs, like radii from the center 
of a circle, each of which terminated a little thort of the ex- 
ternal circle. 

ExamininG the {pots with a Brel tig both the fhining 
dots that formed the central {pot, and thofe which formed 
the external circle, appeared evidently to confift of cavities, re- 
fembling thofe of the moon, as, they appear through a tele- 
fcope, the edges projecting thadows into them, when they 
were held,in the fun. 

Tue moft beautiful appearance of this kind was exhibited 
by a fpot, which I took on a gold watch cafe. Befides the 
cavities, there were, in feveral places of the fpot, hollow 
bubbles of the metal, which muft have been raifed when it 
was in a ftate of fufion. . Thefe looked very beautiful when 
examined with a) microfcope in the fun, and were eafily 
diftinguifhed from the cavities, by having their radiant 
points (which were very remarkable, and dazzling to the eye) 
on oppofite fides to thofe of the cavities, with refpect to the 
fun. The whole progrefs feems to-have been firft a fufion, 

then 


662 CIRCLES MADE BY Parr VIII. 


then an attraction of the liquid metal, which helped to form the 
bubbles; and laftly the burfting of the bubbles, which left the 
cavities. N.B. By this explofion half an inch of a fteel wire, one 
fevenitieth of an inch in diameter, was melted, and entirely 
difperfed. In the difperfion, {parks of it were feen red hot, 
above half a yard from the place where the wire had lain, 
This circumftance I have frequently obferved fince. I have 
alfo feen fuch {parks fly from large brafs knobs, at the inftant 
of feveral explofions. 

I rook the fpot upon polifhed pieces of feveral metals, 
with the charge of the fame battery, and obferved that the 
cavities in them were fome of them deeper than others, as I 
thought, in the following order, beginning with the deraeh 

tin, lead, brafs, gold, feel, iron, copper, filver. 

I wrx not be very pofitive as to the order of fome of the 
metals, but filver was evidently not affected a fourth part fo 
much as gold, and much lefs than any of the others. The 
circles were marked as plain, but the impreflion was more 
fuperficial. Qu. Is this owing to the heat being fooner dif- 
fufed equably through a piece of filver, than through the 
fubftance of any other metal? 

I rHoucuT there might poffibly be fome difference in 
the circles on metals which had been a long time in a folid 
form, and thofe which had been lately fluid; and to afcertain 
it, I made the explofion between a piece of lead juft folid 
after melting, and another {mooth piece, that I had kept a 
confiderable time. The piece of frefh lead was melted more 
than the other, but there was no other difference between 
them. : 

Tue 


Sec. IX. ELECTRICAL EXPLOSIONS. _— 663 


- Tue femi-metals, as di/muth and zink, received the fame 
impreffion as the proper metals; being melted about as much 
as iron.’ : ; 

. I mane three difcharges between a piece of highly polifhed 
fteel, and a pieceof very fmooth iron; and in all the cafes 
thought the fteel was more deeply melted than the iron. I 
mention this experiment more particularly, on account of the 
fingular, and beautiful appearance of the circular fpot upon 


- the fteel in two of the difcharges. A circular fpot, of about 


an eighth of an inch in diameter, was uniformly melted, and 
pretty well defined; and there was a {pace round this central 
{pot, of the fame breath, uniformly filled with fmall melted 
places; but in one of them twice as large as in the other. 
They exhibited the exact appearance of a planet furrounded 
by a denfe atmofphere ; fuch as, I think, I remember feeing 
the figures of, in the plates of Burnet’s theory of the earth. 
The other circle upon the fteel was acommon one. | 

Wuen the kitten. above-mentioned .was killed, there was 
no circular fpot, or any fufion on the brafs knob. I have al- 
ways found it the moft perfect, when the circuit has been 
compofed of the beft conduétors, and had the feweft intervals. 

June the 19th. Hanging the cafe of one watch upon the brafs 
knobs communicating with the infide of the battery, and re- 
ceiving the explofion from it upon the cafe of another watch, 
which was fometimes of the fame, and fometimes of a differ- 
ent metal, and meafuring the circles afterwards; I found 
them to be very nearly of the fame diameter. The {mall va- 
rieties feemed tobe accidental; or at leaft did not depend, 
either upon the metal, or the dire@ion of the eleétric fluid. 
But I thought it pretty evident, from a great number of ex 


periments, 


; i, iY ip 
664. CIRCLES MADE» BY © eaia. 


periments, that the metal: which communicated with ithe 
outfide of the battery, and which I held in my hand t 
the explofion, was marked the more diftin@ly of | the 


Ir feemed that, when the battery was charged very high, 
the central fpot v was the moft — many e dots 


dots appearing beyotid the outer circle, and very 
it; fo that the beft way to procure a diftiné circle, 


take a moderate charge of a very large eR iv ferme ed 
the reafon why the outer circle cannot’ be per d, when 
only fmall jars are ufed ; “the cischenechaaal tii the 
being very fmall, and the charge generally too | 
very weak charge, it is too faint tobe perceiv 
fometimes, however, feen avery diftin& circle m 
two jars, each containing half a {quare foot of ec 
Tue diameter of the fpot feems to depend pon 
tity of coated glafs ; but in what Oe A 
accurately afcertained. dh .fesast 
I nave obferved a good deal. of variety in 
circles. Sometimes they have confifted of pre 
dots, difpofed at nearly equal. diftances,’ in an é: 
which, in the {paces betwixt each large dot, was 
by fmaller dots, vifible only by a microfcope./; 
rally, the external circle, confifts of a {pace 
placed irregularly, but fo that a line drawn th 
of them makes a pretty exact circle round the centr 
PresenTry after I had obferved the fingle 
gined that, whatever was the caufe of the app 
not) improbable, but that two jor more ¢ 
- might be procured, if a greater quantity of cc 


Sec. IX. ELECTRICAL EXPLOSIONS. 665 


ufed, or perhaps if the explofion was received upon metals 
that were more eafily fufed than brafs. Accordingly, June 
the 27th. taking the moderate charge of a battery, confifting 
of about thirty eight fquare feet, upon a piece of tin, I firft 
obferved a fecond outer circle, at the fame diftance from the 
firft, as the firft was from the central fpot. It confifted of 
very fine points hardly vifible, except when held in an advan- 
tageous light; but the appearance of the whole was very 
beautiful, fuch as is reprefented, plate i. fig. 5. No. 2. 

June the 28th. I got another double circle, on a flat pew- 
ter ftandifh, much plainer’ than the former, the outer being 
about the fame diftance from the inner, as the inner was from 
the outfide of the’ central {pot. 

Havinc hitherto found the circles the moft diftin@ on 
metals that melt with the leaft degree of heat, I foon after 
procured a piece of that compofition which melts in boiling 
water; and having charged fixty fquare feet of coated glafs, 
I received the explofion with it, and found, what I was en- 
deavouring to get, three concentric circles; the outermoft of 
which was not quite fo far from the next to it, as that was 
from the innermoft. All the {pace within the firft circle was 
melted ; but the fpace was very well defined, and by no. 
means like a central fpot, which in this cafe was quite obli- 
terated. The appearance of thefe three concentric circles is 
reprefented, plate i. fig. 5. No. 3. : 

I wave feveral times fince found parts of three concentric. 
circles upon brafs knobs, when I have ufed no more than 
thirty fquare feet of coated glafs. They feem to be more 
‘eafily perceived, when the knobs are a little tarnifhed: for 
then the fmall dots, in which the the metal is’ melted, are 


4g? Qs more 


666 CIRCLES’ MADE BY Part VHI.. 


more eafily diftinguifhed, {pecially when they are held in 
a proper light with refpe@ to the fun. 999 05 oh ul 
I MADE many attempts to make thefe cifcles larger )than I 
had ufually found them upon pieces of metal, | chiefly by 
means of worfe condudors ; thinking that the electri¢ matter 
not being fo well conducted, and pafling with lefs rapidity, 
would fpread wider. This was probably the cafe,, but then 
it is likewife probable, that I wanted force to make fuch 
an impreflion vifible. For this purpofe, however, I receiy- 
ed the explofion between two pieces of raw fleth, two pota- 
toes, two moift bladders, and things of a fimilar nature 
but without any effect whatever; no mark at all,qor, a 
leaft, nothing regular remaining upon them. . When J 
took the explofion-upon a piece of wwe lonstobalisdh iam 
to be melted, and run in {mali heaps, within the {pace of 
about the ufual diameter of a circular {pots jand when I 
took it upon a piece of pit charcoal, a piece feemed to be 
ftruck out of it, anda hole was left in it; but there was no 
regular circle upon either of them; nor was there any fenfiy 
ble ignition in either cafe, > de ect vial 
Ar one time I laid a piece of dead ore foraped.werg.dimeoth 
upon the wires of the battery, and took the explofion with « 
piece of tin ore {craped in the fame manner; but though I 
examined the places with a microfcope, I could not be fure 
that there was any part melted, much lefs any regular ci . 
fpot; but there lay on both of them a yellow matter, 
fulphur, round the place where the explofion was taken, and — 
avery difagreeable fimell, was excited... This probably arofe 
from a mixture of the fulphur of the lead ore, and the arfenic 
of the tin ore. toby ttobe ana 4 


I. recziven the explofion in vacuo, at the diftance of bal 


Sec. IX. ELECTRICAL EXPLOSIONS. 667 


three inches); ‘but found no: regular circular {pot, owing, 
probably, to thie two: interruptions. E. was: obliged, in. this 
cafe, to make in the circuit, one! in the air, and the other 
within the receiver; by means! of which: the effect of both 
would be-weakened; the whole force; beings..as. it were; di- 
vided between'them : for inal fuch cafes,| though: both the 
explofions were: peer aap airy . fend: pep animacnra 
- perfect. 

AFTERWARDS, L coutsirad: to mas the explofion in one 
additional atmofphere of icondenfed ait, but! the circles were 
finaller, ‘and -lefs:diftiné& than the othet two. circles, which. I 
was obliged, at the fame time, to make at the other interrup- 
tion of the circuit, in the open air, The denfer air would 
probably confine the electric matter within: a-narrower, com- 
pala s in) the fame manner-as)the nekaanaclespiyeatn that 

diffafion of it which: is remarkable IMUVACHOwn ss ooo) 

. Twe diftanee at which the difcharge ‘was! tndnbensiens 
no: difference:in the diemeter of thefe circular {pots,. When, 
by putting a drop of water. upon the’ brafs red communicating 
with: the! infide> of: the» battery}: b. made sthe:difchatge:at the 
diftance: of two: inches;, the: {pot was: jnfbthe fame asif it had 
been received, as ufual, at the diftance of half an inehy. i. ¢ 
abouta quarter of-an inch in-diameter. : ts 

- L acways found that, if the explofion: was obliged. to- aso 
through any bad: conduétor ‘before: it: reached, the: metal; the 
impreffion it made upon it -was contracted, and: deeper than 
if'it had been’ received immediately’ by the metal. This was 

: evident when paper, a piece of bladder, or-varnifh were-put 
upon the brafs reds with which the. difcharges, were made 
though'a very thin-coating of varnith-or moifture, did not,en> 
tirely prevent the appearance of the circles. 


4Q2 In 


668 ‘CIRCLES MADE BY —~ Parr VIII. 


“In making a courfe of experiments with bad»conduGors, 
and in ufing various methods to promote the difcharge of the 
battery at greater diftances than ufual, I was peculiarly ftruck 
with fome phenomena which occurred in the ufe of water.\ + 

I pur a drop of water, about a quarter of an inch in dia~ > 
meter, upon the brafs rod communicating with the infide of: 
the battery, and took the explofion dire@ly over it. ‘The difs 
charge was made at the diftance of about an inch, and the 
extremity of the drop was marked with a moft beautiful 
circle, exceedingly well defined on the infide, and vanithing: 

gradually outwards, like a fine thade in drawing. » But what 
ftruck me moft in the appearance was, that, in. Bs: * ries 
there was no central {pot. ritoid 

Nor knowing what this new eirooinitalic was inks to,) 
I wetted a piece of {mooth copper, which lay upon the wires. 
of the battery, and taking the explofion upon it, I only found: 
a long ftreak at the edge of the wetted place, well defined on’ 
the fide of the water, but vanithing gradually on the oppofite: 
fide, as in the former cafe. In this, and other fimilar expe-- 
riments, I obferved that the electric matter avoided the | water, 
and would: go a greater wr in the air, inorder pe seg 
the metal. oweitesyetisath 

I ren laid more water upon the copper, ' but fo as only: 
to moiften it; for the furface, being convex, would not allow. 
it to lie in any’ great quantitys and upon taking the'explofion,’ 
I found no circle, but feveral beautiful circular {pots melted: 
very deep, one of which was much larger than the reit. 
Thefe experiments feem to thow, that. the ele@tric matter” 
meets with a confiderable refiftance in pafling through water,” 
which confines its excurfion more than the air; and that, by 


Sec. IX. ELECTRICAL EXPLOSIONS. 669 


fuch a condenfation, its force is greatly increafed, fo as to 
leave deeper impreffions upon: the metal than when it had 
paffed only through the air, in like manner, if two pieces of 
metal be placed, nearly in contaé,, or if they be light, and 
one’of them lie upon the other; the ‘impreffion’ made ‘upon 
both of them, by the difcharge of the battery paffing through 
‘them, ‘will be confiderably deeper, than it would’ have been 
if the’ electric matter had not been confined to fo fmall a 
compafs as the points’ in contact. 2 
As I obferved before, I do not pretend to account for the 
formation of thefe concentric circles.’ /All that ean be con- 
cluded from the appearance is, that the electric matter iffues 
in the form of hollow cylinders, and that thefe cylinders are » 
formed of other {maller and folid ones; fince all the ‘circles 
are made of round dots. Or thefe might’ have been hollow, 
but being fo {mall, the metal could ‘not fhow that ’circum- 
ftance ; being liquified, fo as to fill up that {mall cavity.’ But 
what it is that difpofes the ‘electric matter to iffue in this 
manner, or on what property of the fluid this. phenomenon 
ultimately depends, I cannot’ form a” conjecture worth com- 
maiunicating to the public.: I do not defpair, however, but. 
that the communication of thefe‘imperfect:experiments, and 
the repetition of them by other perfons, may be a means of 
inveftigating the'caufe, in acomplete and fatisfactory manner ; 
and I hope in’ a fhort time! A few facts of a fimilar nature 
may poffibly throw fome light upon this fubjec. 

Tue manner in which feveral of the jars, mentioned in @ 
former fection, were broken feems to be analogous to the for- 
mation of thefe circles. I mean thofe that were pierced with, 
a eres of {mall holes in the neighbourhood of the principal. 


ones 


670 CIRCLES MADE) BY © Parz’VHE 


one; but more efpecially. tha¢ which was broke withan intire 
circle of {mall and independent; fractures round sons gain im 
hole. . 

Tur’ remarkable ftory, of: the ‘five: peafants: iis the 
firft, third, and fifth were killed! by lightning, as they. cwere 
walking in a right line; and which was mentioned before,. as 
analogous to a fact obferved-by Mr. Monniers, will perhaps-be — 
thought more analogous to this. For fappofing' the diameter 
of the concentric circles formed by lightning tobe fufficiently 
great, and the-central {pot to fall: upon the third perfon, the two 
on each fide of him would-efcape,, by being in: the firfhimter+ 
val round the. central {pot; while the two who walked firh 
and laft would fall into the circumference of the firft.circle.. 

Communicarine this experiment to Mr. Price, hie» fugs 
gefted.to,me, that the circles called farry-ringss which: -can« 
fift; of gras, of deeper green) in pafture-fields;' and which have 
by fome; beeniimagined to be occafioned by lightning might:be 
analogous to the:circles above-mentioned,. but that:they want 
a.centrak fpot. Lhaverfince examined one of thefe rings. It 
was about-a,yard/in| diameter,, the.ring itfelf about a quarter — 
of a yard. broad, and-equally.fo in the: whole ciccumference; 
but. there was no: appearance. of any: thing: to.correfpond:ta 
the. central {pot ; which, except. in. that. with water aboves 
mentioned. I have never; failed:to obferye in. myexperiments; 
on whatever form. of a furface I have taken the;circles, | | +» 

I wave fince-met with a curious article in the- Philofophi- , 
cal Tranfactions,, relating to thofe fairy circles, communicat- 
ed by Mr: Jeflop,. which» confirms. the. feppofition. of. theit 
being occafioned. by lightning, and with which I fhall there~ 
fore: conclude this. fection. AD wie 

has 


Src. IX. - . ELECTRICAL EXPLOSIONS, 67t 


« I wave often been puzzled to give an account of thofe 
«¢ phenomena, which are commonly ‘called fairy-circles. I 
«« have feen many of them, and thofe of two forts; one fort 
*« bare, of feven or eight yards diameter, making a round 
«« path fomething more than a foot broad, with green grafs 
«* in the middle; the others like them, but of feveral big- 
<< neffes, and encompaffed with a circumference of grafs, 
«« about the fame breadth, much frefher and greener than 
*« that in the middle. But my worthy friend Mr. Walker, 
«© gave me full fatisfattion from his own experience; it was 
«« his chance one day, to walk out among fome mowing 
<« grafs (in which he had been but a little while before) after 
<« a great ftorm of thunder and lightning; which feemed by 
<* the noife and flafhes to have been very near him: he pre- 
=< fently obferved a round circle, of about four or five yards 
~<« diameter, the rim whereof was about\a foot broad, newly 
«© burnt bare, asthe colour and brittlenefs of the grafs roots 
«« did plainly teftify. He knew not what to afcribe it unto 
«<= but the lightning, which, befides the odd capricios re- 
©< markable in that fire in particular, might without any 
<< wonder, like all other fires, move round, and burn more 
=< jn the extremities than the middle. After the grafs was 
=< mowed, the next year it came'up more freth and green in 
«© the place burnt, than in the middle, and at EEN HN 
«er was de te he tsi 


} 


Ph Tn eet Vet 2. Pr 1820 


boialgon T savewog BO PON 


672 EXPLOSIONS THROUGH ~ Part VIL. 


syvam Ly 


SECTION 


> ile eisthon 


: seals Saedn 

ExPERIMENTS ON THE EFFECTS OF THE ELECTRICAL 

EXPLOSION piscHARGED THROUGH A BRASS CHAIN, 
AND OTHER METALLIC SUBSTANCES. 


hs 


ROM the very firft ufe of my battery, I had obferved a 
very black fmoke, or duff to arife upon every difcharge, 

even when no wire was melted, and the brafs chain. I. made’ 

ufe of was of a confiderable thicknefs. Of this circum- . 
ftance, however,, I only made a flight memorandum, as 
what I could not then account for, and. paid no particular 
attention to it; till on the 13th..of June 1766, I was ftruck 
with another cafual appearance, as I was intent upon the ex- 

periments relating to the circles above-mentioned. | 

I oBsERVED, that a piece of white paper, on which Pits 
the chain I was ufing to* make’ the difcharge, was marked 
with a black flain, as if. it had been burnt, wherever the 
links had touched’ it. Yet I could not then think that it 
could be burnt by fo thick a chain. I imagined the chain 
muft have been dirty, and the dirt have been fhaken off by 
the ftroke. Still however I neglected the experiment till, ob- 
ferving 


Sec. X. METALLIC SUBSTANCES. 673 


ferving a very ftriking appearance of the fame kind, on the 
1ft. of September following, I was determined to attend to the 
circumftances of it a little more particularly than I had done. 
- I mane my chain very clean, and wrapping it in white 
paper; I.made a difcharge of about forty {quare feet through it, 
and found the ftain wherever it had touched the paper. 

. Some time after, I wrapped the paper, in the fame manner, 
round a piece of brafs wire; but, making a difcharge through 
it, faw no ftain. To afcertain whether this appearance’ de- 
pended upon the difcontinuity of the metallic circuit; on the 
13th. of the fame month, I ftretched the chain with a con- 
fiderable weight, and found the paper, on which it ss as the 


. fhock paffed through it, hardly marked at all. 


Finpine that it depended upon the difcontinuiey;' T laid 
the chain upon white paper, making each extremity faft with 
pins ftuck through the links; and when I had made the dif- 
charge, obferved that the black ftains were oppofite to the 
body of the wire that formed the chain, and not to the intervals, 
as I had fometimes fufpected. 

SepTeMBeR the 18th. Obferving that a pretty confiderable 
quantity of black matter was left upon the paper, on every 
difcharge with the fame chain; I imagined it muft have 
loft weight by the operation, and to afcertain this circum- 
ftance, I took another chain not fo thick as that I had ufed 
before. It was five feet four inches long, and weighed exaét- 
ly one ounce, feventeen penny weights, four grains. After the 
difcharge, I found it had loft exaétly half a grain of its weight. 


* The fhock had only paffed through a part of it, the reft lying 


onaheap. I then difcharged the fame fhock through its 


- whole length, and weighing it, found it had loft juft another 


4R half 


674 EXPLOSIONS THROUGH Parr VIII, 


half grain. By repeated experiments I found, afterwards, 
that the fureft way to ftrike off part of its. weight, was to 
make the fhock pafs through a fmall part of its length, and that 
when a confiderable length was ufed the event was uncertain. 
N. B. Tuese and all the following experiments, except 
where the contrary is exprefled, were made'with a battery of | 
thirty two Square feet, that force appearing to be fufficient, 
and the charging of it not taking up much time, At the 
time of both the above-mentioned difcharges, an iron wire of 
one feventieth of an inch in diameter was made red: hotes ‘but, 
but was not melted. ty ss 
OsseRvinG how deep a ftain was made by the Jiniee of 
a thick brafs chain, I had the curiofity to try what would be 
the confequence of fending a fhock through a piece of char- 
coal. accordingly I took a fmall piece, about half an inchin. 
length, and found that, in the difcharge, it was.all blown to : 
duft. The pafteboard on which it lay was torn, the charcoal _ 
being forced into it, fo that the impreflion appeared on the 
other fide. The blacknefs was fpread to a + oie diftance, and 
the tinge every where indelible. ts 4B 
SepTeMBeR the 21ft. In making the mark " 
tioned, on part of the theet of paper, on which I nee 
an account of the experiment to Dr. Franklin, I happened to_ 
lay the chain fo as to make it return at a fharp angle, in or- 
der to imprefs the form of a letter on the paper; and/obferyed — 
that, upon the difcharge, the part of the chain’ that had been — 
doubled was difplaced, and pulled about two inches towards 
the reft of the chain. At this I was furprifed, as ue 
it lay fo, as that it could not flide by its own weight, Upon 
this I repeated the experiment with more aceuracy. I ftr 


| 


Src. X. METALLIC SUBSTANCES. 675 


ed the whole‘chain along a ‘table, ‘laying ‘it double all the 
way, and making it return by a very fharp angle.- The con- 
fequence always was, that the chain was fhortened about two 
inches, and fometimes more; as if a + fadden pull had been 
given to it by both the ends. . 

ConsipeRinc that this pull muft have been given to it by 
the feveral links fuddenly repelling one another, at the inftant 
of the explofion, I compared the links with the black marks 
that were made by them upon the table, and found that each 
link had been pulled from the place on which it had lain, 
and moft of all, at the greateft diftance from the place of the 


_-explofion. 


‘Convincep that the chain had been fhortened by the mu- 
tual repulfion of the links, I endeavoured ito meafure with 
-exaétnefs how much the fhortening was, ina given length of 
chain. To do 'this, I meafured two feet four inches of the 
chain, as it lay upon the table, in one ftraight line, without 
any return, one end-being fixed and the other moveable; and 
found that, upon difcharging fixty four fquare feet through 
it, it was fhortened a quarter of an inch in its whole length. 
I had contrived that the fuddennefs of the motion fhould not 
throw one part of the chain upon the other. 

Susprecrine that the black fmoke, which rofe at every 
difcharge, might come, not from the chain, but from the pa- 
‘per, or the table on which it lay, and which was probably ~ 
burnt by the contact of it, I let the chain hang freely in the 
air; but, upon making the difcharge, I obferved the fame 
black grofs fmoke that had before rifen from the paper or 
the table. It was therefore part of the metal itfelf, which 
had been converted into that black duft. 

4R2 To 


676 EXPLOSIONS THROUGH © Part VIII. 


To give my reader a better idea of the mark made upon 
white paper by a chain, through which the eleétric thock is 
tranfmitted, I laid a chain upon the original drawing of plate 
I. for the engraver to copy as exaétly as he could ; and he has 
fucceeded pretty well. The breadth of the fpots are about 
the mean thicknefs of the wire’of the chain, and [a, 4] marks 
the place to which that part of the chain which was setae 
was thrown back, by the fudden repulfion of the links. 

I nap before obferved the electric {parks Hic ee 
to be moft intenfely bright, fo.as, fometimes, to make the 
whole chain appear like one flame in the dark ; but the ap- 
pearance of the chain at the inftant of the fhock, as it hung 
freely in the air, was exceedingly beautiful; the fparks being 
the largeft and brighteft at the bottom, and fmaller, by de- 
grees, towards the top, where they were fcarcely vifible; the 
weight of the lower links having brought them fo. much 
nearer together. ina 

Sep‘reMBER the 26th. Being {till in fome doubt whether the 
blacknefs that. was left on the paper came from the burning of 
the paper, or fome thing that wasthrown from the chain; I once 
more hung the chain freely in air, and put.under it, but {6 as 
not to touch it, a piece of white paper, on which Falfo laid a 
few pieces of down, to obferve whether they would be affect- 
ed by any eleétric attraction or repulfion. On making the 
difcharge, the down was all difperfed, and the paper was 
marked with a black ftain, near the length of an inch; which _ 
was the diftance at which the two parts of the chain hung . 
from one another, a little above the paper. Some parts of 
the ftain were deeper than others, the whole mark confifting 
of four different {pots of a deeper black, Busi by fainter 


Sec. Xs, ¢ METALLIC’ “SUBSTANCES.” 677 


ftreaks, \anfwering to four’ links ofthe chain, which hung 
nearly. parallel, to) the. paper. The ftain could not. be wiped 
off with,a-handkérchief,, though. it, was not ‘fo deep.as:when 
the chain' had touched the, paper. Thus I was fatisfied; that 
a confiderablepart, ‘at. leatt, of the blacknefs had eee from 
the chain.. » 

SEPTEMBER the o7thi’ Willing to sdatgins more exadily 
what part of the chain, the folid links, or the intervals, | was 
moft affected by the, hock I dipped it in water, .and laying 
it quite wet upon a piece of white paper, difcharged.a fhock 
through it. Part. of the water was|thrown into my face, 
being; (cattered in all direGtions, |and,all, the chain left i in- 
ftantly,and perfectly dry..|, The paper was very much ftained 
for the {pace' of an,inch, broad, wherever the chain lay; not 
equably, but as if it had been ‘handled with dirty fingers, 
The ftain was indelible,..and where the. chain. was Vigan’ 
a-hole. was ftruck quite through the paper... . 

To determine, whether the paper, in, the lievechinatlionad 
inftances, had really been burnt, as well as ftained. I laid a 
part of the chain, at the time of the laft difcharge; upon three 
half crowns; and found they, were all melted, in the places 
where the chain had touched them; The marks made by the 
fufiom were about the breadth of the chain, and fo deep that 
nothing but a tool could efface them. 

To determine, if poffible, more fenfibly what it .was that 
made the black tinge, I laid the chain upon my hand, when 
J had.a moderate charge ; and it was marked juft, like the 
paper. I felt a kind of pricking or burning at the inftant of 
the explofion, and the painful fenfation: continued a fmall 
{pace of time. 


I MapE 


678 _ EXPLOSIONS THROUGH Part VIII. 


I mave no.doubt but that with‘a heat that melted metals, 
I could eafily contrive ‘to fire gunpowder; but, though I laid 
the chain upon the grains, and rammed ‘the powder about 
the chain put through a quill, I could not ‘fucceed. | In the 
firft cafe, the powder was’ difperfed ; and inthe fecond, the 
quill was burft, and there was a fmell, as after an pane 
gunpowder, but no actual firing: ‘of it. 1 Fa 

Hiruerto I had always put the chain in reer with 
bodies that were conduétors. 1 was now willing to try what 
would be the confequence of laying it'in conta& with eleétrics. 
Accordingly, I dipped the chain in melted rofin, ‘till it had 
got a coating of a confiderable thicknefs. “When it! ‘was 
quite ‘ftiff, I laid it carefully, without ‘bending, upon white 
paper, and made the difcharge through it. The rofin was 
inftantly difpetfed from all the outfide of the chain, it being 
left as:clean as if none had ever been put ony /’That with _ 
which the holes in ‘the ¢hain had been filled, having been - 
impelled in almoft all dire@tions, was beaten to’ powder ; 
which, however, ‘hung together, but was perfedtly opaque ; 
whereas it had been quite tranfparent, before this ftroke. I 
felt fome'of the rofin fly in my face. The ftain upon the. 
paper was very deep, containing a good deal of rofin, and fe- 
veral holes were ftruck through the paper on which it was 
laid. A half crown, on which part of the chain had lain, 
was melted, and fo deeply ftained with the rofin, that it could 
not eafily be cleaned. 

I nexT laid the chain upon a piece of glafs; and eonitiders 
ing how both the half crown and the rofin' had been affected, 
expected it would-have been broken to pieces; but, inftead of 
that, the glafs was marked in the moft beautiful manner, 

wherever 


Sec. X.. | METALLIC SUBSTANCES, 679 


wherever the chain had touched its every {pot the width and 
colour of the link: ©The metal might be fcraped off the glafs 
at the outfide of the marks ; but in’ the’ middle. part it was 
forced within the pores of the glafs sat leaft nothing I-could 
do would force it off. . On the outfide’ of this: metallic. misc 
was the black duft, which was eafily wiped off. » 

I nave fince given the fame tinge to glafs orice filver 
chain, and fmall pieces of other metals ;- but could not do it 
with large pieces. ‘They were melted’ where they apg 
one another, but the glafs was not tinged. 

Ocroser the 7th. Ihad the-curiofity to try, dikes I 
could not give a tinge to glafs with quickfilver. In order to 
this, I laid fome globules in aright line, and laid a thin piece 
of glafs upon them, to flatten them, and’ bring them nearer 
into contaé&t with one another. Both the flips of glafs were 
fhattered in a thoufand pieces, and difperfed all over the room, 
feveral' of them flying in my face; though no part of the 
quickfilver could be found, except what adhered to fome 
fragments of the glafs, to whieh it had given a kind of uni- 
form whitenefs ; but no diftiné globules could be feen, and 
it was eafily wiped off, fo that'no part of it was fixed in the 
glafs. My head ached all the remainder of the day,’ which 
I attributed to the fumes of the mercury. 

SepTEMBER the 28th. Having dipped the chain in water, 
and found it inftantly difperfed, I withed to fee what would 
be the effect of difcharging a fhock through a chain quite’ 
covered with water. Accordingly, little imagining the con- 
fequence, I laid the chain upon a piece of white paper, in 
the bottom of a china difh, and poured in water juft fufficient 
to cover it. Alfo, under one part of the ‘chain, and in the 

water, 


680, EXPLOSIONS | THROUGH Pant VII. i 


water, I puta half crown. Upon. the explofion,’ the water 
was. blown, about the room, ‘to a great diftance, the half 
crown was melted in two places, the dith broken into many 
pieces, ; and the part that lay immediately under the chain in- 
to very {mall fragments. The paper was a little ftained, and 
the water, I conde ptosis chad been little. fouled: by 3 
black duft. ig’ saath avi 
Beme certain that the dith ound have been. broken by “rh 
the: concuflion given to the water by the eleétric {park under — 
it, in the manner in which, Signior Beccaria’s tubes were 
broken (though I had not feen his work at that time, but had 
feen the experiment at Mr. Lane’s) I had the curiofity to try 
what would be the effect of making a difcharge through the. 
chain hanging freely in water. I therefore, got a tin veffel,. 
holding a quart, and letting the chain hang three inches and 
a half below the: furface of the water, made the difcharge.. 
The eleétric {parks appeared intenfely bright in the water, all 
along the chain; fome of the water was thrown out, and the 
veflel appeared to have been preffed .with, fome. force upon, a 
book, which I had put under it, a vifible impreffion, being 
made upon it. The veffel muft have received a great con- 
cuffion: for the duft had been fhaken from the bottom upon 
the book, though I had carried the veflel up and down the 
room,, without perceiving that any duft adhered toit. . > 
I was willing to repeat this experiment with fome variation 
of circumftances; and faftened a piece.of {mall filver wire to 
two pieces of ftrong brafs wire, and plunged the whole an 
inch or two under the furface of the water. Upon the dif- 
charge, the filver wire was melted, at leaft fnapped afunder,, 
the veflel had been preffed ,downwards more violently than 
before, 


Sec.K.... METALLIC /SUBSTANCES.: _68r 


before,. a confiderable quantity of the water was thrown a- 
bout the table, and fome was dafhed perpendicularly upwards, 
againft the top of the room ; where there were five wet places, 
each about the bignefs of a half crown.: t 5c fince fre-, 
quently melted wires under water. © | 

- SEPTEMBER the 2gth.. I made.a difcharge shilpa three 
pieces of the fame chain, each being a different circuit. They’ 
all left their impreffion upon the paper, and nearly equal. 
Alfo three out of four pieces made. pretty equal aaeaee but 
the fourth failed intirely. 

AT another time, a chain; which communicated with the 
outfide of the battery, but which made no part of the circuit, 
made the black ftain on a piece of white paper on which it 
accidentally lay, almoft as deep»as the chain that formed the 
circuit. Iwas then. melting a piece of wire, which had the 
fame effe& asufing a bad conductor.’ The’ fame thing has 
frequently happened fince. 

Novemser the r2th. I put a chain sic a glafs eae, 
fo wide as. that it could only touch one fide; and upon the 
difcharge, obferved four fets of marks, made by the metal 
being driven into the glafs; as if four chains had been in 
the tube, and all had received the fhock. Two of the rows, 
on one of which I imagine the chain had lain, were better 
marked than the other two, but all were very plain. 

Tue laft thing that engaged my attention with refpec to 
this courfe of experiments, .was that d/ack duff which I have 
obferved to be difcharged from the brafs chain, and other 
pieces of metal. As it was fo extremely light as to rife like 
a cloud in the air, fo as fometimes to be vifible near the top 
of the room; I concluded that it could not be the meta} itfelf, 

458 but 


682 EXPLOSIONS THROUGH Parr VIE, 


but probably the calx, or the calx° and phiogifion, in’ another 
kind of union than that which ‘conftitutes a metal ; and that 
the electric explofion reduced metals to their conftituent prin- 
ciples as effectually as any operation by fire could dovit, and 
in much lefs time. I was confirmed:in this opinion by find- 
ing, in the firft place, that this black duft colleéted from a 
brafs chain would not condu& eleétricity, which is known to 
be a property of the calces of metals, and. alfo. on ie? sper 
of fome of the following experiments, 

Cons1pERING this black duft as a poo OF Galhcifaachllh 
obferving it to be produced when I made the’ explofions for 
the circular fpots between gold and filver watch cafes, as was 
related above ; ‘I-began to think I had made a calcination of 
thofe metals, which all, the: chymifts fay is impoffible: but 
the following experiments convinced me, “that: it’ could only 
be the alloy that was in them which had yieldedithe black dust 
or calx. 

SensiBLe that my experiments with thefe stniid wosld 
conclude nothing, unlefs I got the {pecimens’ quite pure, 
I firft procured a fmall quantity of grain gold, which I was 
informed was the pureft that the goldfmiths know, ‘and dif- 
charged an explofion of the the battery through a train of the 
pieces, an inch and a half in length, laid'on a piece of white 
paper. Only two of the larger grains could be found after 
the explofion. Two leaves of paper were burnt, or torn 

‘through in feveral places, and) more would probably have 
been torn in the fame manner, if I had: ufed more. But 
what I principally attended to was the tinge that was given 
to the paper, with a view to which I had: made the experi= 
ment. The paper was ftained near an inch on each fide of 


—_—  ——— 


= 


Sxe/Xe7 METALLIC SUBSTANCES. 683 


the train, with black intermixed with red, making an odd 
motley:appearance: 90) fy Le 

Wer thefame! view, I laid a fimilar train of bits cut with 
a knife from a piece of as. pure jfilver as I could procure. 
They were difperfed,. and the paper burnt through, in the 
fame manner as with the gold; and the {pace of about an 
inch on each fide of the train was. ftained with black inter- 
mixed: with adeep yellow, which. was, confiderably different 
from the tinge made by the fufion of the gold. 

- "Tye: blacknefs-in thefe tinges convinced me, that there 
had been:a:calcination of fome part of the metal; but I was 
convinced it! mutt have been fome alloy, by an experiment I 
prefently after made with a piece of leaf gold; which, I be-. 
lieve, is generally the pureft that canbe got. A {mall flip of 
this I put through a quill, letting a part hang out at each 
end; and when I had made the difcharge through it, I found 
the quill tinged with a beautiful vermillion red, without the 
eaft intermixture of black. When I difperfed a flip of leaf 
Wrafs in the fame manner, the greater part of the tinge was 
black, with a little brown mixed with it in a few places. 

I make no doubt but that if I could avoid the black duft, 
Zn thefe experiments I could make each of the metals give a 
tinge of its genuine colour, as they are excellently defcribed 
by Mr. Delaval, in a late paper of the Philofophical Tranf- 
actions. 

In order to afcertain whether the black duft was a pure 
calx, or contained a portion of the metal, I procured a {mall 
quantity of it, by fending an explofion through fome pieces of 
iron wire, fometimes put into a quill, fometimes laid upon 
white paper, and fometimes upon glafs, or inclofed in glafs 

482 tubes; 


684 - ‘THE EXPLOSION\ ON) | Parr Vill - 


tubes; but could never be quite fure that there: was any 
part of it that was not affected with the magnet, which the 
‘mere calx ‘would not have been. But'the black: duft could 
not be the pure metal, for then it would either have been 
bright. immediately after fufion, or have | given a blue colour, 
which is the proper produétion of iron, 4 ) 6) a oy 
‘Some of the experiments with the brafs chain, related in 
‘this {eGtion, are fimilar to one of. Mr. i 
P- 94, concerning bodies placed without the « ¢ cir 
‘being affected with the explofion. As’ Rnd 
and the other appearances above-mentioned, ave: 1 
je&ture worth communicating to the public. I have 


~fued the analogy of faéts, and that not eee 
ee, ie them, A os them farther, and afcertain their ca 


hogy h ih’ Boned VEO tosh 


b tidad? tid Udita 


aT Zitipc odes 


“Sec. XI. «CONDUCTING SURFACES. 685 


SECTION XI. 


-ExpreRIMENTS ON THE PASSAGE OF THE ELECTRI- 
CAL EXPLOSION OVER THE SURFACE or some 
CONDUCTING SUBSTANCES, WITHOUT ENTERING THEM. 


OBSERVED, in relating the experiments on ice, that, 

in my attempts to afcertain its conducting power, I fome- 

times faw the flath of the electrical explofion ftrike dire@lly to 

the chain, along the furface of the ice. But as this paflage 

on the furface was produced only by 2 common jar, it was 

not much greater than the diftance at which the difcharge was 

~ufually made, and the appearance did not ftrike me. But af- 

~ terwards the fame phenomenon occurred in the ufe of my 

battery, where the paflage over the furface fo far exceeded 

the ufual diftance of a common difcharge, that it engaged my 

attention in a very particular manner, and produced fome 

- pleafing experiments ; which I hall recitein the manner, and 
nearly. in the order in which they happened. 

December the 11th. Thinking to make a circular {pot 

on a piece of raw fieth, I took a leg of mutton, and laying 

: ; the 


686 THE EXPLOSION ON Part VIII. 


the chain that communicated with the outfide of the battery 
over the fhank of it, took the explofion on the outward mem- 
brane, about feven inches from the chain; but was greatly 
furprifed to obferve the eleétric fire not to enter the flefh, 
but to pafs, ina body, along the furface of it, to come to 
the chain. 

TuinkinG that this effect might be oceania by the 
fatty membrane on which the explofion was taken, I again 
laid the chain, in the fame manner, over the thank, and took 
the explofion upon the fibres of the mufcles, where they had 
been cut from the reft of the body ; but ftill the fire avoided — 
entering the fleth, made a circuit of near an inch round the 
edge of the joint, and pafled along the furface, to come to 
the chain as before, though the diftance was near ‘eleven 
inches. ve 

ImacininG this effect was promoted by the ‘gags lying 
lightly on the furface of the fleth, and therefore not really in 
contact with it ; I took another explofion, when the, of 
the chain was thruft into the fleth; on which the fire entered 
the mutton, and, as I held it in my hands, both. doy, temps 
were violently fhocked up to my fhoulders; whereas, in the : 

cafes of the eleétric fire paffing over the furface of ‘ded ficth, 44 
my fingers, happening to touch the chain, were only affected 
with a flight pricking, or fuperficial burning, which has been 
explained before. Nh inne is 

Tuis phenomenon being fo remarkable, and. the 
by this means difcharging at a diftance about twenty, times 
greater than it could ufually be made to do, I thought to try 
other fubftances, of a conducting power fimilar to ear ey 


fleth; and of thefe, water was the moft obvious. 


Sec. XI. | CONDUCTING SURFACES. 687 


ingly, the: next day, I laid\a brafs rod communicating with 
the! outfide of the battery. very near the furface of a quantity 
of water|(to refemble the chain lying upon the furface.of the 
fleth, without being in contac with, it),and, by means of a- 
nother rod furnifhed with knobs, made a difcharge on the 
furface of the water, at the diftance of feveral ‘inches from 
any part of the rod; when the eleétric fire ftruck down to the 
water, and, without entering it, pafled vifibly over its. fur- 
face, till it arrived at that part of the rod which was neareft 
to the water, and the explofion was exceeding loud. If the 
diftance at. which, I made the difcharge exceeded, feven or 
eight inches, the electric fire. entered the water, making a 
beautiful ftar upon its furface, and yielding a.very dull found. 

Tuer refemblance between this, paflage of the ele¢tric mat- 
ter over the furface of the water, and that which Dr. Stukeley 
fuppofed to {weep the furface of the earth, when a confider- 
able quantity of it is difcharged. to the clouds during an earth- 
quake, immediately fuggefted to me, that the water over 
which it pafled, and which was vifibly thrown into a tremu- 
lous motion, muft;receive a concuffion, refembling that which 
~ is given to the waters of the fea on fuch an oceafion, 

To try this, myfelf, and other perfons who were prefent, 
put our hands into the water, at the time that the eleétrical flath. 
above-mentioned pafled oyer its furface; and we felt a fudden 
concuffion given to them, exactly like that which is fuppofed 
to affect fhips at feavduring an earthquake. This percuflion 
was felt in various parts of the water, but was ftrongeft near 
the place where the explofion was made, 

AFTERWARDS; I made the explofion of a jar, containing 
three fquare feet of coated glafs, at fome diftance below the 

furface 


488 THE EXPLOSION ON. Part VIII. 


furface of the water, fo as to be vifible in the water, and 
we felt the fame concuffion that we had done before, when 
the fire of the battery paffed over the furface, only much 
weaker. The flath of electric fire in the water does certainly 
difplace fome of it, and thereby give a fudden concuffion to 
the reft; and the fimilarity of the effec is a confiderable evi- 
dence of a fimilarity in the caufe. 

I AFTERWARDs made the fire of a jar pafs dioagh the 
water, making a fpace of about a foot part of the circuit; 
when, putting our hands in its paflage, they were affefted, 
but in a very different manner from what they were before : 
for this evidently affected the nerves and mufcles of the hand 
internally, and occafioned a fmall degree of the fame kind of 
convulfion which is felt by the eleétric thock itfelf; whereas 
the other was a mere percuffion, affecting the furface of the 
hand. Both fenfations were, indeed, felt moft fenfibly at the 
furface of the water, though our hands were, in fome meafiurey 
affected by both as low as we could put them. 

Brine willing to experience what kind of a fenfation this 


paflage over the furface would occafion, I laid a chain in con- 


tac& with the outfide of a jar lightly on my finger, and fome- 
times kept it at a fmall diftance, by means of a thin piece of 


glafs; and, if I made the difcharge at the diftance of about ” 


three inches, the eleétric fire was vifible on the furface of the 
finger, giving it a fudden concuffion, which feemed to ) make 
it vibrate to the very bone; and when it‘happened to pafs on 
that fide of the finger which was oppofite 1 to the eye, 1 ‘the 
whole feemed perfectly tranfparent in the dark. IFI too k 


the diftance much larger, the fire entered the fingen, ‘occa ie) 


fioning a very different fenfation from the former. — 


——_ | ——- 


oe 


Sec. XI, CONDUCTING SURFACES. 689 


was like a blow, but of a very peculiar kind, whereas the o- 
ther is well known to be a convulfion. 

I THEN ventured to put my fingers upon a piece of the fpinal 
marrow of an ox, while the explofion of the battery was paf- 
fing over it, when I felt only a flight pricking, or percuffion 
on each fide of my finger; and the fenfation continued for 
fome time. This fenfation did not extend at all beyond the 
place of percuffion ; but afterwards, putting two of my fin- 
gers on the fame piece of {pinal marrow, when the charge of 
the battery was confiderably ftronger, I received a concuffion 
which affected my whole hand, but it was with a kind of a 
vibratory motion. _ 

PLeaseEpD with this refemblance of the earthquake, I en- 
deavoured to imitate that great natural phenomenon in other 


‘refpects ; and it being frofty weather, I took a plate of ice, 


and placed two fticks, about three inches high, on their ends, 
fo that they would juft ftand with eafe; and-upon another 
part of the ice I placed a bottle, from the cork of which was 
fufpended a brafs ball by a fine thread. Then, making the 
ele&tric flafh pafs over the furface of the ice, which it did 
with a very loud. report, the nearer pillar fell down, while 
the more remote ftood ; and the ball, which had hung nearly 
ftill, immediately began to make vibrations about an inch in 
length, and nearly in a right line from the place of the flath. 

IT arrer warps diverfified this apparatus, erecting more pil- 
lars, and fufpending more pendulumis, &c. fometimes upon 
bladders ftretched on the mouth of open veffels ; and at other 
times, on wet boards fwimming in a veffel of water. 
This laft method feemed to anfwer the beft of any; for the 
board reprefenting the earth, and the water the fea, the 
4T phenomena 


690 THE EXPLOSION ON > Pari VIII. . 


phenomena of them both during’an earthquake may Be imi- 
tated at the fame times’ pillars,> &c." being’ erected upon the 
board, and the eleétric flath being made ‘to’ pafs either’ over 
the board, over the water, or over them both, “This makes 
an exceeding fine experiment. ; (WS Save itt 
Wuen I firt’ made this experiment ‘oe the eletuiic flath 
‘paling over the furface of the water, I-thought it neceflary, 
that ‘neither the piece of. metal communicating with the out 
fide, nor that communicating ‘with the infide of the jars fhould 
touch the water immediately before the difcharge. But I after- 
wards found, that the experiment would anfwer, though either, 
or even both of them were dipped in the water: for in this cafe 
the explofion would ‘till: prefer’ the furface to the water itfelf, 
if the diftance was not very great; and’ would even pafs ata 
greater diftance along the furface, when there was a neater 
paflage from one rod to the other in ‘the water, | 
Just ‘before the difcharge, both: the rods pris ier 
to attra&t the water very ftrongly. It was thrown upon the rod 
“communicating with the outfide when it was laid’ near half 
an inch above the ‘furface. When I put a:drop of water on 
the rod ‘communicating with the infide,! the difcharge was 
‘made at the diftance of about two inches from the furface of 
the water, the fire firft defcending perpendicularly, and then 
paffing along the furface; and if the rod communicating with 
the outfide hada drop of water upon it, it might be, placed 
higher over the water than if it had not. At the time of 
“the ‘explofion, this ‘drop was elongated, and mee esp ae 
difcharge very confiderably. 
My attention was next drawn to the kind of igi 
which was made upon the water by the paflage of the electric 
: fluid 


| 
; 


Sec) XI. 1 CONDUCTING SURFACES. = 69x 


fluid in this’manner...| To. afcertain this, I firft placed a thil- 
Jing level with the water,) to. receive the explofion before it 
paffed along the’ furface; and obferved. that it was melted, 
but! only. about half, as’»much | as I, imagined it would have 
been in the common way. There. was no. regular circular 
fpot. And.T could’ never perceive; that ‘the brafs | rod which 
communicated with:the outfide.of the battery was at all melt- 
ed by the explofion. ' 

Jupcine from the’ conbuffion given to the. mae body of 
the! water over which. the hock: pafled} I thought ithat) the 
trace of it might poffibly be preferved on the furface: of foft 
pafte ;,and accordingly |, made the explofion pafs over the 
farface of fome, ‘and plainly obferved, that the part under 
the paflage was deprefied; the electric matter having repelled 
it. The, impreflion was not deeper where, me viegdne’ firkt 
fell than in,any other part of the track. (jo) 6) 

To diftinguith more accurately rina the. effed of 4 
eleGtric matter when it properly enters ‘the, water, and when 
it only paffes over the furface, I {pread a little water, ex- 
ceeding thin, upon the furface of-a finooth picce. -of flate ; but, 
though the explofion paffed over. the furface,. with its ufual 
violence, L.could riot: perceive that it had occafioned the ledft 
degree of evaporation ; which Signior Beccaria found:to be the 
confequence of making the capteetise aries pene cwater 
in, fuch cireumftances, 

Wuen the explofion paffed over aha fiphode of. the plite of 
ice, in the experiment: of the earthquake above-mentioned, 
the ice feemed to be melted, both where the chain had been 
laid, and alfo along the tract over which the explofion had 
»paffed.. But this melting, if it was fuch,.'was not uniform; 

Aes but 


692 THE EXPLOSION ON Parr VIII. 


but looked as if a chain with fmall links had been laid hot 
upon it; and the impreffion was not at all deeper where the 
explofion was firft received. : odemoala ish 


WueEn the explofion pafied over 'the furface of a green leaf, 


the leaf was rent in two direétions ; the longer in the track of 
the explofion, and the other at right angles'toit. 9° > 
I seveRAL times made theexplofion on the furkecsabsenie, 
when it always difperfed a confiderable quantity of it, making 
a hole near two inches deep, and almoft as broad as'long; for 
it could not be made to pafs at a area eects than about 
three inches. tiie Niowasht 
I was not a little furprifed to find pay! t ‘could not: make 
this electrical explofion pafs equally over the furface of fub- 
ftances which were conductors in nearly the fame” ‘degree; 
and for a long time imagined, that this property was. 
to water, or to bodies that conducted by means of the water 


they contained. I could never make ‘it pafs the the furface of 


any kind of charcoal ; though all the degrees of condudting 
power may be found in different pieces of it: and I was the 
more confirmed in my opinion, by obferving, that, though the 
explofion paffed perfedtly well over the furface ofafmooth board, 
that had been juft wetted, and immediately wiped! as’elean as 
poffible ; yet two hours after, when the board was quite dry, 
it would not pafs at all in the fame place. It alfo paffed with 
great violence over the furface of a bladder which had been 
moiftened about a quarter of an hour before, and then feem- 
ed to be quite dry; but would not pafs in the leaft degree 
two or three hours after. In the former cafe,» the explofion — 
had left a mark where it had-paffed over the bladder, darker 
‘than the reft of the furface, a kind of polith iit eae 


= 


Sec. XI. | CONDUCTING SURFACES. 693 
being taken off: in the latter cafe, as the dry bladder con- 


- ducted very imperfectly, the fire-of the charge fpread in a 


beautiful manner, covering a fpace of about an inch in di- 
ameter. ‘ 

Tuis electrical explofion would not pafs in the leaft degree, 
over the furface of new glafs, notwithftanding its property of 
diffufion above-mentioned feemed to promife that it might. 
Neither would it pafs at all over the: furface of alum, rock 
falt, fal ammoniac, blue or green vitriol, or a piece of polithed 
agate ; though thefé are all conductors of a middle kind, like 
water ; and feveral of them had very fmooth furfaces.. It al- 
fo refufed the furface of dry wood, and dry leather, even the 
fmootheft cover of a book. ‘shay 

Bur I found that I had concluded too foon, that this paf- 
fage of the electrical explofion was peculiar to the furface of 
water, by finding, firft, that it paffed over the furface of a 
touch-ftone, and then over a piece of the beft kind: of iron 
ore, exceeding fmooth on fome of its fides. This piece is 
about an inch thick, and about three inches in its other de- 
menfions. The full charge of a jar of three {quare feet would 
not enter it. It was diyerting to obferve how the ele¢trical 
explofion would make a circuit round its angles, when it was 
made in a place remote from the jar. It looked like a thing 
invulnerable. 

Tuts eleétrical explofion paffed over the furface of oil of 
vitriol with a dull found, and a red colour, which was the 
only appearance of the kind that I have yet met with. In all 
other cafes, if it paffed at all, it was in a bright flame, and 
with a report peculiarly loud. It paffed over the furface of the 
mott highly reGtified {pirit of wine without firing it; but 
when 


—ufaal fize of the circular {pot ; and remained very vifible, 


the fteam and the bubbles, which feemed to Ls I 


694 -THE EXPLOSION ON ; Part VIII. 


when I took too great a diftance, the electric fire entered the 
fpirit, and the whole plate was in a blaze in a.moment..4), 
- I once fancied that the fluidity of water was. in a great 
meature the caufe of this phenomenon ;_ but I found I could } 
not make it ‘pafs over the furface of quickfilvér, or melted 
lead ; ‘though neither of the'rods with which the 
was made touched the metals, A dark impreffion was’ made 

on the furfaces of both the quickfilver and the! lead, of the — 


hotwvaslittading the ftate of fufion in which the metals: were. 
So far was the eleétrical explofion from /paffing. cover the fare 
face of any metal, ‘that I obferved, if the diftance 1 
the air, in order to a paflage through the metal, “was ever fo. 
little nearer than the diftance along the furfaces, ‘it never { bes 
ed to enter the metal; fo that its entering the farfa 
the metal, and its coming out again’ feemed to be made, 
out the leaft obftruction. If as much water was’ Iai lid’ 
fmooth | piece of brafs as could lie upon’ it, ‘it would: 
over the furface of the water, but always ftruck- J 
water into the metal. But if the metal lay at 1D} 
able depth under the water, it would prefer the i 
even pafted over three or four inches of the furface « 
as it was boiling in a brafg pot over the fire, in the 


to it. 
Antmat fluids, of ‘all kinds that I iva died, 
peculiar manner to favour the paflage of the eleé 
fion over their furfaces, and the report of ‘thofe 
was manifeftly louder than when water was ufed br 
timent. ‘This I remarked more particularly ‘wh 


Sec. XI... CONDUCTING SURFACES. - 695 


‘ufe of milk, the white and yolk of an egg, both freth broken, 
and after it had ftood a day or two, and had contraéted a hard 
pellicle. In all the experiments with the egg, it was ob- 
ferved, that no peculiar impreflion was made: in the place 
where the ele&tric matter firft came upon the furface. 

Ir was very remarkable, that the report made by all thefe” 
explofions, in which the ele&tric matter paffed over the fur- 
faces, was confiderably louder than when the difcharge was 
made between two pieces of metal; and they were obferved 
by perfons at fome diftance out of the houfe, and in a neigh- 
bouring houfe, very much to refemble the ‘fmart cracking of 
a whip; and indeed it would not be very eafy to diftinguifh 
them. But the found made by thefe explofions, though by 


far the loudeft that lever heard of the kind, fell much fhort of 


‘the report made by a fingle jar, of no very great fize, of Mr. 
Rackftrow’s ; who fays that it was as loud as that of a piftol. 


- Irwas pretty evident, that the diftance at which the fire paf- 


fed over animal fubftances was greater than it could be made on 
the furface of water; particularly in the firft experiment of 
the leg of mutton. It.alfo -paffed about ten inches over the 
furface of a piece of fpinal marrow taken from an ox. 

I was much ftruck with a beautiful appearance which oc- 
curred in the courfe of thefe experiments, though it was ofa 
different nature from them. When the eleétrical explofion 
does not pafs over the furface of water, but enters the fluid, 
it makes a regular ftar upon it, confifting of ten or a dozen 
rays; and, what is moft remarkable, thofe rays which 
ftretch towards the brafs rod that communicates with the out-_ 
fide of the battery are always longer than the reft; and if the 


_explofion be made at fuch a diftance, as to be yery near 


taking 


696 EXPERIMENTS ON Part VIII. 


taking the furface, thofe rays will be four or five times longer 
than the reft ; anda line bounding the whole appearance will 
be a beautiful ellipfis, one of whofe foci is perpendicularly 
under the brafs knob with which the difcharge is made. 

Ir will be in vain to attempt thefe experiments without a 
* confiderable force. Nothing at all, to any purpofe, can be 
done with a common jar ; fince the explofion of it will hardly 
pafs over the furface of any conduétor farther than it will 
difcharge through the air. The charge of a jar containing 
three fquare feet of coated glafs will not make any confider- 
able appearance upon the water; and as far as I can judge, 
the diftance at which the explofion will pafs along any fur- 
face is in proportion to the ftrength of the charge. For this 
reafon I make no doubt but that I could have performed 
the experiments above-mentioned to much greater ad 4 
if I had applied a greater force, but that would have r equired 
more time, and a moderate force was fufficient to afcertain 
the facts. 

N. B.. In thefe experiments, I put the difcharging od 
through a handle of baked wood; by which means, T could 
with fafety lay one end of it upon the wires of the battery, and 
make the explofion with the other, on what fubftances I 
pleafed. 


DAD 
ayaa 

: Sut Pe | ool 
ak 

ee dt | yy 

eB ata 
naar 

i) ot SA BBE 


SECTION 


| 
: 
: 


Sec. XII. THE TOURMALIN. 697 


“SECTION, XI. 
EXPERIMENTS (ON THE TOURMALIN. 


ATIGUED with the inceffant charging of the electrical 
battery, and ftunned with the frequent report of its ex- 
plofion ; I was defirous of fome refpite from thofe labours, 
and with pleafure took up the gentle and filent rouRMALIN. 
And I make no doubt but that my readers, who muft have 
fympathized with a $43 sp bs! naa pleafed with the 
change. 
~ Ir was in the month of Aug 1766, that, being in 1 London, 
I received from Dr. Heberden, who is glad to encourage e- 
very attempt in philofophical inquiries, his fet of tourmalins; 
among which was that fine one which had paffed through 


- the hands of Mr. Wilfon and Mr. Canton, and of which a 


drawing and defcription are given in the 51ft. vol. of the 
Philofophical Tranfactions, p. 316. But notwithftanding I 
had this valuable ftone fo long in my poffeffion, it was not 
till the latter end of December that I began to make any ex- 

4U¢ "periments 


68 «EXPERIMENTS ONy  PageVilh 


periments with it, having, in the mean time, been engaged 
in other eleétrical purfuits. At length, however, having 
brought my other experiments to the ftate in which therea~ 
der hath feen them, I was defirous of being an eye witnefs of se 
the wonderful properties of this  ftone,, and of purfuing a few 
hints which had occurred to me with refpe& to it. T 
fult of my experiments I fhall lay before the 
having informed him in what manner, and hh 
cautions they were made. a" 
Tue methods I ufed to apply heat to ‘she: soca 
various, but they will be fufficiently explained in th 


ways had near me a /land of baked wood, from the to 
projected yarious arms for different purpofes.. Th 
were of glafs, to two of which were fateng 
as it comes from the worm, fupporting light 
from the. other hung a fine thread, about nine or 
long; while a brafs arm. fupported @ pair of Mr 
pith balls. , At the other extremity of this arm n, 
pointed, I could place a charged jar, to keep th 
ftantly and equably. diverging, with, pofitive. or n 
tricity. Sometimes I fufpended the balls, not hy 

the influence of large charged jars. And] 
at hand a fine thread of trial not infulated,. and han 


gan any experiments, and fometimes 0 Sel, 
of the power which it had Lacquired. yt 
Berore I began any. experiments, never 


how long my eleGtrometers, would retain: gledtricity,: 
what degree. If the thread would retain the virtue 


Sec. XIf..’ THE ‘TOURMALIN..  _— 99 


minutes, I generally preferred: it, when'I wanted’ to commu- 
nicate’ the electricity» of ‘the ‘tourmalin 5" becaufe: it! would 
catch it in'a‘moment: If the:thread would’ not “retain “thé 
virtue long’ enough, or if I wanted a lefs variable degree of et 
leGtricity than the thtead could retain; I had recourfe’ to' the 
Seathers, which never failed to retain the virtue that was com+ 
municated to them for fevéral hours ‘together. -I have ofteri 
found’ them pretty ftrongly electrified, aftér retnaining un- 
touched a whole night, ‘though there had’ béen’ no fite in thé 
room. They might be touched without any fenfible lof’ of 
their ele&tricity ; but they received the'virtue very flowly. 
Tur reader muft obferve,* that by the poftive or’ negative 
fide of a tourmalin, in the following ‘experiments; I always 
mean the fide whichis pofitive or negative while thé ftoné is 
cooling.  Alfo, when’ I mention ‘the tourmalin without any 
diftin@tion, I’ always mean’ Dr: Hebetden’s large’ one, the 
convex’ fide of’ whitch’ is ep — and the’ co 
negative.) 9° 
Tue confideration of Mr: Wilke! 's ax piv isci on ete’ pro- 
duation® of {pontaneous electricity, by melting one fabitance 
within another, firft made nie'conjeGtare, that the tourmalin 
might Colle& “its ‘cle@tricity fromthe ‘neighbouting aid To 
afcertairt this citeumftance I made the following experiments, 
which feem to prove that’ my conjeftute was juft: “It was 
with a view'to' this' experiment that'T firft expreffed’ a defire 
to have a tourmalin in my  pofféffion. I afterwards found 
that'Mr. Wilfon had miade ‘an’ experiment mentioned’ p. 319; 
which is,’ in part,” favourable to this hypothefis, though he 
fuppofed the eleétricity to permeate the ftone, fo that’ ond 


. fide might have'been fupplied from the other. But the fol- 


4U02 lowing 


7oo- EXPERIMENTS?) ON! | Part VIIEO 


lowing experiments will fhow, that» the’ fuppofitiom of the 
permeability, .of the tourmalin to the electric fluid is altoge- — 
ther unneceflary: fy enctiantt for-any ‘of the mien it ex- 
hibits.. : 53 Bhi Jjnons Saat 

On, the ftandard’ bar of a moft sieeliene: pyrometer made 
by. Mr. Ellicott, I laid a part of ‘a pane of glafs, and upon 
the glafs..Dr. Heberden’s large tourmalin./;The bar was 
heated by a {pirit lamp placed underneath it; and I treated 
the tourmalin. in. this manner, to ,afcertain ‘with exaétnefs 
when the heat was increafing, decreafing, or ftationary.. In 
this difpofition of my, apparatus I obferved, that, whenever I 
examined the tourmalin, » the . glafs had acquired an ‘e- 
le&tricity oppofite to. that of the fide of the ftone which had 
lain upon it, and equally ftrong. . If, for inftance, I prefent- 
ed the flat fide of the ftone to a feather, electrified pofitively, ~ 
as the heat was increafing, it would repel it at the diftance of 
about two inches, and the glafs would attractit at the fame, 
or a greater diftance; and when the heat was decreafing, the 
ftone would attract it, and the glafs repel it at the diftance of 
four or five inches: _ It made no:difference which fide of the 
glafs I prefented ; , both fides attracting or repelling the fame 
feather with equal ftrength. . When I faftened)a thilling with 
fealing wax upon the glafs, the events were always) the fame. 
The eleétricity of both the fhilling and the glafs was always 
oppofite to that of the ftone:, Iwas furprifed to, obférve how. 
foon the electricity, both of the ftone and the glafs, would 
change when it came to the turn; for in lefs than a minute I 
have fometimes found them the reverfe of what they. wren 
before. 

TuERE was, however, in. the cafes in pia 3c I aid the 

“convex 


SeXIk | «= THEOTOURMADINGS | zor: 


convex fide of the tourmalin upon the flat furface of the 
glafs, or thilling, one exception to the rule above-mentioned ; 
viz. that; in cooling, the glafs and fhilling were pofitive, as 
well as the ftone. | This I imagined to be owing to the ftone — 
touching the furface on which it lay in fo few points, that it’ 
collected its electricity from the air, and imparted it to ‘the’ 
body on which it lay; and this fuppofition was confirmed by - 
experiment. || For getting a mold made for the convex fide of 
the {tone in plaifter of Paris, and heating the tourmalin in the 

mold, faftened to a flip of glafs, I always found the mold 

and the glafs poffefled of the eleGtricity contrary to that ‘of.- 
the ftone, and equally ftrong. When they were cooling, the 

mold feemed fometimes to be: more ftrongly negative than 

the ftone was pofitive; for, at one time, when the {tone 

repelled the thread at the diftance 6f about three inches, the 

mold attracted it at the diftance of near fix. 

Havine made the experiments above-mentioned with the. 
tourmalin placed upon glafs, or conducting fubftances laid 
upon the glafs, I had the curiofity to try what would be the 
confequence of heating and cooling the ftone in conta& with 
other fubftances, both electrics and conduétors. And thefe 
experiments brought me gradually to the difcoyery of a me- 
thod of reverfing all the experiments that have hitherto been 
made upon the tourmalin, making that fide ‘which is pofitive 
in heating or cooling to be negative, and that which is nega-, 
tive to be pofitive; fo that the kind of eleétricity fhall be 
juft what the operator fhall direct, by the application of 
proper fubftances to the ftone. 

I seGan thefe experiments with fubftituting another tour- 
malin’ inftead of the piece of glafs above-mentioned; and 

when 


702 EXPERIMENTS ON | Part VIII. 


when only one of the tourmalins was heated; they were both 
affected juft as the tourmalin and glafs:had been. If, for 
inftance, the negative fide of a hot tourmalin) was. laid 
upon the negative fide of a:coldone, this latter-became: pofi~ 
tive, as a piece of glafs would have been ete aneeneyt 
cumftances, 

Wuen I heated both the tourmalins, hihi hegre 
faftened together with cement, they both» acquired the fame: 
power that they would have done in the open: air: Incthefe: 
cafes, as the ftones could not. be made to touch one another: 
in a fuflicient number of points, nothing could be concluded: 
from the experiments. . The fame objection lay againft heat-) 
ing or cooling the: tourmalin-upon rough glafs ; when I al-: 
ways found them both to be affected as alloys would bape sure 
if the glafs had: been fmodth. t epiagneia * 

Tuts confideration made me think of cooling: prspate i : 
lin in. contact with fealing wax, which might be made to fit 
the ftone as exaétly as poflible, though) it were ever fovirre-' | 
gular. Accordingly I half buried the negative fide ofva’ 
tourmalin in hot fealing wax; and when it was cold, turning’ 
it out of its waxen cell, found it pofitive (contrary to what it . 
vould have been in the open air) and the wax negative. The’ 
yther fide of the tourmalin, which was expofed to 4 
rir, was. affected in the fame manner as it would have been: 
if the oppofite fide had been expofed to the air too, 6 that: — 
both fides were pofitive in cooling. As the negative fide of 
the tourmalin became pofitive by cooling in wax, prea Dy 
doubt but that the pofitive fide would be in ame ip 
found it. ‘sd Hae Fas | HN ’ 

I woutp have afcertained the ftate of he 


Seo. XII. THE TOURMALIN * 703 


the tourmalin when it was beating in wax, but I found itex= 

tremely difficult to do it with fufficient certainty. It cannot 

be known exaétly when the ftone begins to cool in thefe cir= 

cumftances’: befides, in this. method of treatment, it muft 

neceflarily be fome time in the open air before it can be pre- 

fented to the ele@rometer ; and the electricity of the fides in 

heating is by no means fo remarkable as it is in cooling. In 

the attempts I did make with the pofitive fide of the tourma-’ 
lin buried in wax, I generally found it negative, but once or 

twice it feemed to be pofitive. 49 

Wuen I cooled the tourmalin in guick/lver, contained in- 
a china cup, it always came out pofitive, and left the quick- 
filver negative ; but this effe@ could not be concludéd to be 
the confequence of the application of the one to the other, 
becaufe it is almoft impoflible to touch’ quickfilver with the 
tourmalin without fome degree of fri@ion ; which never fails 
to make both fides ftrongly pofitive, though it be quite cold, 
and efpecially if the ftone be dipped deep into it.’ 

Ir then occurred to. me, that the tourmalin would-not be 
apt to receive any friction from fimple preffuré: againft the 
palm of my hand; and this being a conduéting fubftance 
communicating with the earth, the’ circumftances of the ex- 
periment would be new, and might poflibly produce new ap- 
pearances. ‘The event more than anfwered my expectations: 
for in heating or cooling the tourmalin. in: conta@ with’ the 
palm of my hand, each fide of the ftone was. affected exactly 
in a manner contrary to what it would have been: if expofede 
to the open air. In this cafe, though the pofitive-appear- ~ 
ances may be fufpected to be ambiguous, on. account of the 
difficulty of avoiding fome {mall degree Of fridtion,: in re 

moving 


yon EXPERIMENTS ON! Parr Vill: 


moving the ftone from the hand; yet the. negative appear- 
ances are, by that very circumftance, rendered the’ more in- 
difputable, and therefore remove the objection from the po- 


fitive ones. For the greater fatisfaGtion. of my’ reader; I thall 


relate thefe experiments exactly as they were made. 

I rAsTENED the convex fide of Dr. Heberden’s largeitour- 
malin to the end of a ftick of fealing wax, and when it was 
quite cold, I preffed the flat fide of it pretty hard againft the 
fofteft part of the palm of my hand. Immediately upon this, 
prefenting it to an electrified feather, it appeared to be ftrong~ 
ly negative, contrary to what it would have been if expofed 
to the open air; and it continued negative till it had acquired 
all the heat it could get from my hand,; when its power de- 


creafed, though it was fenfibly negative to the laft, . Perceiv- 


ing no alteration, I let the ftone cool in the open air; when, 
according to Mr. Canton’s rule, it grew more ftrongly nega- 
tive, till it was quite cold. Thus the fame fide of the ftone 
was made negative both in heating and cooling. |. 5. 
Herarine the fame flat fide, by holding it near a red hot 
poker, and then juft touching it with the palm of my hand 
(when I could not bear it to reft a moment) it became pofi- 
tive. Letting it cool in the air, it was negative, and touch- 
ing it again with my hand it became pofitive. Thus I, made 
the fame fide of the ftone alternately pofitive and negative for a 
confiderable time; and at length, when I could bear to keep 


it upon my hand, it acquired a ftrong pofitive electricity, 


which continued till it was brought to the heat of my hand. 


To complete thefe experiments, I removed the wax from — 


the convex fide, and faftened, it.to the flat fide of the ftone. 
Then warming the convex fide, by prefling it againft the 
palm 


Sec XIl. THE TOURMALIN: = 705 


palm of my hand, it became pretty ftrongly pofitive, contrary 
to what it, would have been if |heated in, the. open,air, and 
continued pofitive in a fmall degree after it had got all the 
heat it could from my hand, Letting it cool in the open air, 
it grew, according to Mr. Canton’s rule, more ftrongly pofi- 
tive, and continued fo till it was quite cold... Thus the fame 
fide of the ftone) was; mas pofitive, both in heating and 
cooling, 

_I ren, heated the convex fide, by holding it near a red 
hot, poker, and prefling it againft the palm of my hand, as 
foon as E,could bear it, it became (contrary to what it would 
have been inthe open-air) pretty ftrongly negative; though 
it. be}\extremely difficult to get a negative appearance from 
this fide. It. cannot always’ be.catched when it is heating in 
the:open air. ,; Care, however, muft be taken, left a flight 
attraction, of the elegtrified feather, _by:a body, not ¢leétrified, 
be miftaken for negative eleGricity.. " 

Havine made, |the above-mentioned sapiens: to fee 
how the tourmalin would be affected by being heated or cooled 
in contact with various fubftances, :to which only: one of its 
fides was, expofed at once ;.1, made others:in which the ftone 
was entirely furrounded by'them.,| It appeared very evident, 
from Mr, ‘Canton’s experiment, mentioned p. 323, that it 
could anfwer no purpofe to inclofe it in fubftances that were 
conductors: for. though. the two,electricities fhould be gene- 
rated, the. equilibrium, would inftantly be reftored between 
them. I therefore made ufe of electric fubftances only, and 
began with oi and tallow, both covering the tourmalin with 
them when it was hot, and alfo heating it.in boiling oil. But 
this, treatment produced no. new appearance, the clectricity of 

4X the 


yo6 EXPERIMENTS ON Pant Vill, 


the ftone being only a little leffened.’ The eve 
when a tourmalin’ 'was covered i cement nad 
and turpentine. rik 8 Avi 

Ar laft I made a froal ‘evbceolla very hot, and doping 
melted fealing wax upon it, covered the ftone all over, t 
thicknefs of about a crown piece ; and found ‘it to 
if not quite as 'well- through this coating of wax, 
been expofed to the open air. I take it for ee te 
infide of the cafe of wax next to the fto 
the eleétricity oppofite to that of the ftone, a 
that the outfide was the fame with ‘it.” ape “ 
may be made by means of this experiment + “for if a 
lin be concealed in a ftick of fealing wax, the-wax 
to have acquired the properties of the tourmalin! 
_ Heatine the ftone, or letting it cool’ 
eafily be imagined to have the ‘fame effect as a 
ing it in contact with conducting fubftances; ‘I haé 
ofity, however, to try the experiment, by'letting it 
exhaufted receiver, in which I had a contrivar 
thread of trial near it, .or withdraw it at pleafir 
was fet upright on its edge, by means of 'b 
it touched but in a few points, The lene wi 
the virtue of the ftone  feemed to’be di ‘ 
half; owing, perhaps, to ‘the vacuum not b 
perfect. For the fame ‘reafon, *the’ tourmalin 
virtue immediately upon’ being taken out of boili 
after being heated in flames 9 1 9)" sro 

One time I fixed a thin piece of glafs, v 
upon it, oppofite and parallel to the flat'fide o 
lin, and at about a’quarter| of an'inch diftance fr 


Sec. XII. THE TOURMALIN. -  Fo7 


exhaufted receiver; to obferve whether the electricity would, 
be tranfmitted from the glafs to the ftone through the va- 
cuum: but though the glafs was electrified, it was fo flight- 
ly, that I could not be certain of what kind it was. 

In» order! to’ afcertain ‘the circumftances relating to the 
change of the eleétricity of the tourmalin with more exaét- 
nefs than could be dorie by heating and cooling’ the ftone in 
any of the ufual methods, I laid it upon the ftandard bar of 
the pyrometer, and communicated heat to it by a fpirit lamp: 
placed underneath it.. The refult of thefe experiments was 
in general agreeable to Mr. Canton’s rules; but a few cir. 
cumftances occurred in this method’ of treating it, which . 
could not be determined in any other; and therefore it may 
be worth while juft to mention them. I generally heated 
the bar, which is of iron, eight inches long, tillthe index 
moved! feventy degrees, ‘each \of| which correfponds’ to one 
72o0oth, part of an inch ;, and obferved, that whichever fide 
of the ftone lay uppermoft, it was extremely difficult to afcer~ 
tain the nature of its electricity all the time the heat was in- 
creafing ; though, in order to do it, I held over it an elec- 
trified thread, about two inches in length, faftened to a ftick 
of fealing wax, which juft fupported it in an horizontal fitu= 
ation. It ‘was evident, however, that it was eleétrified, by 
its attracting a thread of trial at the diftance of about a quar- 
ter of an inch; but if I took the ftone off the bar, and im- 
mediately prefented the. fide that had lain upon it to an elec- 
trified thread or feather, I always perceived the convex fide 
to be negative, and the flat fide pofitive in the fame circum- 
ftances; but not half fo much as they were in the contrary 
ftate by cooling. In this’ cafe, the two powers were very 

4X2 diftin- 


708 EXPERIMENTS ON Parr VIII. 


diftinguifhable by the {mall thread above-mentioned, as'the: 
ftone lay upon the bar ; and alfo by bits of down faftened to! 
filk threads. One of thefe, which had’ touched the convex’ 
fide of the ftone, as it lay uppermoft upon the bar, ‘could 
not be made to touch it again in iit — five hours and a 
half. sf? Io! Sense» 

To fee what would be the effect of edie the tourmalin 
in the very fame degree of heat a confiderable time together, 
T laid it upon the middle part’of the bar, heated by two 
fpirit lamps, one at each extremity, and making the index) 
move forty five degrees, I kept it in the fame degree of heat, 
without the leaft fenfible variation, for above half an hour 
together ; and obferved, that the upper fide, which was the 
convex one, was always electrified to a fmall degree, attrac. 
ing a fine thread at the diftance of about a quarter of an 
inch. If in that time I took it off the bar ever fo quick, and’ 
prefented it to an electrified feather; the flat fide, which lay 
upon the bar, was negative, and the upper fide very flightly 
pofitive; as appeared by its only not attraéting the feather. 
When I put a piece of glafs betwixt the ftandard bar and the 
tourmalin, and kept them likewife in ‘the fame degree of 
heat, for the fame fpace of time, the refult was the fame as 
before, and the glafs was flightly electrified, ina ‘kind oppo- 
fite to that of the ftone. 

In heating the tourmalin upon the pyrometer, one of its 
fides was neceflarily made much hotter than the other. This 
inconvenience I avoided in the following method of treat- 
ment, which, though not fo accurate in fome refpeéts,” has 
peculiar advantages in others. By means of two rough places 
in the ftone, I tied it in a filk thread, which only touched 

the 


Sec. XII. THE TOURMALIN. 709 


the extreme edge of it on both fides. Beingin this manner per- 
feétly infulated, I contrived to make it hang in the air, at any 
diftance from a fire, or candle, &c; and by twifting the 
ftring, I could make it prefent both its fides alternately, fo 
as to heat it very equally. 

Wuen, in this manner, I had made it fo hot, that I could 
hardly bear to handle it, I let it remain in the fame fituation 
a quarter of an hour, in order to be fure that it was heated 
equally throughout. Then, with a bundle of fine thread, 
held fome time before in the fame degree of heat, I took off 
the eleGtricity which the ftone had acquired in heating, and 
continuing it in the fame fituation, I found it acquired ex- 
tremely little, if any electricity. Sometimes, when I thought 

_it had acquired a little (which might be occafioned by the 
variation of heat in the fire) it was fo fmall, that I could not 
determine of what kind it was. This fully fatisfied me of the 
juftnefs of Mr. Canton’s obfervation, that it is not 4eat, but 
the circumftance of changing its degree of heat that gives 
eleétricity to this ftone. 

Ir the ftone be heated pretty fuddenly, I have fometimes 
found that it may be handled, and preffed withthe fingers fe- 
veral times before the electricity it acquires in heating will be 
changed, though it begins to cool the moment it is removed 
from the fire. 

In this fame method of treatment, I verified Mr. Canton’s 
obfervation, that when the tourmalin is heated, and fuffered 
to cool again, without either of its fides being touched, the 
fame fide will be pofitive or negative the whole time of the 
increafe and decreafe of the heat. But, as he obferves, p. 240, 
in his experiments on hot air, the ftone muft, in this cafe, 

be 


710 EXPERIMENTS ON Parr VIII. 


be heated only toa fmall degree. I alfo proved the converfe 
of this propofition : for, beginning where I left the ftone’in 
the laft experiment, and removing it farther from the fite, 
both fides acquired a ftrong electricity, as ufual ; and bringing 
it again nearer to the fire, I obferved that both the fides not 
only retained the electricity they had:acquired| in: : 
the time it was heating, but a’ confiderable siento Ste 
remained in the fame degree of heat. “Spep.t 
I cannot, however, entirely acquiefce in the rea at 
Mr. Canton gives for this appearance : for if the fu 
air would condué& the eleétric fluid from the pofitive 
_the ftone to the negative, I fhould think it. oul sale 
fame fituation as in the experiment Mr. Canton made upomit 
furrounded with water, p. 323, and that neither fide 
difcover any eleétricity at all. When the heatis three 
tines greater than is {ufficient to change the ele¢tri 
two fides, the-virtue of the ftone is the ee 


ver itfelf with athes, attracted to it from sl iden 
this property it.acquired its name in Dutch. 

Ir requires, indeed, fome time for the: electrici 
fides to change from one ftate to the other; and 
the time of the fenfible change is not always at 
its beginning to cool, but: thefe two ‘circumftances, i 
brought nearer together the hotter the ftone 
becaufe then the efforts (of whatever kind they are 
any particular f{pecies. of electricity will be the m 
and fooner produce their effect ; fo.as be to mo 
come ahtiae lca to it, fuch as muft arife from 


Sec. XII. THE TOURMALIN. 711 


eleGtricity with which the ftone is poffefled. This, if either 
fide of the ftone be in a ftate'to acquire either kind of eleétri- 
city, and a quantity of the contrary eleGtricity be communi- 
cated to it by friction, or ab extra, that foreign electricity 
will be either only weakened, or loft, or changed; and thefe 
in a longer or a thorter fpace of time, according’ to the vi- 
gour, as we may fay, with which the ftone is made to exert 
itfelf to countera& that influence. But I have great reafon to 
fufpe& my own opinion, when it is different from that of fo 
accurate and excellent a judge of this fubjeét as Mr. Canton. 
"Ir is a fact, however, that the ftone often changes its elec- 
tricity very lowly ; and the electricity it acquires in cooling 
never fails to remain many hours upon it; with very little di- 
thinution. It is even poffible that, in fome cafes, the electricity 
“acquired by heating may be fo ftrong, as to overpower that 
which is acquired by cooling ; fo that both fides may fhow 
the fame power in the whole operation. ‘And Iam very cer- 
tain that, in my hands, both the fides of Dr. .Heberden’s 
large tourmalin have frequently been pofitive for feveral hours 
together, without any appearance of either of them having 
been negative at all. Perhaps the flat fide of this ftone, 
which is pofitive in heating, might continue fo according to. 
Mr. Canton’s obfervation; and the electricity of the convex 
fide might have changed, as it very often does, too foon for 
me to obferve it. This fact, however, has happened fo often 
with me, and is fo very remarkable, that I think T ought not 

to omit the mention of it, let the cau be what it will. 
Tus appearance happened fo conftantly when T firft began 
to make experiments with the tourmalin, that I had con- 
cluded the Duc de Noya had reafon to. affert, contrary to 
pinus, 


712 EXPERIMENTS ON Parr VIII. 


pinus, that both fides of the tourmalin in all cafes acquired 
pofitive electricity; and I thould have acquiefced, in that opi- 
nion, had it not been for the friendly remonftrances of Dr. 
Franklin and Mr. Canton; in confequence of which I renew- 
ed my experiments, and at length found other appearances. 
At the time above-mentioned, I generally heated the tour- 
malin- by prefenting each fide alternately to a red hot poker, 
or a piece of hot glafs held at the diftance of about half an 


inch; and fometimes I held it in the focus of a burning ; 


mirror; but I have fince found the fame appearance when I 
have heated it in the middle of an iron hoop made red hot. 
The ftone, in all thefe cafes, was faftened by its edge toa 
ftick of fealing wax. This appearance I have obferved to hap- 
pen the ofteneft when the iron hoop has been exceeding hot, 
fo that the outfide of the ftone muft have been heated fome- 
time before the infide; and I alfo think there is the greateft 
chance of producing this appearance when ‘the convex fide of 
the ftone is made the hotter of the two. When I heat the 
large tourmalin in this manner, I feldom fail. to make both 
fides pofitive till the ftone be about blood warm. I then ge- 
nerally obferve a a ragged part of the flat fide, towards one end 
reft of the flat fide; but very often one part of the flat fide 
will, in this method of treatment, be ftrongly pofitive half 
an hour after the other part is become negative. 

Tuis account of the appearance is made the more probeble 
by the manner in which the ftone was affected when only one 
of its fides was heated at one time. For when the convex 
fide only was heated, the ftone often continued a long time 
with both its fides pofitive, generally till it was not fenfibly 
warm, 


>" ba 


Sec. XII. THE TOURMALIN. 713 
warm. But, in this cafe, before the convex fide became po- 
fitive, it would fometimes be negative two or three minutes. 
On the other hand, when the flat fide only was heated, it 
would be pofitive a long while, and the convex fide negative; 
‘but the flat fide becoming negative a confiderable time before 
the convex fide ceafed to be fo, both fides would continue 
negative till the ftone was nearly cold. 

Extremecy forry I am for the article with which I muft 
clofe this fe@tion. In the firft of the above-mentioned courfes 
of experiments, that fine tourmalin, which has been fo often 
mentioned in the courfe of this work, flipped out of my 
hands; and though it fell only from the height of my breatt, 
upon a boarded floor, two pieces were broke off from one of 
itsends. The ftone, however, is more disfigured than i in- - 
jured by the accident: for the larger of the fragments weighs 
but ten grains, and the fmaller only one, while the reft of it 
weighs four penny weights, fixteen grains. I cannot per- 
ceive that its virtue is at all leffened. Mr. Wilfon obferyes, 
that there were feveral cracks in it; and for that reafon I had 
been careful never to expofe it to any great degree of heat. 

Ir is broke with eight or ten different faces, each of which 
have a moft exquifite polifh ; but there is no appearance of 
any frata or Jaming in the internal ftru€ture of the ftone. 
A piece of glafs or pitch might be fuppofed to break in the 
fame manner. The larger of the fragments has confiderable 
power, and the two fides have the fame different powers that 
they had when they were part of the entire ftone. 


4X, SECTION 


714 MISCELLANEOUS Parr VII, 


SECTION Xi. 


{s Eley. avid aif 
MISCELLANEOUS EXPERIMENTS. —— 
1% , 9 Diol4 


e try 


ti Qari 

I, OnsERVATIONS ON THE ELECTRIC SPARK TAKEN 

THROUGH SEVERAL PIECES OF METAL.| 

a 

ARCH the 24th. 1766. I obferved that an eleétric 

{park taken from the prime conduétor itfelf was not 

near fo ftrong and pungent, as one taken through a piece of 

‘metal infulated, and interpofed between my finger and the 
conduétor. tect ich f 

Tue effe& was the fame whatever was the form of the in- 


terpofed piece of metal. And, in this manner, whatever was ~ 


prefented received a full and ftrong {park : whereas ‘a gre 
part is commonly diffipated, in pencils or ftars, even when 
pretty large brafs knobs are prefented to the prime conduétor 
itfelf, if the excitation be very powerful; unlefs both ‘the 
conductor and knob have one precife degree of convexity, 
adapted to one another. y yr 
One fingle brafs ball made the {park as {trong as the inter- 
pofition of a long piece of metal, or.of many pieces. 
WHETHER 


Sec. XIII. EXPERIMENTS.” — 713 


WueETHuER one, a few, or a great number of pieces were 
ufed, it feemed that the intervals taken together muft be 
equal. : 3 

Bur thefe intervals taken together will be larger when the 
pieces are placed in a right line, than when they are laid ina 
curve. 

’ Wueruer one body, or a number of them be interpofed; 
if a {park be folicited, it will not ftrike the firft, unlefs it 
can, at the fame time, {trike all the reft. 

. Axx thefe.experiments fucceed, -in the fame manner, with 
the explofion of a charged:jar. 

Some of the above-mentioned circumftances, I afterwards 
found, had been’taken notice of by Sighior Beccaria. 


II. A DECEPTION: RELATING TO THE DIRECTION OF THE 
: ELECTRIC SPARK 


As I was once amufing myfelf with taking long {parks 
from a large prime conduétor of polifhed copper, and confider- 
ing the deceptions that eleétricians had fallen into with re- 
{pect to the dire@tion of the eleétric matter ; I could not help 
being ftruck’ with one deception, which the evidence of my 
fenfes would never have rectified; and which fhowed very 
clearly, how little the evidence of the fenfes is to be depended 
upon in fuch cafes. I obferved, that, whether I made this 
large conductor give, or take the eleétric fire (for I could 
make it do either at pleafure, and with the fame force) I ftill 
fancied that a fpark taken with a brafs ball above the conduc- 
tor defcendéd to it, and that a fpark taken below it defcended 

4X: 2 from 


716 MISCELLANEOUS Pax VIL’ 


from it; but {parks bali ee feemed to have no one 
certain direction.. Loorssk ob they 
ep 
III. An EXPERIMENT INTENDED TO: ce 
ELECTRIC SUBSTANCES, IN THEIR NATURAL STATE, , CON- 
* TAIN MORE OF THE ELECTRIC FLUID THAN SPREE wi: 


t rt hac aise: 
THINKING to aScertesin Dr. Franklin’s posses e 
ing the effential difference between condu@tors and non-con- 
duétors, I made a pretty large piece of glafs red hot (in which 
ftate I had proved it to be a real conductor of eleétricity 
placed it upon a fmooth piece of copper, infirlated 3 fap 
that, if electric fubftances had naturally a much greater tha 
of the eledtric fluid than conductors, this piece of g! 
pafling from a conduéting to a non-condu@iing ftate, ie 
exhauft the copper of its natural thare of the eleétric fluid, 
and leave it electrified negatively. But I could’ percei 
kind of electricity, either in the copper, or the gla 
the whole time of its cooling. 
Some time after, I found that J. F. Ciel 
voured to afcertain the fame thing, by reducing ice) 
ter ; but ice and water are both conductors of ele 


IV.. Tue’ MUSICAL TONE or various z 
ASCERTAINED. 


sien 


As the courfe of my experiments has required a 
ety of electrical explofions I could not help ol 


Sec: XIII. EXPERIMENTS 1° 717 


great variety in the mufical| tone made by, the reports. ./This, 
excited, my,-curiofity to, attempt, to, reduce: this variation-to, 
fome meafure., Accordingly, November the 17th. by the help 
of a couple of fpinets, and two perfons who had good ears for 
mufic, I endeavoured to. afcertain the tone of fome electric 
explofions 5 and obferved, that every difcharge made feveral, 
ftrings, particularly thofe that were chords to one another,) - 
to vibrate: but one note was always predominant, and found- 
ed after the reft. As every explofion was repeated feveral 
times, and three of, us feparately took; the fame, note; there 
remained no doubt, but that the tone we) fixed (upon was, at 
leaft, very near the true one. The refult was as follows. 

A JAR containing half a fquare foot of coated glafs founded 
F fharp, concert pitch.’ Another. jar of a wepetaes ants but 
equal furface, founded the fame... 

A jar of three {quare feet founded.C, bali F Si A! 
battery, .confifting of fixty four jars, each containing half 
a fquare foot, founded F below the C. 

Tue fame battery, in conjunction with eneshen of thirty 
one jars, ‘each containing a fquare foot, founded C tharp. So 
that a greater quantity of coated glafs, always gave.a deeper 
note. 

Dirrerences in the degree of a charge in the fame jar 
made littlé or no difference in the tone of the explofion ; if 
any, a higher charge gave rather a deeper note. 

From thefe experiments it will be eafy for any perfon to 
compare the quantity of {quare feet of coated glafs, with the 
lengths of mufical ftrings giving the fame note. For this 
purpofe, I could eafily have found more terms of the feries ; 
but I am afraid philofophers in general will think it trifling 

enough 


m8 MISCELLANEOUS Parr Vitti 


enough to have found fo many. I do not expeé that elec- 
trical explofions will ever be introduced into’ concerts of mu? 
fic; or that thefe experiments will be of any ufe to meafure: 
the extent of the clouds from which a clap of thunder + 

_ ceeds. - But true philofophers will not abfolutely defpife 
new fact or obfervation, gaa it an no Thee ae 
— ufe. : in Ute aegOT th 
pee Sudan iis 
Jie etappeate | bs 
Vi Pxrennsents on! rieceryeermer eranete METAL-! 
LIC TINGE ro rue: pteeignn ps GLARE DOI a) 
‘ i peat, 3 i efinel 

At: t) 

- Trhas long'been a queftion among olbnitctinnis alee’ 
eleatic matter that conftitutes the chargé of a plate of glafy 
lies ; whether within the pores of the glafs, ‘or only upon the 
furface ;. and fomé experiments'I have made" rea ah 
thought to throw fome light on this difficult fubjeg. > 

I constpERED that the commonicoating of chet sihin 
a€tual’ contact with the glafs, but that the-metallie tinge; 
which is: given to glafs by an eleétric’ explofion of ‘the metal 
upon its furface, is probably in contact with it, if not] 
in its pores. I'therefore gave a coating of this kind to both 
fides of a plate of glafs; and at firft imagined that the glafe 
coated in this manner did receive a charge, ‘as’ well as? if it 
had been coated in the common way; for it gave a real 
fhock :. but I very well remember, at that time,’ being a 
little furprifed: to: fee-the electric fire run over the fur- 
face of that coating, a thing not poflible in the common way. 
However, not fufficiently attending to that circumftance;' I 

was 


Sec. XII. EXPERIMENTS. )/ 719 


was -purfuing the experiment, and trying whether, by com-, 
bining» this piece of glafs with a large battery,.and making: 
the difcharge of both upon this metallic tinge, I_could ‘nat, 
melt: part of it, and thereby fetch it out of the glafs ; as that 
method would have melted, andabfolutely difperfed a confi- 
derable part.of the coating. of a, common jar.| But I was 
prodigioufly furprifed to find, that, though the connection of 
this, metallic tinge’ with the battery. was complete, the.dif 
chargé could not be made. by bringing the. difcharging rod 
upon it; though within three quarters of an inch of another 
brafé rod, that formed the communication between this plate 
of glafs'and the battery. This. convinced me that the metal- 
lic tinge did not anfwer the|purpofe of a coating ;. and I pre+ 
fently fatisfied myfelf, that a piece of uncoated glafs would 
receive juft fuch a charge as the tinged glafs had done. 

To afcertain, this matter, till, further, I ftruck\a tinge of 
this kind along two oppofite fides of a glafs tube, about half 
a yard in length; and holding it with my hand in contact 
with a part of this metallic tinge, found that it was excited 
juft like another tube: for when T difcharged the éle@ricity 
of any part of the tube where the tinge was ftruck, it did 
not at all difcharge other parts of the tube, whither the fame 
tinge extended. Alfo the electric fnapping from the tinged 
part of the glafs could not be diftinguithed from the {napping 
at other places ; except that, fometimes, where, the gold lay 
thicker than, ordinary, a denfer ftream of electric. matter was 
yifible, gn, its; furface, and ran in feyeral fall, freaks, in dif- 
ferent: diregtions,, from the place where the, fpark was taken, 

Tuts experiment feems to, thow, that a coating of, metal 
exceedingly near the furface of the glafs is not at all affected 
either 


720 MISCELLANEOUS Part VIII. 


either by the excitation or charging‘of its. and feems to;con~ 
firm the hypothefis of the elegtric fluid not ennesing’ the pores’ 
of the glafs. oid? moqu Hiod Yoropegdab oats 
As the giving this metallic tinge to bth desig a plate of: 
glafs is not’ very eafy, the reader will not, perhaps; be dif= 
pleafed to be informed in’ what'manner I fucceeded in it. 
After fatiguing myfelf a long time in endeavouring to:ftrike'a 
piece of Jeaf brafs into the two fides of a plate of plafs,: to 
ferve inftead of a coating (having always ‘broken the glafs in 
fixing either the firft or fecond coating) Iat length put two 
other pieces of glafs, one on each fide of that to which I in- 
tended to give the tinge, ‘with pieces: of leaf brafs between 
them both ; and making one explofion through both of them 
at the fame time, the upper and the lower piece of glafs were 
fhattered to pieces, but the middle piece (being equally af- 
fected on both fides) remained whole, ‘and the coatings were 
nearly as I wifhed them. v7? ply hitb ebcts 
‘0 tive load iilignsl ni biey 
+ Oa & 
VI. AN EXPERIMENT INTENDED TO ASCERTAIN WHETHER 
FERMENTATION contRiguTEs TO THE PRODUCTION 
OF ELECTRICITY. bprie-s| *, 


up 1 70R. 

; sboba aixv>, Povls 

SepremseR the 3d. In order to determine whether any of 

the eleétric fluid was difcharged from, or acquired by bodies 

in a ftate of fermentation; I hung a pair’of pith balls. at the 

extremity of a piece of wire communicating with 4’ quantity 

of fteel filings, fermenting with oil of vitriol) ‘inclofed! ina 
glafs veffel. - But they never feparated in the leaft. 


Sec. XIII. EXPERIMENTS. 721 


VII. AN EXPERIMENT INTENDED TO ASCERTAIN WHETHER 
EVAPORATION conTRIBUTES TO THE PRODUCTION 
OF ELECTRICITY. aa: 


‘Decemner ‘the 26th. T put a ‘fall | ‘quantity of water pon 
a thin piece of glafs, and made i it all fuddenly « evaporate, by? 
red hot iron” held ‘under its but ‘the glafs had acquired no de- 
gree of éleétricity. The ‘weather was ‘oie it: 


009 10 2 


st 110 


VIII. AN EXPERIMENT INTENDED TO ASCERTAIN WHETHER 

FREEZING se ACCELERATED OR RETARDED BY ELEC- 

9 PRIFICA TION. otis ai 2909 2 AG 

16d Jody bas a 3 Be DI_TwH INU TC 
| ls 

January the 6th. 1767. Lexpofed two difhes of water in 
the open air, while it was freezing intenfely, and eleétrified 
one of them pretty ftrongly; but could perceive no difference 
in the time,  cither, when:it began'to freeze, which was in 
about three minutes, ‘or:in the thicknefS of the ice when 
both had been frozen fome time. 

HapPeENincG to caft my eyes into the fields, out of the win- 
dow, through which I had put the board which I ufed for 
the purpofe of this « experiment, I obferved, on each fide of 
the elettrified wire, the fame dancing vapour, which is feen 


‘near the furface of the earth in a hot fummer’s day, or near 


any heated body that occafions an exhalation of vapours. 
4 Z IX, 


ilies 
22 «=6O MPSCELEANEOUS © PARE 
: 2 CS PL KON 


npering Mie eae 


Hs RAG, PAM SAIC oF GLASS 2UAGm SHI a, 
noP ESN a dic St SIME: FRARGER AAO PERO TICRGLY 


SEALED. “YT Tae ‘aay. ao 


DecemBer the oth min 

feet ‘in Tength, ‘oiaale! Pane shat r 
of March preceding, ; au nd then feale herme me 
not perceive-that - a Hy excite din n the; des 
heating or cooling: The di erence in the Fefult of thi 
periment from feveral of Mr. Canton’s, related p. sip6it T at- 
tribute to the thicknefs of the glafs of my tube. . Mr, Canton 
charged, {mall t balls exceeding thin. , I alfoobferved that there 
was no perceivable difference in the excitationof the charged 
or uncharged part of this tube, and that both parts aéted ex- 
ceeding well. 

I arrERwarps opened this tube;-and pouring a’ quantity 
of leaden. fhot into it,, found it to contain a very good charge: 
It gave me one,confiderable fhock,! and:!feveral; fmall lones3 
as I _made no, ufe.of .an, outward coating, »-bit-onlydifcharged 
it.by,grafping it in-feveral sort se handic soid? auods 

‘ot 29d) bath aad: 


bfon- oil? of yo yro fisQ.0). 04 made 
% Tur WEIGHT, REQUISETE, Ta, ARIE GRAD BODIES INTO 
CONTACT ASCERTAINED BY ‘THE, ELECTRICAL, SREROB SH: 


hohtinSsis sit 


» Iris plain iets optical experiments, “and alfo from ‘a vari- 
ety of other confiderations, that bodies of no gteat ‘Weight, 


lying 


Sei XHI. = © EX PEYRIMEINT 8.1 723 


lying upon one another, are not in actual contaét. As the 
fame thing is demonftrated by an eledtric fpark being vifible 
between ‘pieces of metal lying upon’ oné another, and other 
effects of elettitity (particularly the fafion of the parts through 


which it goes out of one body and enters another, not actually 


im: consecbin aie) shy ree i! 
tion, Ww. what weight was faffici Ay bog Ag on on 


contact. With thefe views, I menh ly 
hillings upon one another, and makin pattie it ¢ 
battery through thems, sistiog ee that che fl va pa ar 
pear, when;the; weight, was) fa a gp oo hn con 
taG.. But J found that the whole column, was no fa cient 5 
for every piece was melted on both, its fides, . fo, that every 
two, contiguous. fides had, fpots exactly correfponding to one 
another. The deepeft impreflions were ey ure the top. of 
the column,, but they did not diminith sai 
Perhaps {mall .particles of duft m pais ft ° 
from coming fufficiently near-one another... onal: 
AFTERWARDS, L gradually increafed BY “we ights,, “stl r 
found that about, fix ‘pounds. was, eee OF DYosPPEB ON, 
The fulion was,vilible under that, weighty, bu HeePRe ps 
above halfa pound more, though I “repeated ¢ experiment 
feveral times. . 
_Iaap fome. Sulpicione. that he largenefs ae the “explofion 
might have occafioned 2 a momentary repulfion, feparation, an 
confequent fufion of thefe pieces of metal, though prefied k by 
fuch a weight, but T found I was not able to produce any 
fufion ; under a greater weight than that above-mentioned, 
though, inftead of thirty two Aquare . feet of coated | gla, I 


ufed above fixty. oe Shi eae 
Se 422 1 Sis NOLES sae uf 


724 MISCELLANEOUS Part VIII. 


oflt-e PRinor Isufba ai jon sip + ,19dI0fs ono nogu gniyl 
oldiliy ont isd Aueq) virhelo as yd hetevinomeb 4 gaids sonst 
XI..Tur errecr or, “THE ELECTRICAL EXPLOSION TRAN~ 
igor 2) SM ERT ED (TAROVGH NARIONS | EAQNOR SI 16 sans 
avis jor «19 fron o-bas ybod sao46 30 #03 9i Morty 


A is BELIEVE it is iguauay hippo, “that. id and gine li- 
quors are turned four by lightning,’ and Twas’ d Ate 
afcertaining whether that fact (if it be one) was ow 
liquors being propeily ftruck with the lightning, nia. 
rite of the air, &c. ‘during ‘the ‘thunder ftorm.” In order to 
this, I ipieteea myfelf with a ‘glaft’ tube, in ete 
and about 4 quarter of an inch'in Wiameter, and by inferting 
a wire intd one end of it, which was ftopped ee fealing wax, 
could eafily tranfmit an cleétrical thock thtodg ey sare 
contained in it.” th i 2al pare Bit 
By this ineains, Hijedhae the 1 3th. uégan wited i 
the explofion of the battery through this tube, ‘Aled with /ry 
Jmall beer, and obferved a confiderable quantity bie 
or fomething in the form of bubbles,’ to afcend in’ it {is 
when I tafted it, I could perceive no difference bet eid 
that out of which it was taken. No doubt the efeape of fo. 
much air would tend to make it grow ftale fomething fooner 
I THEN difcharged feveral large fhocks through a tube’ = 
ed with red wine, but, after two or three: days, ‘could 
ceive no alteration in its tafte, or other fenfible qualities. a 
this difcharge, the eleétric matter did not immediately trike 
the wine, but a metal rod, which juft touched its furface : 
but I afterwards gave it two or three more fhocks, in whic 
the wine itfelf was made to receive the explofion, “but there 
was no variation in the effects, nit SOE Tea 
I PASSED 


ee 


See. XIII. EXPERIMENTS. © 725 


\/IppasseEp ‘the fhock through a tube filled with m/z, in 
both the methods above-mentioned ;\ but it was fweet three 
days ‘after. Alfova tube filled with: fre/b ale received feveral 
large fhocks without vernal sare any fenfible change of pro- 
perties. 
~ Twoall thefe explofions Theld the tube in my hand; without 
feelingiany thing of the fhock. 

I atso made the electric {park fible a great number of 
times in a {mall quantity. of /yrup of violets, without producing 
any change'of colour, or other fenfible qualities. 


XII. OBpsERVATIONS ON THE COLOURS OF ELECTRIC LIGHT. 


FinpinG it advanced in the writings of feveral electricians 
(who muft have copied it from’ one atiother, without ever re- 
peating the experiment, though it may be done fo foon) that 
electric light contained no prifmatic colours; I had the curi- 
ofity to try fo extraordinary a fact, and immediately’ faw both 
the fallacy of the experiment when it was firft made, and the 
caufe of it. Holding a prifm before my eyes, while the elec- 
tric fparks were taken at the prime conduétor, I obferved as 
beautiful prifmatie colours as any that are exhibited by the 
image of the fun; but when the light was a little diffufed, as 
in thofe red’or purple parts of a long fpark, “as it is called, 
the colours were not fo vivid, and lefs eafily diftinguifhed 
from one another; and when the light was ftill more diffufed; 
through a vacuum, the prifm made no fenfible alteration in 
the appearance of it. Thus the middle part of any large ob- 

; je 


726 MISCELLANEOUS Parr VII. 


je appears of its natural colour through a prifm + for though 
the rays be really feparated, they are immediately confounded 
with others from different parts of the fame object; fo that 
its natural colour muft neceflarily be the refult ~9) | 
As the flames of different bodies yield very different pro- 
portions of the prifmatic colours, I have! often thought: of iat- 
tempting to afcertain the proportion of thefe colours 
tric light, and compare it with the proportion. 
from light procured in various other ways. Thi 
bly determine what that heterogeneous page h: ve 


fenfible aes of ele€tricity ; but I pe pon tiada 
purfue the inquiry. Mee 

I swat clofe this article with juft mentioning anot 
ception, which fome perfons, may .poffibly, lie, under,, 
refpect to what is called. the. length of the 
When a jar is difcharged, it may be imagined, | 
fire is feen extending from the infide to the outfic 
is pretty certain, that that appearance. 
very rapid motion of a fingle ball of fire; in the 
as a lighted torch, with no greater motion than a 
can give to it, will feem to make an entire. 
That the fire of an eleétrical explofion confifts..o 
cylinder, of no great length, feems pretty evident 
of the experiments with the circles, p. 667,-4 n . 
diameter of the circle was the fame, whether th 
was taken at the diftance of half an inch, or of tv 
alfo from the experiments of its paflage over furf 
it was fometimes made twenty times longer than. 
out any fenfible diminution of its thicknefs. 


= 


Saey XU." EXPERIMENTS. 727 


SMITI. OpseRvVATIONS ON THE SMALL WIRES THAT COL- 
“LEC? ELECTRICITY FROM THE EXCITED GLOBE. 


Havine made ufe of feveral brafs wires, about two inches 
and a half Jong, to colleét the electric matter from my globe; 
I obferved, after a month or two, that about half an inch of 
the ends of them, which touched the globe, had contraéted 
a placknefs, particularly on the fide which lay next the globe. 
L then took them off the ring to which they had hung, and rub- 
bing them carefully, obferved, that the fame friction which 
rnade the reft of the wire quite bright, made bit little altera- 
tion in| this acquired blacknefs. Recollecting, at the fame 
time, S. Beccaria’s theory of magnetifm, inftead of replacing 
the wires, I hung two very fine needles in their place; and 
December the 2oth. after about two months, in which I had 

rade the moft ufe of the machine, I examined them, and 
Found that blacknefs’ at their. points, but could not be fure 
that they had acquired any degree of magnetifm. They had, 
i ndeed, a very fmall degree ; ‘but I had not examined them 
(Co very accurately before I hung them on, as I did afterwards. 
"The experiment deferves to be repeated with more care, but 
it requires a longer and more conftant ufe of an eleétrical ma- 
chine than, it is probable, I fhall ever have an opportunity of 
employing. 


sath adip «i 3 


728  #$MISCELLANEOUS Par VIIL. 


“5 Peped 

XIV. ExperRIMENTS INTENDED. TO ASCERTAIN THE 
DIFFERENCE IN THE CONDUCTING POWER OF DIFFER- 

. ENT METALS. at ite 


In a converfatien I once had with Dr. Fraokling rr. ( 
ton, and Mr. Price, I remember atking whet F 
bable that there was. any difference in the co 
of different metals ; and if there was, whether ae w 
ble to afcertain that difference ; and_as fata as. ae fe lit 
it was the Doétor who fuggefted the method whict 
cribed to him, p. 490. Since that part ° ee 4 ie 
printed, I have endeavoured to carry the | i 
tion, by tranfmitting the fame explofion I rer) 
two wires at a time, of two different. “metals, ar and 
fame thicknefs. They were hooked one to the o 
held faft in hand vifes, after they were meafurec 
of compafies to exactly a fame length. a 


JYUDIS & ; 
| 


hour 


wire. The explofion waite Pci ‘the 
copper untouched. The brafs likewife 
joined with the copper, and the iron when, oined 
brafs. her ky 

So far the experiments were extremely we : 
charge of the battery fufficing to determine the ¢ 
tween any two; but when I came to compare ‘hed 


Sec. XIII. EXPERIMENTS. . 729 


fect metals, I found much more difficulty, and was obliged 
to try four or five charges of the battery upon every two: for, 
their conducting powers being nearly the fame, I either made 
the charge too high, and difperfed them both; or too low, 
and touched neither of them. At length, I happened to hit 
upon.fuch charges, that the copper vanifhed, and left both 
the filver and the gold; and the gold remained when the 
filver was difperfed) .The hook, however, of the filver was 
melted off when the copper was difperfed, and the hook of 
the gold when the filver was difperfed: for the heat is al- 
ways the greateft where the electric fire pafles from one body 
to another. Before the difperfion both of the copper and the 
filver, I had made explofions of fuch a ftrength, as though ° 
too fmall to melt them, gave them a bluifh tinge. é 

From thefe experiments it is eafy to fettle the order in 
which, the metals above-mentioned are to. be: ranked, with 
refpe& to the power of electricity to melt them. | It is as 
follows. Iron, brafs, copper, filver, gold. 

_ Nor being able to get /ead or tin drawn into wires, I got 
pieces of thofe metals, rolled into plates equally thin, and 
taking {mall flips, of equal length and breadth, I tranfmitted 
the explofion through them ;_ when the lead gave way the 
firft. I intended to have compared thefe plates with others 
of iron, brafs, &c. but had not an opportunity. I have lit- 
tle doubt but that tin would melt before iron; though indeed 
I had expected that tin would have melted before lead, and 
gold before filver. But according to Mr.:Wilke’s experi- 
ments, p. 335, lead is a worfe conductor than any of the o- 
ther metals. My own experiments on the circular fpots, p. 
662 made me expect that gold would have melted before 


filyer. 
5A Ir 


"730 MISCELLANEOUS Part VIII. 
‘Ir is very remarkable, that when iron wire is melted by 


the electric explofion, bright fparks ave generally difperfed a- 


bout the room, in all directions; but that they are feldom, 
or never feen when wire of any other metal is‘ufed.~ If but 
a {mall refidaum of a’battery-be taken between two iron rods, 
when the explofion is’ extremely’ little, a great number’ of 
{mall fparks will fly in all direétions' from the iton;’ to the 
diftance of about an inch, and exhibit a beautiful appearance. 
Fewer of thefe {parks will be feen if one of the ‘rods be brafs 


and, I think, none, in thefe fmall pine if ‘aiey ‘both 
be brafs. ; 2 


Berrore any ufe can be made of thefe’ expense trae! 


’ termine the relative conduéting power of the feveral metals, 
the order in which they melt with common’ heat fhould be 
compared with ‘the order in which they melt with the elec- 
trical explofion ; and I could not readily find a table of that 
kind. I think, however, that iron is “faid to require more 
heat to bring it into a ftate of fufion than any other metal, 
and it requires but a fmall force of cleétricity to do it; fo 
that I think thefe two orders are not the fame. ‘Before this 
matter can be fettled, it fhould likewife be found, how much 
more eafily any of the metals will be’ melted before another, 
by tranfmitting thocks through wires of different lengths and 
thickneffes, which would be a very tedious bufinefs. I make 
no doubt but that an explofion which melts a copper wire of 
any given diameter would difperfe an'iron wire of twice the 
diameter, fo that copper would be a much greater fecurity, as 
a conductor to guard a building from lightning than iron, 
befides its being lefs liable to ruft; but then: it is more ex=. 
penfive. 


~ XV. 


Sec. XIII. EXPERIMENTS, 731 


XV. ExPpeRIMENTS wiITH AN ELECTRIFIED CUP, 


. Isnatz clofe the account of my experiments with a {mall 
fet, in which, as’well-as in the laft, [have little to boaft be~ 
fides the honour of following the inftru¢tions of Dr. Franklin.) 
He informed me, that he had found cork balls to be wholly 
unaffected by the elegtricity of a metal cup, within which. 
they were held; and he defired me to repeat and afcertain the: 
fact, giving me leave'to make it public. 

AccorpiINGLy, December ‘the 21ft. I eleGtrified a tin 
quart veffel, ftanding upon a ftool of baked wood ; «and ob~ 
feryed, that a:pair of pith ‘balls, infulated by being faften- 
ed to the end of ‘a ftick of glafs, and hanging entirely 
within the cup, fo that no part of the threads were above the: 
mouth of it, remained juft where they were placed, without 
being in the leaft affe&ted by the eleétricity ; but that, if a 
finger, or any conducting fubftance communicating with the 
earth, touched them, or was even prefented towards them, 
near the mouth of the cup, they immediately feparated, be- 
ing’ attracted to the fides; as they alfo were in raifing them 
up, the moment that the threads appeared above the mouth 


of the cup. 
- Ir the balls had hung in the cup a confiderable time with- 


out touching it, and they were taken out» immediately after: 
the électricity of the cup was difcharged, they were found to 

have acquired no degree of eletricity. 
Ir ng had touched any part of the cup, though they 
5A2 fhowed 


732 MISCELLANEOUS Part VIL 


fhowed no electricity while they were within it; yet, upon 
being taken out, they appeared to have acquired fome; which 
was more if they had touched a part near the edge of thecup, 
lefs if they had touched any part more remote from the edge, 
and leaft of all if they had touched the bottomonly. If they — 
had firft touched the fide near the top, and then'the bottom, 
they came out with that fmall degree of eleétricity which: 
they would have acquired, if they had touched ‘the bottom: NT Le el 
only. ) ohare set , 
. In any cafe, if the balls were taken opt while the cup re-, aa 
mained eleétrified, they neceflarily .acquired. ‘eae drapes tik 
electricity, in pafling the mouth of the cup. ' ceoggttberigg tah 
To purfue'this experiment a little further, di ‘took a fmall ; 
coated phial, fuch as is reprefented upon the ftool [e Pl. ii.) x 
and obferved, that when I held it by. the wire, within the 
eletrified-cup, it acquired no charge, the cledtricity of the: 
. cup affe@ting both the infide and outfide 
the external coating touched the bottom of the cup, 1 
al received a very fmall charge. If it was made to to 


phial, which communicated with the infide co 
further removed from the influence of; the e 
cup. 


of electricity is fubje& to the fame saan 
vitation, and is therefore according to the fquares of tl 
tances ; fince it is eafily demonttrated, that were thevea 
the form of a hell, a body in the infide of it would _ 
attracted to one fide more than another?) Leth: as zi 


Sec. XIII. ° BXPERIMENTS.: 933 


Doru it not follow from the experiments of the balls, 
compared with thofe with the phial, that no body can receive 
electricity in one: place,,;unle{s an opportunity be given for its 
parting with it in another; at leaft, that a quantity muft be 
repelled from any particular part before any more can enter 5 
fince a fmall body can no more receive electricity whe 
fides are equally expofed ‘to’ ‘the aétion of an’ not 
than a phial can be charged when | both i its, coatings are are ey ; 
expofed | to the fame ele@tricity : Bee 

Do not thefe e experiments, likewife, vour “the hy en 
of S. Betcaria, that there is no se “attri ttraétion iy 
a communication of neat? i : 


& ocd. Dis: niwigid o} noilso 
bar re ot [oq tert gon) 
re 7 ; 

ee eek al ty 2A Jo. Saodinl 301 xg. 

boy y ft of? apy sued oC] aM «: aa@A. 12°39 
wos it 2360 ws ei Darin izgonatidin sirBola aprit 
i; ,lolay gteie s teilt bovisida ot] 

; pate ty? ‘ os i 
I : ort sO AW (VSD AE US 0990 OA} 5-3 
jadi Sanogqu} yd fel etds 20? elauosos. eiygs298 2 wb, 

“191102 S3uhoiq yiitss vin sri do yiiondsls od3 at gnoiaxsils 
sai coidw ne wlewom-to wintiels adi st anoisils tiobacq 
‘at ae ES PU iw : bigt ; 
n fyst 10 t iol st ,79 dV 
1 ‘ *\ bonlizBols lets ct bose a 

od $ il} a3 0OUs oa 87 

y hein fnsD to Msdallgh” lV 1 aa | 


ADDITIONS 


734 ot ADDLETLO ¥ $ ATER: 922 
clled orlt Lo eanorminsgxs oi? mot<wolletea - mrt, 
sean ailecabenbiectbi lsidgods dsive Qoddudsine Saxaqrring: 


> ADDITIONS: ai > CORRECTIONS)” 
pat sitons-niies eDer ails 
;teha9 4 sion vn ¢ 5 Fike ‘hla A AG at Sollogax: 


itis ‘to 999%: S108 ‘On ALD soot Lhasa . 

es areas Yad, polite inthe yeat 
IIR 2307 LOD f rod ¢ ote ged 5) sai "t 

P. to. Nore. “Volume 2. Seg th iis 2 et 2 


ODE AKO work, hoy the rer 
a to © difinguith i part ‘of the volume, 
thing that relates to the fubje& of electricity 
together, among the phyfological papers. 

P. 37. 1. 14. Inftead of Mr. Wheeler, read 

P.°53. App: Mr. Du Faye-was the firft 1 
that eledtric fubftances attraét the dew more than 
‘He obferved that a glafs veffel, placed on a me! 
fet in the open air all day, will often be wet wl 
is dry. $. Beccaria accounts for this fact, by f 
alterations in the electricity of the air eafily prod 
pondent alterations i in the electricity of metals, in : 


Whenever, therefore, the ftate of the electric fl 
is altered, the glafs is eleétrified Lhe or anlar and 
attracts the vapours in the air. * 

P. 145. App: Mr. Jallabert of Geneva 


tana 
* Beccaria dell’ elettricifmo naturale et artificiale, p. 179+ 
eMolrrlrggqa { 


neta cneded 


ann CORRECTIONS. 735 
riments on plants further than the Abbé Nollét' had done ; 
and, by electrifying bottles in which the plants: ‘Were ‘growing 
in water, and placing in the “fame ‘expofure - other bottles, 
containing plants of the fame kind ;- proved, in the cleareft 
manner, «that the eleétrified plants ‘always: grew fafter; and 
had finer ftems, leaves, and’ flowers ‘than’ thofe pte ‘were 
not eleétrified,"and‘confumed more of their water. *” 

P.. 212. Tue article relating to the conducting | power at 
animal fluids’ was compofed from’my memory. Thad written 
to Dr. Franklin: for more’ a¢curate information, but his‘an+ 
{wer came too lates! He informs me, that, of animal ‘fluids, 
Mr. xiahefiey! and oxtietl in America had rages! ‘ied blood 
and urine, and alfo'the finews’ of animals newly killed ; which, 
helunderftood, were'all found to be eer good conduc- 
tots} remarkably better than water!) « — ft 

P. 321. 1. 2. App: Mr. Wilfon obferves, ‘that hie a 
tourmalin, which he had from Dr. Morton, was held be- 
tween the eye and the light, and viewed in the direétion 
through which the ele@rie fluid’is found’ fo pas, it appears 
of a darker colour confiderably than when itis viewed at right 
angles to the former direGtion. This appearance, he fays, 
obtains in many other tourmalins, efpecially wee they hap- 


"pen to be as conveniently fhaped. + 


P. 381. 1.2. Reap, Jf it will come on #8 Pall oocn: you 
being at the change, obferve thefe figns. There was fome mif- 
take in the work from which I firft copied the account, and 
Thad made the beft fenfe I could of it; but I have fince ac- 


S Ib. p. 125. + Phil. Tranf. Vol. 53, p. 448. 
cidentally - 


736 ADDITIONS: “AND ~ CORRECTIONS, 
cidentally met with the authority from. which it was taken, 


whieh is Phil. Tranf. abridged. , Vol. 2.) p. BOGGS Fa 
P. 518. 1.28. App.:. The Sor; of.a posted, plate of gla 
is repepGanted 6 plate ii. " prigizcada 


,P...530. 1. 24... App.: Mr. Retotiits, misthetnatical: ins 
ftrument maker in the Hay Market, I am. informed, has late- 
ly conftructed an electrical machine, ‘on a plan very different 
from all that I have yet heard of, in'which, friGtion is not 
given to any kind of hollow glafs veffel whatever; but to a 
circular plate of glafs, about nine-inches in‘diameter, ¢ 
Tuis plate turns vertically, and rubs againft four cufhions, 
each an inch and a half long, placed at the oppofite ends of 
the vertical diameter. -The conduétor is a brafs tube, and 
has two horizontal branches coming from it, reaching with- 
in about half an inch of the extremity, of the glafs;. fo that 
each branch, itis faid, takes off the BR Hanoy * 


two of the cufhions,. 


Tue quantity of electricity excited by this mbchine i is fia, 


by the maker, to be greater than can be produced from others. 
It is alfo faid to be much lefs affected by moift weather 5. and 
the mechanifm being re fimple, renders, it lefS liable to be 
out of order. hoa elans 

Nor having had an opportunity of feeing this wacko a 
cannot affert any thing concerning it from my own know- 
ledge ; but the conftruction is original and ingenious. 


A CATAL- 


. 


A ‘caTALocue oF BOOKS WRITTEN ON THE SUBJECT OF EvectriciTy, ExChLuy 
SIVE OF PAPERS IN BOOKS OF PHILOSOPHICAL TRANSACTIONS, AND OTHER 
MISCELLANEOUS 'WORKS} DISTINGUISHING {my asrerisms] THOSE wHicK 
THE AUTHOR HAD SEEN, AND MADE USE OF IN COMPILING bi hy WORK. 


* 7“ ILBERT de Magnete Magnéticifque corporibus, 1600, London, folio. 
* Orth de Gueric: shar yoeskactat ea Magdeburgica, 1672, Reta 
= 8 fico mi experiments, 1709, 171 vo. 
PP diferation concernin eledtricity, vas la ve 4 
os A. Haufenii novi profeétus in eledtricitatis, 1743-0 ey 
ollet’s conjettures fur les caufes de I’ elettricité des , Paris, 1745+ Wilfon, p. 12. 


pice fur V ele€tricité des corps, Re 17 4 at. ; 

* Wilfor’s eflay towards an explication th Phenomena of elec deduced from 

* Watfon’s iments and obfervations, tendin; to illuftrate the nature and properties 
aba > 34. edi. 1746, London, ! 


‘ ottavo. 
+e eel to the experiments and obfervations, Dios papal 
of » 1746, 1747, London, ottayo, 


7 Fo yf rm he nl electricity, 1746, London, ottavo. © 


Fi theoria eleétricitatis, more explicata, Hall, 1 4 it 
yy peers poe Spyies 1748, Bath, oftavo. mb: : 
Boxe’s rechi oy Ja caufe,. et fur la veritable theorie de I’ eleétricité 1746. 


Conjetture fifi che intorna i fenomeni della machina elettrica, Rome, 1746, ofavoe 


Hitt. p. 168. 

FrancifrrPiont?’ s lettere della elletricita medica, Venice, 1747+ 

Boxe’s tentamina elettrica, Wittemburg, 1747. 

* Rackftrow’s mifcellaneous dbfervations, together with a colleétion of experiments on 
eledtricity, He , London, oa he 

Secondat’s hiftory o: icity, 1 ’s preface, p. 2 

* Watfon’s account of pepe et ys to difcover cn ici power would 
be fenfible at great diftances , &c: 1748, London, oétavo. 

Recueil des oer: ot es a traduits, a) dentaad: et del’ anglois, Paris, 1748, 


o€tavo 
* Nollet’s rates fur les caufes particulieres des phenomenes eletriques, 1749, 


Paris, twelves. 
A latin didtwation on-sleQeisiey bP Erol Pipes gp ead ae . Hiftoire. | 
° Wier’ treatife on eleétricity, 1 Soa c¥ ; i book is 
quoted in this work by the tit 
* Boulanger’s traité de la caufe et des Prenomenes de *eledtricité, 1 0; Paris, twelves. 
NB. B. Ihave feen nb more than one part ems Boor » acbich fbad of Dr. Watton. 
more parts theré are of the have not been informed. 


How many 
Veratti obfervations fur sieBricit, sux ema a joint les experiences faites 
7 etary pour guerir les paralytiques au moyen et 
: ' 1750, twelves. 
Jabert’s experimenta eleétrica ufibus medicis applicata, 1750. _ 
JeGtricoram effectuum explicatio, by Father Bina, 1751. i 
* Hiftoire 3d sr gut et particuliere de l’ eleétricité, 1752. twelves. 
'. H. Winkler’s progr. de avertendi falminis artificio ex doétrina cledtricitatis, Leipfic, 


. Legere la ha dell’ elettricifino artificiale e naturale, 1753, Turin, quarto. 
. The copy of this treatife which I perufed, and which was procured for me by 

Dr. Franklin, was defiBive; a being wanting, vix. from p. 182 to rg? 

A, 


“A CATALOGUE or” BOOKS 4% 


_ wna diferacio de vivibas edices metic 
re 's new experiments cheats on ee 
“America, part 1. reg * 
part 2. 2d. ed. ae 


wanna necenaeneneee 1 Lor 
Brevis relatio de- Paledhicks ie 


Lucerne Helvetioram. 
let’s letters, vol. 2. 
i differtatio 


1s) =f 
on ittal) - 


* Giambaita B caria’s lettere dell atm ‘ee sae Bnei 
* Gi ts jectaria ‘ i 0 
Wilfon. aa sid Hin’ cher ic 
1759, prereen  e j 
* #; Pi? energy bee 


Beatin a ae 


Paris, twelves. 


sa i yma pina 
AEpinus 1762. 
5 Nate's Ny peta h , tome 6th, 
* Fobannes Fi Fania ‘de novis. 
moirs of the y,of Turin for the year.1765, 
* Lovet’s philofophical efffays in three parts, 1766, 


Orner Boos THE DATES OF WHICH 1 Mave Nor 
Winkler’s effay far laa la sot la scant ete effets de iyven 


Bose’s 

Gherdtone fac Feed mrs Yr eet pat Me 

Nouvelle differtation far TPeleturicité 

Mt. Waitz trailé. de’ P Seeuiche et 

Mr. Kragen’s meditations on eledtricity., Hall. 
‘Tentamen de vi eleétrica ejufque jhenomenis, 
L ane Berand S.J, shea leita, Pecborg 
Watkins on Sheeticity 


cane coe ala 
— ig» he will paba head ved perm be ee 
all think myfelt great obliged so any ite 
why trea! contains a difcovery 0! prion 
sa Rh 2 rp at 


A 


INDEX © of 


IR, condenfed, obftraéting excitation, 
A 581.4 current of it from electri- 
fea points, a fis 591. eledtrified, 
- 205, &c. a conduétor when heated, 240. 
— 598. receiving a charge ‘ite 


ams anges ae to hws she power af astrti- 
bodies, 


beft ih pone OF Ce, 5 Ten 

ation, the experiment {0 called, 
Bote teats a eleétrical, invented, 75. particle 

3- Sar to si by the 


B a eriiee electrical, firft made, 167, the 


ai 
y 
elec- 


APILLARY hack eledtrified, 137. 

Charcoal, fhown.to be a conduétor, 602. 
Charging, and difcharging glafs jars and bat- 

teries, ex) ts concerning, 642. 

Cireles, Sas ry apes eleétrical: ri pemnpa 7 659. 
Cobefion, of bodies by eleétricity,. 269. 
Coating, jars with tinfoil, 87. a 
eye rhe ‘thought to a4 rN 


that opinion refuted, eee 


5B2 


N 
TET N-GS. 


fark, 77+ Of filk affecting electricity, 267, 


prow metallic introduced, 
‘weight 


Contad, the required to to bai g Soller 


into it, 722. 
Cy I hiodaced; 7. $ 
Cylinders 5 firk uted, oT ie 

ISEASES, cured by.cledtricity, the pal- 

», 409, 419. tetanus, 411. deafnefs, 

. various - hyferical diforders, 

ite oka, be ath St. Vi- 

tis , ates in which it ‘has. done 

harm, 412, 

Défiderata, i ine , 

Difiufion Of eledtriciy Sa ethene of enn 

. dudting fubftances, 621. 
ARTHQUAKES, ee by electrici- 

ty, Pp thon imii 
Efiuvia, ee ioe 4 Seine? “its condugting 
I. 

£ jes, the two, difcoyered, 49,115,161, 

: 8 ts relating 10 221, 

22 0, 232, 237, 272, 235. 
Rlaricigg Seavetins i aia see 2. commu. 
_ nicated to conduttors, 27, 33. conveyed to 


great diftances, 30, 46, 100. throw: P 
‘glafs, 42, 78. collected fag he uced 
111, 116. pervadi dhe Goblinices 


of metals, 116. couiadliag ® various fubftan- 

- Ges into its path, 295, 635. tends to move 
in a right line. 

EleGvie atmofpheres, the affeCtions of bodies i im- 

merged 


IN D-E xX 


mer: in them, 120, 248, 256. experi- 
ae them, 185. Ba vible, 187, 
214. their exiftence denied, 2€1. whether 
they exclude air, 264. 

Ele@rical attra@ion and repulfion, through glafs 
veffels hermetically fealed, 119. fhewn to 
exift always together, 427. 

EleGric \ight obferved, 9, 17, 23, 725» ina 
barometer, 74, 128. vifible Pete 

+ Wax, 294. in vacuo, 298. fometimes denfer 
at the furfaces of bodies, 301. returning 
after being repelled from the infide of an 
exhaufted glafs veflel, 302. pofitive and 

negative, 309, 311. produced by the dath- 
ing of air againit glafs, ib. peculiarly pe- 
netrating, 312. antient appearances of it, 


4s 

Elbatical repulfion obferved, 8, 48, 52. 

Eledtric poock, given by a piece of Portland 
ftone, 239. by a plate of air, 259° by feal- 
ing wax, &c, 288. a new method of giving 
it, 629, 630. given after keeping the glals 

‘ oR or a long time, and hermetically feal- 
ed, 722. 

Ehéric parks, firing inflammable fabftances, 
23 755 _— 156. — experiment is 

man . a tion concerning 
the Siete ork. 7156 : 

EleGrics, various fubftances found to be fo, 3, 
6, 27, 35. diftinguifhed from non-eleétrics, 
45. per Je, the term firft ufed, 66. a table 
oi them, 125. compared, 224. ree 

. they contain ‘a larger» proportion 
eleétric fluid, 716. worehing the dew, 734. 

Elerometers, 133, 521. ; 

Evaporation, increaied by ele€trification, does 
not produce eleétricity, 721. . . 

Excitatién, increafed by moiftening the rubber, 
131° by amalgam, 196. by lining glafs 

» globes with other eleétrics, 199. of glafs 
tubes with oiled filk,‘ 195. ‘experiments 
concerning it, 581. ~ 

Experiments, entertaining’ones, 547, &c. with= 


out the Leyden phial,551. with the Leyden’ 


phial, 561. with various inftruments, 569. 
' 


ALLING STAR; an eleétrical  pheno- 
amenon, 373. 


Fermentation, whether it promotes eledtricity, 


720. 
Freexing, not affetted by eledtricity, 723. 


OF 


aling _ 


‘THEN 6S oo 


584. x al 4. 
AIL, produced t 
: ee el te 
Hurricanes, an electrical ¢ 
CE, whether an eleétric or a 
128, 217, 600. ais: 
Iand cbryftal, experiments 


which it paffed, ib. the d 
of its two fides difcovered 
fis of it, 167. the red 
its two fides com 
the difcharge t 
289. new met! 
to it, 288, 
it, 561.) Nas 
Lightning and cle€tricity 
127; 174, &e. ie f 
Sette ead vaiton 333+ | 
the two kinds, 334. mel 
fufion,. 335. miaialaens b 
$22. edict of it 19. @ gre 


ICN“D-E X50 F 


it brought down by a kite, 353. fatal to 
profeffor Richman, 358. . 

Liquors, great explofions difcharged through 
them, 724. 


ACHINES ELECTRICAL, obferva” 

tions on their conftruétion, 508, &c* 

various forms of them, 525, &c. the author’s 
deferibed, 530. 

Magic pi@ure, 563: 

Magnetifm, and cleéricity compared, 5, 6, 

431, 727. not affected with ¢ eGtrification, 

33» given by the eleétric explofion, 178, 


I. 

Mexia, prattical, for the ufe of young clec- 
tricians, 535. 

Medical eledricity, ar 2 

Medicated tuber, 146, &c. 

Metallic condu@ors, their ufe in guarding build-. 
ings, 398. exemplified in tne cafe of New- 
berry church in New England, 499: in the 
houfe of Mr. Weft, 400. in St. Bride’s 
church, 401. the beft conftruction of them, 


405, &e. * 
Metals, melted by the eleétrical explofion, 292, 
649. making on refiftance to the pain 
of the eleétric fluid, 212. their calces, elec- 
trics, 238. calcined and revivified by the 
eleétric explofion, 294. tinge given by them 
to glafs, 187, 649, 678. experiments re- 
lating to it, 718. the eleétric {park taken 


through pieces of them, 714, the difference ~ 


of their conducting power, 7238. 
Mufical tone of eleeical exp lafion, 716. 


O* fhown to be a non-conduétor, 614. 
P APER, quire of, pierced with the ele&tri- 


cal explofion, 274. ° 
Phofphorus, put upon pointed bodies electrified, 


Pointed bodies,’ their effe8. in ele@tricity, 121, °y, 


144, 172, 173, *, % d 
Propofitions, a feries of them .comprifing all 
the general properties of electricity, 433. 
‘UERIES, and hints calculated. to pro- 

mote further difcoveries in electricity, 
‘487. 


To. F N-G 


AIN, produced by ele@tricity, 368. - 

Rake went a 

GoENCE, what branches of it are peculi- 
arly ufeful to an eleétrician, 499. 


Spheroids, ufed inftead 5, 1405 

Spider, ele&trical, 553. 

Star, eleétrical, 75. 

Steam, how affected by eletricity, 215. 

Stockings,cleétrical experiments with them, 267. 

Stone, Portland a conduétor when'warm, 239. 
the conduéting power of various ieee, 


619. ‘ 
Surfaces, of eleétric fubftances their different 

properties, 222. of conducting fubftances, 
the eleétrical explofion pafling over them, 
85. 


Snow, produced by eleétricity, 371. 
of globes.” 


685 : 
9 okt of eledtricity, 451. Mr. 


. 


Wilfon’s, 450. Nollet’s, 451. Du» 


Tour’s, 454. of pofitive and negative elec- 


tricity, 455. of two eleétric fluids, 468. * 


Thunder clouds, defcribed, 341. theory of them, 


344+ 
Tourmalin, known to the antients, 314. the 
fite ele Oe two fides, 316. the 
change of its icity in heating and cool-, 
ing, 321. its el rties 
er precious ftones, 324. excited by {mall 
. alteration of the heat of this atmofphere, 
326. fhown to collec its eleétricity from 
contiguous bodies, 699. the refult of heat- 
ing and cooling it in contaé& with various 
fubftances, 701. : 


ACUUM, i made in it, 41, 
V 74s 124. op. Torricellian, 571, made 
by the cleétsical explofion, 638. >” 


cS aay 


properties found in . 


‘1 7 ATER, an: imperfe& condudor of e- 


* le€tricity, 209. : 
Water fpouts, an ele€trical phenomenon, 377. 
Wheel ele€trical, 565. felf-moving, 566. 
Wood, baked, a non-conductor. oh of 
. : : ¢ . : 


AN 


A 


N 


INDEX of NAMES. 


PINUS, 135, 260, 2 06, 
yeaa: eee 

Al: > 74 83, 85, 118. 
Ammerfin, Windelinus, 196. 


ACON, Lord, 51 
Beccaria, S. Giambattifta, 197, 2 
213, 264, 288, 293, 311, 33% 3 
377» 391, 406, 428, 465. 
an, bern, 198, 230, 244. 
Bevis, Dr. 87, 88, 333- 
Bianchi, 146. 
Bohadtch, 409. 
Boulanger, 124, 132+ 
Boyle, 5, 8. “ 


ANTON, Mr. 95, 133, 195 204, 220, 
240, 248, come 321, 332s 334 462. 

yon heteeaal f ee 6 geen aura 
on ele atmofpheres, 263, experimen 
on glafs balls heresiéaliy ferled, 296, ob- 
fervations on Mr. Wilfon’s experiment con- 
cerning eleétric light in vacuo, 306, on the 
tourmalin, 322, comparifon of the quantity. 
of pofitive and negative eleGtricity of the 
clouds, #35: 

Chalmers, Mr. 374. 

Coke, Mr. 129. 

Cuneus, 811. 


ALIBARD, 293,° $27. 

Darwin, Dr. 215, 264. 
Delaval, Mr. 238, 242, 405s 
Delor, 330. 


» 209, 
» 373» 


iers, 64, Bete ip rtei(hou 
Du Faye, 45, 447+ ee 


Du Tour, 


Oy 454+ 


ELES, Mr. Henry, 215. 
Ellicott, Mr. 133. aa 


Grey, Mr. Stephe: n, 2 
Guericke, Otto, 


RANKLIN, Dr. 158, 170, 185, 2 
412) 4552 456, 563. ibe 
re tiag ok ha or 
»7ts 27 : 
6 3 739 127 : 


AEN, Antonius de, F 
Hales, Dr. 156. wm 
Hamilton, Dr. 429. 
Hart, Dr. 410, 411. 
Hawkefbee, 15, 25. 


Heberden, Dr, William, 317, 697. 
“J ALLABERT, 128, 408. 


Knight, Dr. 335¢ 


ANE, Mr. 312, 521, 605. 
Lemery, 315. 

Linneus, 315. 

Lovet, Mr. 415, 

Ludolf, 73, 74. 


MAZEAS 


a 


INDEX °o 
AZEAS, 330 414- 

Miles, Dr. 75, 118, 119+ 

- Monnier, 97, 101, 116, 130, 33%» 362. 
Maufchenbroeck, $2, 83. 


EWTON, Sir Ifaac, 12. 
Nollet, the Abbé, 72, 96, 120, 132, 


"1359 152s 199» 35% 408) 410 4512 477+ 
Noja, Duc de, 315. ae Bereaeae 


LINY, 2. 
Price, Mr. 439- 


ACKSTROW, Mr. 555. 
Richman, 358, 288. 
Romas, Mr. 353- 


AUVAGES, Mr. 409. 

— Mr, 88, 118, 301+ 
Speedler, 
Stukeley, Be SB ie 
Symmer, Mr. 266, 468 


F NAMES. 


HALES, 1. 
Theophraftus, 1. 
Trembley, Mr. 135- 


AUDONIA, Aleffandro Amadeo, 271, 
Verati, S. 146. 


AITZ, 80. 
Wall, Dr. 10. 
Watfon, Dr. 76, 85, 101, T12, 1315 153s 
8, Oly Ally 455 
Wel ae John, ny 7 
Wheeler, Mr. 31, 5 7 
pwd rady ind 2555 abe,’ 307, 463. 
92, 116, 132, 224 3045 


4a 3332 4059 415» 42 
Me 71s a Ha 


wh sheploe vy Dr. 417. 


318, 
2 45 Oe 
> 294+ 


Publ ifhed by the Author of this Treatife, and fold by J.. JOuNSON, 


in Pater nofler row. 


Price 38, 6d. 8°. 


AN 


E S 


ON 


S 


A COURSE OF: 


A Y 


LIBERAL EDUCATION 


FOR : 
CIVIL AND ACTIVE LIFE. 


WITH pean oF LECTURES ON 


L phe of 
IL. 


seo geo Policy. ~ . é 


ill. "The Conftitution and leit of England, 
To which are added, 


REMARKS on A CODE orf EDUCATION, 
Propofed by Dr. BROWN, in a late TREATISE, intitled, 
Tuoucuts on Civyit Ligerty, &c. 


ea Re RS See i ee ee 
EE 


A -fhort Account of a : 


CHART or BIOGRAPHY, 
By JOSEPH PRIESTLEY, LL.D, F.R.S. 
The Second Edition. _ : it ‘ 


HE Cuart een of whick the Plate annexed peer a 

is about three Feet in Length, and two Feet in Breadth. It: the In- 
terval of Time between the Year 1200 before Chrift, and 1800 after i, divided, 
by an equal Scale, into Centuries. Tt contains about two thoufand Name: 
the moft diftinguihed in the Annals of Fame ; and the Length of their 
fented in it by Lines drawn in Proportion to their real Duration, and 
fhow, by Infpeétion, how long any number of Perfons were cotemporary, 
long one Life began before, or extended beyond another, with every oth 
which depends upon the‘Length of Lives, and the Relation they bear,sboth to one” 
another, and to univerfal Time; Certainty being always reprefented by 
and Uncertainty. by Dots, or broken Lines. ‘The Names aré, moreover, « 
into feveral Claffes by Lines running the whole Length of the Chart, and th 
nology is noted in one Margin by the Year efore and after Chrift, and in 
by Succelfions of Kings. 

As an Example of the Ufe of the Chart, let any Perfon tsi ind pthc Lda 
which repréfents the Life of Sir Issac Newron ; he will fee, 7 Neh 8 St i 
tuation of it, that that great Man was born before the Middle of the feventeenth Cen. 
tury, and livéd till near the Middle of the eighteenth. He was born a few Years 
after the Death of Lord Bacon, and about-as many Years before that of Descartes. 

He was a younger Man than Boye, whom he outlived many Years; and Sir Hans 
Stoan, Montravcon, Rouirim, Bentiey, and Le Ciere, lived to al Age, 
and were. his Cotemporaries the greatelt Part of his Life, _Almoft ‘any Num of Lives 
may be compared with the fame Eafe, to the fame Perfeétion, pe oe ‘More © 
Space of Time. ‘ 

The Price of the Chart, togethet with a Book, contsining a Deshi of it, 
a Continuation on a fmaller Scale, as high as the Creation, and a CaTaLocus 
of all the Names inferted i in it, with the Dates annexed to them, is Half a Guinea. 

Printed for the Author, and fold by himfelf in ‘Warrington 3 by Mr. F. in 
Cornhill ; J. Fefferyes, at Charing=Crofs; and Mr, hha, in as et 
where Specimens may be had gratis. : a“ - * 


% CF Speainenofe Ohartof Biography. 


_ Priestley InLD. inviet detin £ cMynide So! 


, 
a "| 
¢ ; 
af e 
\ 7 : 
) 
» 
» 
i 
é * 
iv} 
j f 
. | 
=A aa 
. ' 
| ‘ 
i j , : . 
. ! ( F P| 
7 ° 
. ‘ 
7 | 
é i 
a ¢ 
vi t 
bass al am i} % 
’ 
. ' 
PF 
’ 
= ma = - a ¥ 
ia} j ’ 3 
t é s 
' 
| ad 
| _ 
‘ : i. - 
q 7 nm 
= a i‘ ‘ o = 
—_ _— -— Lan — ae wales os oo a _ - - i 


Buchbinderei 
Franz Steckeler 
8884 Héchstadt