Me. SMEATON'8 REPORTS, ESTIMATES, and TREATISES, embracing die several Subjects of 
Canals, Navigable Rivers, Harbours, Piers, Bridges, Draining, Embanking, Light-houses, Machinery 
of various Descriptions^ ii^cludiog Fire flngiQes^ Mills, ^c. &p,. with other Miscellaneous Papers 2 
drawn up in the Course of his Employment/ ad n Ciyil Cqgiqeer^ In 3 Vols, Quarto, Price ^f 7. T%, 
Boards, illustrated with 74 Plateu, by LOWRY. 



Also, 9 NEW EDITION of a NARRATIVE of the BUILDING, and a DESCRIPTION of the 
CONSTRUCTION of the EDDYSTOJ^E LIGHTHOUSE with STONE; to which is subjoined, an 
Appendix, giving some Account of the I«ig^tbousc on the Spurn P(Hat, built upon a S^nd. By JOHN 
« 8MEA TON, CIVIL ENGINEER, F. R. S. in Imperial Folio, Price £6. 6s. half Bound. 

Printed for Longman, Hurst, Recs, Orme, and Brown» Paternoster Row ; ^nd at the Baivisii Ga^^ 
iiRY, 64, Nbw Bono St«ebt. 



35, Pa<«nMf<«r-l2ow, Xjmdmu 



\ 



THE 



MISCELLANEOUS PAPERS 







OF ,^t«FC\W 

JOHN SMEATON,^''^^^^VvV^^^^ ) 



CIVIL ENGINEER, &c 



I, F. k,s.i^ 



• r 







«01f PRICING 



1 



HIS COMMUNICATIONS TO THE ROYAL &OCIEIT, 



PBINTED IN THE 



PHILOSOPHICAL TRANSACTIONS, 



FORMING A FOURTH TOLUME TO HIS REPORT& 



ILLUSTRATED WITH PLATES. 



HOtttOtt: 



PBINTEO FOB 



fJOKGlIAN, 



, REES, ORBIE, AND ERO'WN, PATERHOATEBHROW. 



1814. 



# ' « 



• . - • 



* 



- , '••■ 






1 Tli— *-*" VVt • 



# • 



« k 









»• . 



1 



ADVERTISEMENT. 



nriHE papers which are here collcdcd together include th^ whole of Mr. Smeaton's 
communications to the Royal Society, publifhed m the Philofophical Tranfadtions. 
Mod of the articles have been reprinted verbatim from the originals in that work : a 
few of them have been printed from copies which had belonged to the author, and 
contained correftions and additions in his own hand writing. For the latter the editor 
has to make his acknowledgments to Mr. Smeaton's daughter, Mrs. Dixon, who 

I •• 

obligingly lent him the trafbs. 



I 



r 



The accompanying plates, with one or two exceptions, are the fame as were 
originally given with the feveral articles in the Philofophical Tranfadions ; the Pre- 
fidcnt and Council of the Royal Society having, in the handfomeft manner, granted the 
loan of the coppers, in order to afford every facility in their power to the publica- 



tion. 



ib^H- 



»- 






The prefent volume completes the feries of Mr. Smeaton's works. The account 
of the Edyftone light-houfe was publi(he4 during his life-time, and has been lately 
reprinted. Since his death, the Committee of Civil Engineers have publiftied, with 
the liberal permiffion of Sir Joseph Banks, who had purchafcd the whole of the 
manufcripts, three volumes of Mr. Sj^fE atom's Reports, which comprife every paper 

of 






vi 



ADVERTISEMENT. 



of any confcquencc cotnpofcd by him, in the way of his profeflionj during the long 
period of his public life. To thefc volumes, the prefcnt may be confidered as an im- 
porrant and indiipenfable appendage ; and the vyhgje tjogether will be found to contain 
a moft valuable fund of praftical jnttruftion in the fevcral branches of Science and the 
Arts, which had occupied the attention of the ingenious author, and upon which be 
has raifed for himfelf a high and lading reputation. 



Xondofi, July 20/ A^ 1814. 



CONTENTS. 



• < 



CONTENTS. 



Page 



LETTEfl from Mr. John Smeaton to Mr. John Ellicott, F. R. S. concerning fome im 
provements made by himfelf in the air-pump, • . . ^ . « 

An engine for raifing water by fire, being an improvement of Savery's conftruction, to 
render it capable of working itfelf, invented by Mr. De Moura, of Portugal, F. R. $• 
defcrlbed by Mr. J. Smeaton^ - - - ' - 

An account of fome experiments upon a machine for meafuring the way of a (hip at fea, 

An account of fome improvements of the mariner's compafs, in order to render -the card 
and needle propofed by Dr. Knight, of general ufe, by John Smeaton, philofophical 
inftrument maker, -..--- 

An experimental inquiry concerning the natural powers of water and wind to turn mills, 
and other machines^ depending on a circular motion^ . . - 

An experimental examination of the quantity and proportion of mechanic power neceflfary 
tojbe employed in giving different degrees of velocity to heavy bodi^ from a ftate of 
ref^, by Mr. John Smeaton, F. R. S. - ' - 

New fundamental experiments upon the collifion df bodies, by Mr. John Smeaton, 
F. R. S. - . . . - - 

A defcription of a hew tackle or combination of pullies, by Mr. John Smeaton, 

A difcourfe concerning the menftrual parallax, arifmg from the mutual gravitation of the 
earth and moon, its influence on the obfervation of the fun and planets, with a method 
of obfcrvlng it, by J. Smeaton, F. R. S. , - 

Defcription of a new method of obferving the heavenly bodies, out of the meridian, by J. 
Smeaton, F. R, S. - • - 

Obfervation of a folar eclipfe, the 4th of June, 1769, at the Obfervatory at Auflhorpe, 
near Leeds, in the county of York, by J. Smeaton, F. R. S. 

Account of an obfervation of the right afcenfion an^ declination of Mercury out of the me- 
ridian, near his greateft elongation, Septpmber, 1786, made by Mr. John Smeaton, 
F. R. S. with an equatorial micrometer, of his own invention and workmanfhip ; ac^ 
companied with an inveftigation of a method of allowing for refraction in fuch kind of 
obfervations, • • - • . 



It 
14 



2} 



27 



80 

9S 

107 



2x1 



120 



122 



•124. 
Defciription 



Till 



CONTENTS. 



\ 



Defoription of an improvement in the aj^ication of the quadrant of altitude to a celeftid 
globe^ for the refolution of problems dependant on azimuth and altitude, by Mr. John 
Smeaton, P. R. S. - - - 

A defcription of a new pyrometer, with a table 6f experiments made therewith^ by J« 
Smeaton, F. R. &• - ^ - 

Defcription of a new hygrometer, by Mr« John Smeaton, F. R. S. 

Obfervations on the graduation of aftnmomicaiinftrmnents; with an explanation of the 
method invented by the late Mr. Henry Hindley, of York, clock-maker, to divide circles 
into any given number of parts; by Mr. John Smeaton, F. R. S. ; communicated by 
Henry Cavendiib, £fq. F. R. S. and S. A. - - 

Remarks on the difFeimt temperature of the air, at Edyftpne, from that oUerycd at Ply- 
mouth, between the 7th and 8th of July, ^757, by Mr. John Smeaton* F. R. S. 

An account of the efiects of lightning upon the fteeple and church of Leftwkhid, i« 
Cornwall ; in a letter to the Right Honourable the Earl of MacelcsfieU, Prefidrfit af 
the Royal Society, by Mr. John Smeaton, F. R. S, • - ♦ 



Page 



145 

149 
160 



170 



203 



20g 



-.-.TStri*,?v«^ 



,.■ :.^\mL^. 



^: r A *• 







AND 



MISCELLANEOUS PAPERS, 



[Philos. Transact. Vol. XLVII. Article 69.] 

A LETTER from Mr. John Smeaton to Mr. John Ellicott, F. R. S^ 

concerning some Improvements made by himself in the Air-Pump. 

SIR, 
Read April i6,T HAVE bccn informed by fomc of my friends, diat my endeavours 
1752. X towards complcring the air-pump, have been menrioncd with approba- 
tion, in papers diat Mr. Short and Mr. Watfon have lately communicated to the Royal 
Society. I underftand likewife, that the latter of thole gentlemen has, in a yery 
obliging manner, expreifed a wi(b, that I ihould lay before die Society a particular 
account of my improvements therein. 

i (hall always efteem it a fingular honour to be thought capable of producing any 
thing worthy the attention of the Royal Society s and to be my duty and interlfft fo tO 
do, ypon the Icaft intimation of that kind. 

Your fuperior (kill m mechanics, together with the afliftance you have given me in 
making trial of my pump, againft three very good ones of the common confl^rudion^ 
as well as die frequent marks of friendihip you have ffaewn me on all occafions, en* 
courage me to trouble you wtdi communicating the following to that Society^ of which 
you are a member, and who> of flU odiers, are die moft proper judges^ 

B IlbaU 






'^^ 



\ 



•-, -• 



A 



\ 



N 




U.: 



4 IMPRO^'EMENTTS IN 

But fuppoHng all thofe difficulties to be abfolutely overcome, the other defeA that 
I mentioned in the common conftruAion, would hinder the rarefaction from being 
carried on beyond a certain degree. For, as the piilon cannot be made to fit fo cloie 
to the bottom of the barrel, as totally to exclude all the air ; as the pifton rifes, this 
air will expand itfelf ; but (till prefTing upon the valve, according to its denfity, hinders 
the air wichin the receiver from coming out : hence, were this vacancy to equal the 
150th part of the capacity of the whole barrel, no air could ever pa& out of the 
receiver, when expanded 150 times, though the pifton were conftantly drawn to the 
top ; becaufe the air in the barrel, when in its moft expanded ftate, would be in 
(Kquilibrio with that in the receiver. This obftacle I have endeavoured to overcome, 
by (hutting up the top of the barrel with a plate, having in the middle a collar of 
leathers, through which the cylindrical rod works, that carries the pifton* By this 
means, the external air is prevented from prefling upon the pifton ; but that the air, 
that pafles through the valve of the pifton from below, nuty be difcharged out of the 
barrel, there is a valve applied to the plate at the top, that opens upwards. The 
confequence of this conftruftion is, that when the pifton is put down to the bottom of 
the cylinder, the air in the lodgement under the pifton will evacuate itfelf fo much the 
more, as the valve of the pifton opens more eafily, when prefled by the rarefied air 
above it, than when preifed by the whole weight of the atmoiphere. Hence, as the 
pifton may be made to fit as nearly to the top of the cylinder, as it can to the bottom, 
the air may be rarefied as much above the pifton as it could before have been in the 
receiver. It follows therefore, that the air may now be rarefied in the receiver, in 
duplicate proportion of what it could be upon the common principle i fuppofing other 
impediments out of the queftion. 

Another advantage of this conftruftion is, that though the pump is compofed of a 
fingle barrel *, yet the preflure of the outward air being taken off by the upper plate, 
the pifton is worked with more eafe f than the common pumps with two barrels : and 
not only {o^ but when a confiderable degree of rarefadtion is defired, it will do it 



• It is obvious that these improvements will equally obtaiD, whether the pump be coDstructed with a 
single or a double barrel. 

t Because, though the pressure of a column of air, equal to the diameter of the piston-rod, still 
presses upon it, yet, as there is only the frictioo of one piston, and that not loaded with the weight of 
the atmosphere, the frictioQ of the leather against the side of the barrel, and that of the rack and 
wheel, is much less : so that, ootwithstaadkig the addition of friction ia the collar of leathers, that of 
the whole will be less. 

quicker 1 



THE AIR PUMR 5 

quicker i for the terms of the feries exprefling the quantity of air taken away at each 
ftroke do not diminifh fo faft, as the feries anfwering to the common one, 

I have found the gages that have been hitherto made ufe of, for meafuring the 
expanHon of the air, very unfit to deternune in an experiment of fo much nicety. I 
have therefore contrived one of a. different fort, which meafures the expanfion with 
certainty, to much Icfs than loooth part of the whole. It confifts of a bulb of glafs, 
fbmerhing in the (hape of a pear, and fufiicient to hold about half a pound of quick* 
filver. It is opened at one end, and the other i^ terminated by a tube hermetically 
clofcd at top. By the help of a nice pair of fcales, I found what proportion of 
weight a column of mercury, of a certain length, contained in the tube, bore to that, 
which filled the whole veffel. By thefe means I was enabled to mark divifions upon 
the tube, anfwering to a looothpartof the whole capacity, which being of about one 
tenth of an inch each, may, by eftimation, be eafily fubdivided into fmaller parts. 
This gage, during the cxhaufting of the receiver, is fufpended therein by a flip-wire. 
When the pump is worked as much as (hall be thought neceffary, the gage is pufhed 
down, till the open end is immerged in a ciftem of quickfilver placed underneath : 
the air being then let in gradually, the quickfilver will be driven into the gage • ,• till 
the air remaining in it becomes of the fame denfity with, the external; and as the air 
always takes the higheft place, the tube being uppermoft, the expanfion will be de- 
termined by the number of divifions, or parts of a divifion, occupied by the air at 
the top. 

■ 

The degree, to which I have been able to rarefy the air in experiment, has generally 
been about looo times, when the pump is put clean together : but the moifhire, that 
adheres to the infide of the barrel, as well as other internal parts, upon letdng in the air, 
is in fucceeding trials worked together with the oil, which foon renders it fo clammy, 
as, being minutely divided, to obflruA the a6bion of the pump upon a fluid fo fubtil as 
the air is, when fo much expanded ; but in this cafe it feldom fails to a6b upon the air 
in the receiver, till . it is expanded 50Q times : and this I have found it to do, after 
being frequently ufed for feveral months, without cleaning. I have alfo generally 
found it to perform befl, the firft trial at each time of ufing; though nothing had 
been done at it from the time preceding y which, after a great many trials made with 

* The bulb of the gage may be cmptiect of Hs quicksilver, without einptying the tube ; mud afterwards 
the tube being' held faorizoatally, .the column' of 'injury in it will have no power to contract or expand 

the air at th^ top. ' > i I'u : * 

this 



« IMPROVEMENTS IN 

this view^ I alfo attribute to the watry vapours of the air mixing with the oil. An 
experiment^ where the air was expanded looo times, was tried about two years fince 
in your prefence ; at which were prefent alfo Dr. Knight and Mr. Canton ; and I 
lately did the fame thing with Mr. Watfon *. The pump, which I have the honour 
of (hewing the Society, is the fame that I jufl: now mentioned, and the fecond that I 
made^ with a view to improve upon this principle. 

The degree of rarefadlion, produced by the bcft of the three pumps, that you pro- 
cured the trial of, and which you efteemed good in their kind, and in complete order^ 
never exceeded 140 times, when tried by the gage above defcribed f. 

I have alfo endeavoured to render the pneumatic apparatus more fimple and com- 
modious, by making this air-pump a£t as a condenGng engine at pleafure, by Gngly 
turning a cock. This not only enables us to try any experiments under different 
circumftances of prefTure, without changing the apparatus, but renders the pump an 
univerfal engine, for ihewing any efFeft, that arifes. from an alteration in the denfity or 
fpring of the air. Thus, with a little addition of apparatus^ it Ihews the experiments 
of the air-fountain, wind-gun, &c. 

» 

The condenGng part is contrived in the following manner : The air above the pifton 
being forcibly driven out of the barrel at each ftroke, and having no where to efcape, 
but by the valve at the top ; if this valve be connefted with the receiver, by means 
of a pipe, and at the fame time the valve at the bottom, inftead of communicating 
with the receiver, be made to communicate with the external air, the pump will then 
perform as a condenfer. 

The mechanifm is thus ordered. There is a cock wldi three pipes placed round 
it, at equal angles. The key is fo pierced, that any two may be made to commu- 



• ThQUgh an expansion of 1000 times is mentioned here, as capable of being procured at pleasure; 
yet this Is by no means the utmost ever arrived at : for when perfect tightness has concurred with perfect 
cleanness, and perhaps some other causes, that the author does not profess to be acquainted with, it has 
made a rarefaction of 2000, 5000, and<eyen 10,000 times, a degree of rarefaction seldom to be obtained 
in the TonicelUan tube. 

t Bot/lCj DesaguUerSy and others, make mention of rarefying the air by their pumps 14,000 times and 
upwards : but as the experiment was made by expending a whole tube of air upon the surface of- water^ 
which is capable of emitting a quantity of air when under the exhausted receiver of the common air- 
pumpy no certain conclusion can be drawn therefroqi^; on, the contrary, it appears from experience, that 
a common air-pump that will, with certainty, rarefy the air 100 times; is not to be accounted a bad one. 

oicate. 



I i 



il 






' 



f ' 



THE NEW yORl 

PUBLIC LIERAHY 

ASTOR, LENOX 



N 



#. 



I 



2. 








THE AIR PUMP, 7 

nicate^ while the other is left open to the external air. One of thefe pipes goes to 
the valve at the bottom of the barrel ; another communicates with the valve at the 
top, and a third with the receiver. Thus, when the pipe from the receiver, and that 
from the bottom of the barrel, are united, the pump exhaufts : but turn the cock 
xt>und, till the pipe from the receiver, and that from the top of the barrel, commu* 
jnicate, and it then condenfes. The thir^ pipe, in one cafe, difcharges the air taken 
^rom the receiver, into the barrel i and in the other, lets it into the barrel, that it 
smay be forced into the receiver. 

I am, 

SIR, 

... Your mod humWc fcrvant, 

J. SMEATON. 

3?urnivalVInn Court, 
April 16, 1752. 

P. S. I have alfo added fome draughts^ and letters of reference, in order to 
explain myfelf more fully. 

Plate I. Figure i. 

Is a perfpeAive view of the principal parts of the pump together, 

A is the barrel. 

B the ciftem, in which are included the bottom of the barrel and cockj with three 
communications. Thefe are covered with water to keep them air-tight A little 
cock to let the water out of the ciftern, is marked b. 

C c c is the triangular handle of the key of the cock : which, by the marks on its 
arms, (hews how it muft be turned, that the pump may produce the efiefi: defired* 

r 
> Ik 

• • • 

D ]E1 is the pipe of communication between the cock and the receiver* 

E is the pipe, that communicates between the cock and the valve, on the upper 
plate of the barrel. 

F is the upper plate of the pump, which contains the coUar of leathers d, and V, 

the valve, which is covered by the piece f. 

G I 



8 IMPROVEMENTS IN 

« 

G I is the fiphon-g^e ; ^hich fcrews on and off*, and is adap!:6d to common pur* 
pofes. It coniiils of a gbfs tube, hermetically fealed at c, and furnilhed with quick* 
filver in each leg s which, before the pump begins to work, lies level in the line a b^ 
the fpace b c being filled with air of the common denfity. When the pump exhaufts» 
the air in ^ c expands, and the quickfilver in the oppofite leg rifes, till it becomes a 
counter- balance to it. Its rife is fliewn upon she firale I a, by which the expanGon of 
die air in the receiver may be nearly judged of. When the pump condenfes, the 
quickfilver rifes in the other leg, and the degree may be nearly judged of, by the con* 
traQion of the air in be: marks being placed at ^ and 4- of the length of A c from c ; 
will ihew when the receiver contains double or treble its common quantity. 

K L is a fcrew-frame to hold down the receiver, in condenfing experiments, which 
takes off* at pleafure ; and is fufficient to hold down a receiver, the diameter of whofe 
bafe is feven inches, when charged with a treble atmofphere : in which cafe it afts 

with a force of about i aoo pounds againft the fcrew-frame. 

» 

M is a fcrew that faftens a bolt, which Aides up and down iii that leg, by means 
whereof the machine is made to ftand faft on uneven ground. 

Figr^ I 
Is a perpendicular fcftion of the barrel and cock, &c. where 

A B reprefents the barrel. 

C D the rod of the pifton, which paffles through 

M N the plate, which clofes the top of the barrel. 

K ia the collar of leathers^ >throqgh which the piiton-rod pafies. When the pifton 
is at the bottom of the cylinder, the upper part of K is covered by the cap at D, to 
keep out duft» &a 

The valve on the upper plate, is covered by the piece 

O P, which is conneded with the pipe 

• " ■ ' '. ■ ■ . . ■. ■ ' * " • ■ - .. 

O H> which makes the communication between *the valve and cock. 

CE 



THE AIR PUMP. • 

C E is the plfton t and 

« 

E F F b the pifton-valvc. 

1 1 arc two little holes to i^ ''*^ *^^ P^^* ^^^^ ^^^ pifton-ralve into the upper ptrt of 
the barrel. 

Q^T is the principal valve at the bottom of the cylinder. 

H H is a piece of metal, into which the valve G G T is fcrewedt and doits the 
bottom of the cylinder ; out of which alfo is compofed 

S S the cockj and 

T T the duft from the cock to the bottom of the barrel* 

W W is the key of the cock. 

X the ftemj and 



VV the handle. 



Fig- 3* 



Is an horizontal feAion of the cock, through the middle of the duft T T. 

A B reprefents the bignefs of the circular plate, that clofes the bottom of the barrel. 

C D reprefents the bignefs of the infide of the barreh 

£ F G is the body of the cock^ the outward (hell being pierced with three holes, 
according to an equilateral triangle, and correfponding to the three dufts L H, N I3 
M K, whereof 



L H is the dufV, that goes to the bottom of the barrel. 



NI, 



10 IMPROVEMENTS IN, &c. 

17 l^ tk^ duft, that communicates with the top of the barrel j and 

I I the flaAch or bafe for the jm,^. ^-^h the pipe E, ih fig. i. 
M K is the duft^ that paffes from the cock to the iw^^^y^j. ^ ^^ 
K K the flanch for the joint, with the pipe D, in fig. i* 

L M N is the key, or folid part of the cock, moveable round in the (hell E F G. 
^Vhen the canal L M anfwers to the dufh H and K, the pump exhaufts, and the air 
is difcharged upwards by the perforation N. But the key L M N being turned till 
the canal L M anfwers to I and K, the perforation N will then anfwer to H H ; and 
in this cafe the pump condcnfes. Laftly, when N anfwers to K K , the air is then let 
in or difcharged from the receiver, as the circumftance requires. 

Fig. 4. 

Is the plan of the principal valve. 

A B C D reprefents the bladder faftened in four places, and ftretched over the ieven 
holes I K> formed into an hexagonal grating $ which may be called the honeycomb. 

E F G H fhcws where the metal is a little protuberant, to hinder the pifton from 
i^kbg againft the bladder. ' 

Fig. 5. 

Reprefents the new gage ; which, from its fimilitude> may be called the pear-gage. It 
is open at A ; B C is the graduated tube, which is hermetically clofed at C, and is 
fufpended by the piece of brafs D E, that is hollowed into part of a cylinder^ and 
dafps the tube. 



AN 



THB TIEV/ YORK 



. .. ).vriuN 



* • > 



^/i//os.2i'ri/u.Vp/.Xiyn..TAR.X[X. ^o. ^97. Fl/tuz.pa^eil. 




J.^ifynAj-c, 



[ 11 ] 



AN ENGINE for raising Water by Fire, being an Improvement of Savery'^ 
Construction, to render it capable of working itself, invented by Mr. 
De Moura, of Portugal, F, R. S. described by Mr. J. Smeaton. 

Read Not. 9, r|1HIS engine confifts of a receiver, a fteam, and an injeAion cock, 
17 o2. J. ^ fuftion and a forcing pipe, each furni(hed with a valve, together. 
with a boiler, whichj on account of its bulk and weight, is not fent with the reft ; but,, 
as it may be of the common globular ihape, and having nothing particular in its con- 
ftrufbion, a defcripdon of it will not be neceflary, as alfo the reft of thefe parts already 
mentioned being eflbntial to every machine of this kind, a further account of them 
may be difpenfed with. What is peculiar to this engine is a Boat within the receiver, 
compofed of a light ball of copper, which is not loole therein, but faftened to the 
end of an arm, which is made to rife and fall by the float, while the other end of the 
arm is faftened to an axis^ and, confequendy, as the float moves up and down, the 
ixis is turned round one way or the other. This axis is made conicalj and palles 
Through a conical focket, which laft is foldered to the fide of the receiver. Upon one 

)f the ends of the axis, which prcgefls beyond the focket, is fitted a fecond arm, 
.vhich is alfo moved backwards and forwards by the axis, as the float rifes or faUs. 
3y thefe means, the rifing or filing of the furface of th? water within the receiver, 

ommunicates a correfpondent modon to the outfide, in order to give proper motions 
to the reft: of the geers which regulates the opening and fliutting of the fteam and 
injection cocks, and ferves the fame purpdk as the plug frame, &c. in Newcomen's 
engine. The particular conftrudion and relation of thofe pieces will better appear by 
the figure and references, than can be done by a general defcription. 

Plate 2. 
A B an arm^ which is faftened to 

a b, z conical axis, which goes through a conical focket in 

C, a triangular piece foldered to the receiver. This piece has this fhape, to give 
liberty to the arm to rife and fall, that carries the float on the infide. 

I 

D E is a fmall ciftern, foldered to die receiver, which, being kept full of water, 
keeps the axis and focket air-tight. This ciftern is cooftantly kept full of water by 

mean^ 



12 AN ENGINE FOR 

means of a fmall leakage through the wooden peg c, which follows the packthread c U 
to the ciftern. 

e, is a fmall weight to counterpoife the float within. 

y, is a Aider j which being fct nearer to or farther from the axis, will rife or fall, a 
greater or leflcr fpacc as may be required, and is faftened by the fcrew g. This Aider 
is furniAied with a turn about, h /, which is alfo faftened by a fcrew and nut at tlie 
end i, and ferves to adjufl the length of 

F G G H, a chain, which gives motion, by means of the Aiorter chain k /, to 

I K L, the balance which opens and Aiuts the cocks i and moves upon the fmall 
axis L. 

G G are two pullies, fupportcd by two arms, that are faftened to the fide of the 
receiver, and give the chain a proper dircftion in order to move the balance. 

M N is the fteam cock, the end N being fuppofed to be detached from a pipc> 
that gives it communication with the boiler. 

is the injection cock, whofe key is turned by the arm O tn. 

P Q is the injedion pipe, communicating between the forcing pipe above the valvej, 
and the top of the receiver. 

R S b the arm, by which the key of the fteam-cock is worked, 

1 Ki two rollers annexed to the balance^ which, by ftriking upon the arm R S> open 
and ftiut the fteam cock^ as the balance is moved backward and forward. 

R n c> is the fteam cock's key tail^ which is fumiflied with two fmall rollers^ n o^ 
which open and Aiut the injedion cock> by aAing upon the arm O m, in fuch a manner> 
that* when the fteam cock is opened, the injeftion is Aiut^ and vice versd. 

T is a bell of advice, which, moving along with the balance^ continues to ring as 

long as the engine is at work* 

Vis 



RAISING WATER BY FIRE. 18 

V is a cock, which fcrvcs to difchargc the air from the receiver, and is opened by 
hand when necelTary. 

W is a weight fufficient to raife the balance to a perpendicular pofture, when it is 
inclined to the right, and alfo to overcome the friftion of the float, axis, puUies, 
chain, &c» 

To put the engine in motion, prefs down the arm A B, which will bring the balance 
over to the right fide, and its motion will open the (learn cock, and (hut the injcdion ; 
fct open the cock at V, that the air may be difcharged by the entrance of the (team 
into the receiver. This being done, ihut that cock, and let go the arm -, the weight 
W will bring over the balance to the left, and in its motion ihut the ftcam cock, and 
open the inje£lion ; the prefently condenfing the (leam into water, in a great meafure 
leaves a vacuum in the receiver* Things remain in this fituadon, till the preflure of 
the atmofphere has caufed the water to mount through the fuftion pipe into the receiver, 
where, as its furface rifes, it caufes the float to afcend -, and deprefllng the arm A B^ 
raifes the balance, till it has paflTed the perpendicular ; and, in its defcent, which is 
done by its own gravity, the roller K lays hold of the arm R S, again opens the fteam 
cock, and (huts the injedion. The receiver being now almoft filled with water, the 
1)alance cannot return till the furface of the water therein fubfides, and fuflfers the float 
to defcend. This is performed by the elafticity of the fteam, which^ at the fame 
time that it fills the receiver, drives out the water through the forcing pipe, and when 
the furface is defcended fo low, as to fuflfer the weight W to bring the balance beyond 
the perpendicular towards the left, it then falls of its own accord, and, in falling, the 
roller I, lays hold of the arm R S, (huts the fteam cock and opens the injeftion> as 
before. 

When the engine is defired to be ftopped, obferve, when the balance lies to the 
right, to turn round the arm O m of the inje&ion cock, to that the tail of the fteam 
cock may mifs it in the next motion ; fo that, at the fame time that the receiver is 
filled with fteam, and the fteam cock ftiut^ the injedUon not being opened^ the mouon 
will ftop for want thereof.. 



AN 



[ 1* 3 



AN Account of some Experiments upon a Machine for ineasuring the Way 

of a SHIP at Sea. 

TN the Philosophical Transactions ^ No. 391, for November 1725, Mr, Henry de 
-*- Saumarez, gives an account of a machine for meafuring a (hip's way more exaftly 
than by the log. This machine confifts of a firft mover, in the form of the letter Y. 
Upon the two arms of tbe Y are faftened two vanes, inclined in fuch a manner, that 
when the Y is 'hauled through the water by a rope, faftened to the ftem or tail thereof^ 
it may turn round, and, of confequence, endeavour to turn the rope round. The 
other end of the rope being &ftened to the end of a fpindle capable of movmg freely 
rmindi will be made to do fo by the rotadons of the Y, communicated to the rope. 
A motion being thus communicated to a fpindle within the Ihip, this fpindle may be 
made to drive a let of wheel- work, which will regifter the turns of the Y ; and the 
value of ^ certain number of thefe turns being once fbund> by proper experiments^ 
diey are eafily reducible into leagues and degrees, &:c. The only difficulty dien n^ 
whether this Y will make the fame number of rotations in going the fame fpace, 
when it is carried through the water faft, as when it is carried flow. Upon this head 
Mr. de Saumarez, as well in the paper above cited, as in a fubfequent one publifhed 
in the Philosophical Transact ions ^ No. 408, for March 1729, has given an account of 
feveral trials, which he has made of it, from which it appears, that this ntachine, in 
part, anfwers the end propofed, and is, in part, defedlive : the errors of which he 
fuppofes to proceed from the (inking down of the Y into the water, upon a flow 
modon ; the axis of its rotation being then more oblique to the horizon than in a 
quick one* 

In a machine, conftru(5led like this, k is evident, that the end of the fpindle, to 
which the rope is feftened, muft be of lufficient ftrength and thicknefs, not only to 
bear the force or ftrefs, that the hauling of the Y through the water will lay upon it, 
in the greateft morion of a (hip, but alfo to bear the accidental jerks, that the waves 
will fuperadd thereto. The thicknefs of the fpindle then being determined by theie 
conditions i it is alfo manifeft, that, to prevent the fpindle from being pulled out of 
its place by the draft of the rope, there muft be a flioulder formed upon it, which muft 
be greater than the part of the Ipindle before defcribed, for the fpindle to bear 
ag^nft. The fize, that Mr* Saumarez propofes to give to his Y, is twenty-fevcn 

inches 



MACHINE FOR MEASURING A SHIP'S WAY. 15 

inches the whole lengdij fifteen inches for the length of the arms (which are to be 
opened to a right angle) ; eight inches for the length of each vane ; four inches and 
a half broad, and the ftems and Ihank to be two- thirds of an inch thick. According 
to thcfe ditnenfions, the refiftance, that this part of the machine will meet with, in 
paffing through the water, will, in the fwift motions of the fliip, be very confi^rable : 
confcqucntly, the neceflary bulk of the pivot-end of the fpindle, and its fhoulder, will 
occafion a confiderable fridbion in the turning thereof, and retardation to the rotation of 
the machine. 

To cure thefc defers as much as poffiblc, inftead of the Y before dcfcribed, I made 
trial of a fingle plate of brafs, of about ten inches long, two and an half broad, one- 
thirtieth of an inch thick, and cut into an oval (hape. This plate being fet a little 
a-twift, and faftencd by one end to a fmall cord, in the manner of the Y, is likewife 
capable of making a rotation, in being drawn through the water i but with this di^ 
ference, that as this is but a fmall thin plate drawn edgeways through the water^ its 
refiftance in paflfing through it is much lefs i of confequence, a niuch fmaller line is 
fuflicicnt to hold it, which again confidcrably diminifhes the refiftance ; and this, of 
courfe, proves a double diminution of fridbion in the Ipindle : Firft, as the preflure 
upon it is lefs ; and, fecondly, as it allows the fpindle and fhoulder to be of a lefs 
diameter. To break the jerks of the waves ; next to the end of the fpindle I fixed a 
ipiral fpring of wire, to which the cord was fattened ; which, by this means, was 
capable of playing backwards and forwards, and giving way to the irregularities of the 
fea : and, left the plate fhould lay faft hold of any thing, or any extraordinary jerk 
fliould damage the fpindle or fpring, a knob, or button, was faftened upon the cord^ 
at a fmall diftance from the fpring, which ftopped upon a hole in a piece of wood, and 
prevented the fpring from being pulled out to above a certain length ^ fo that all 
addition of force, beyond this, could only tend to break the cord, and carry away 
the. plate. The fpindle, being thus guarded from accidents, will allow of a ftiU fiir- 
ther diminution of its fize ; fo that, at laft, I ventured to make the fpindle-pivot no ' 
more than one-twentieth of an inch diameter, and that of the fhoulder one-eighth i 
being of tempered fteel, and fufHciendy fmooth. The hole, in whicb the pivot, and 
againft which the fhoulder worked, was of agate like wife, well polifhe^. 

Being thus provided, in May 175 1, I procured a boat, upon the ferpentine river 
in Hyde-park, to try how far the turns of the machine would be confiftent with them- 
felves, when the fame fpace was meafured over with the fame, and with difierenc 

velocities. 



18 MACHINE FOR MEASURING 

Itippofc, that they proceeded from a retardation of the plate in fWift motions, but 
from the hauling home of the log in flow ones. As for inftance ; the log, to do its 
office accurately, ought to remain at reft in the water, whatever be the motion of the 
veffcl. But even the keeping the line ftrait, and much more the fufFcring the log to 
haul the line off the reel (as praftifed by many,) will make the log, in fome rAiafurc, 
follow the veflfcl, and will be greater, in proportion as the time of continuance of 
this aflion is greater; and therefore the log will follow the (hip twice as far in going 
one knot, when the fliip is twice as long in running it. The confequence of this is, 
that a veffel always runs over a greater fpace than is (hewn by the log-line ; but that 
this error is greater, in proportion as the veflTel moves flower. It is this rcafon, I 
fuppofe, that has induced the praftical feamen to continue the diftance. between their 
knots (horter than they are direCted by the theory. 

Afterwards, in the fame fummer, I made fuch another expedition, in a falling veflfel, 
along with Captain Campbell, of the Mary yacht, and Dr. Knight. Having prepared 
two of thefe machines as near alike as pofllble, I determined to try, how far they were 
capable of agreement, when expofed to the fame inconvcniencies, and ufed together. 
During the trial of thefe machines, one made 86,716 revolutions, and the other made 
'^88,i84. During this fpace, they were compared at ten fcveral intervals. The re- 
-volutions between each interval differed from the proportion of thefe numbers, in the 
firft comparifon, one-nineteenth of the whole ir^irval. The errors of each interval, 
in the other compari(bns, were, in order, two-fevcnteenths, one -nineteenth, one- 
cwentiech, one-fifty-fourth, one-fourteenth, one-eightieth, onc-fixty-feventh, one-four- 
ceenth, one-(ixteenth; the greateft errors being where the fpaces were the (horteft. 
In other refpefts, the plates feemed to perform their duty, in the water, well enough, 
though the fca was as rough, in this voyage, as oUr fmall veDTcl would well bear* 

Laftly, being for fonr.c time on board the Fortune floop' of war, commanded by 

Alexander Campbell, Efquir^ , n company with Dr. Knight, for the purpofe of 

making trial of his new inxcntcd il*a-compa(res, I had frequent opportunities of making 

ufe of thefe machines, by com}>aring them with one another, with *thc log, and with 

'iiial diflances; andha\ing, by repeated trials, pretty well afcertaine'd the 'number of 

turns of the plate, t. at was tc^ual to a given fpace, by* the help 6f the log, in the 

manner before defcribcd, wh* i the (hip was upon a middle, velocity j I found tl^p 

"fpaces, fo meafured, nearly cMfiltent with themfelves, and with the' tiuth : but all 

'this while the winds and weather were very moderate. It afterwards happened^ t^t 

•S/e ruft eigheecttleaguelii ibntk gale of wind, which, thoujgh not fair fbr'us (tctng 

'*'-^ ' ■' before 



A SHIP'S WAY AT SEA. 19 

before the beam^) yet drove us fomctimcs at the rate of eight knots an hour, as ap- 
peared by heaving the log. During this run I obfcrvcd, that the refiftance of the 
water, to the line and plate, was very confiderable, and increafcd the fridtion of the 
fpindle fo much, as to prevent it from beginning to turn, till the plate had twifted the 
line to fuch a degree, that when it did fct a going, it would frequently run 1 50 or 20a 
turns at once. I alfo obferved, that the wind coming acrofs the courfe of the (hip, 
blew the cord a good deal out of the direction of the fpindle, and caufed the line to 
rub againft the fafeguard hole, for the button to ftop againft, as above dclcribed -, 
which undoubtedly occafioned confidcrable friftion in that place.^ Btit the moft unto- 
ward circumftance that I cAferved, was, that being in a rough, but (hort chopping 
fea, and failing obliquely acro& the waves, the plate would frequently be drawn from 
one wave to another through the air, without touching the water ; and, as it appeared,, 
would jump from one wave to another, the unevennefs of the furface, joined to the 
quicknefs of the motion, not permitting the plate to follow the deprcffion of the water^ 
This evil I endeavoured to remedy, by placing upon the line, at a fmalLdiftance before 
the plate, fbme ItoUow buHcts, fuch as are made for nets, in order to keep the place 
fo low down in the water, as to be below the bottom of the waves. This, iapart, I 
found they did; but they, at the fame time, added fo much refiftance, in their 
pairing through the water, that the inconvenience was as great one way as the other.. 

Upon making up the account of this run, I found the number of rotations were 
tefi, by ene full third than they ought to have been, compared with former obferva- 
tions; which afforded me a convincing proof, tliat this inflrument was coofiderabljp 
retarded in quick motions* 

The length of the line made uft of was about twenty fathoms^ which- I found nc- 
ccffary, that the water, difhirbed by the body of the fhip, might be tolerably fettled 
before the plate was drawn through it ; but this lengtb of line was alfb aa inconveniencCjc 
as it met with greater refiftance in the water^ 

Upon the whole, it feems to me, that an iaftrument, made as above defcribed, in- 
capable of meafuring the way of a fhip at fea, when its velocity does not exceed five fea 
miles an hour, to a degree of exaftnefs exceeding the log. It dicrefore may be 
ufeful in the mcnfuration of the velocities of tides,, currents, &c*^ and alfb in mea- 
furing diftances at fea in taking furveys of coafts, harbours, &c. Thus far it feeme- 
capable of performing, upon the fuppofition, dkat it cannot be brought to a greater 
diegree of perfedtion. But this I am very far (mm fuppofing ; on the contrary, I do 

not 



20 MACHINE FOR MEASURING 

not defpair, that it may be brought to anfwer the end of meafuring the way of a 
fbip at Tea univerfally ; and, for that reafon, it may not be amifs to put down a few 
hints, concerning the caufe and cure of the errors above-mcntionedj for the fake of 
thofe, who may hereafccr be inclined to profecute thefe inquiries *• 

It appears then from the preceding obfervations, that the rotadon of the plate is 
confiderably retarded in the quickeft motions of the fliip^; and fenfibly fo, in all 
velocities exceeding five miles an hour. This may proceed, firfl:, from the friiftion of 
the machine increafing in a greater proportion than the power to turn it round. 
Secondly, from the water's being put in motion by the (hip, fo as to follow it in the 
fame direction, and that to a confiderable diftance aftem. And, thirdly, from the 
plate's jumping from wave to wave, when their concavity is great and difbnce 
litde. 

The firft may, in feme meafure, be helped, by applying a loaded fly« of a proper 
fize, to the fpindle of the machine, which will prevent its flicking faft for a time, and 
then whh-ling round with great rapidity, as it is apt to do when the refiftance is great ^ 
by which means, the motion will be rendered more equal and uniform, as was jufUjr 
obferved to me by my friend Mr. Ellicott, of this Society. 

Alfb, if the body of the machine were hung, equally poifed upon crofs-centres, 
like thofe ufed for fea-compafles, or in the manner of a fwivel-gun, as Captaia 
Alexander Campbell well propofed ; the fpindle of the machine would readily place 
itfelf in the fame diredion with the line that draws it, and thereby avoid unneceifary 
friftions from the oblique diredlion of the cord. 

The fecond may be helped by placing the machine upon the end of a pole, fattened 
near the forecaftlc, over the fide of the fhip. By this means, a Ihorter line will be 
neceflary, and the place prevented firom working in the more difturbed water at the 
flern. 

Laftly, its quitting the water, perhaps, might be helped by joining a fhank of 
brafs, of fix inches long, and three quarters of an inch diameter, to the fore-part of 

■ I ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ I I , , 11,1 ■ I ■ ■ ■ !■ 

* Upon communicating these experiments and observations to my ingenious friend Mr. William 
)lu88el» be gave mc an account of a machine, that he had made trial of in a vojage, some years since, 
frtMn the Levant, so m-arly agreeing uith the above described, that one would have imagtncd we bad 
been of each other's council in designing tbnn* . ' V ' 




« 
N 



A SHIFTS WAY AT SEA. 21 

the platCs to which the cord mud be faftened, the ends of the fliank being formed into 
a figure moft convenient for paffing through the water with cafe. The weight of* 
diis will caufe the fore-part of the plate to fink faftcr than the other^ and endeavour ta 
give it a dircAion down into the water *. 

I had intended to have made trial of the efFcft of thefe alterations, but have been, 
prevented, partly by want of opportunity, and partly from the indifference, with which 
I found fuch a contrivance as this, even if brought to perfeAion, waii likely to be 
received by Teamen ; who, in general, do not fcem to be over fond of making trial of 
new inftruments, efpecially if propofcd by landmen, as, in dcrifion, they arc picafed 
to call us. 

Indeed it may be obje^ed, that, could we meafure the way of a fhip through the 
water ever fo exaftly, unlefs fomc method were^ found out, of afcertaining the cur- 
rents, &c. ; a Ihip's courfe, with refpeA to the globe, could not hereby be deter- 
mined. But then it may be replied, with equal juftice, that it is for want of a means 
cf meafuring the way of a (hip througfi the water (and this compared with other 
check obfervationa,) that the drift and velocities of the principal currents have not 
already been determined. ^ 



Mr. de Saumarez, in his fecond paper, of March 1729, makes mention of another 
machine for this purpofe, which he himfelf acknowledges to be inferior to his former, 
c^ecially in rough weather at fea. But as leveral. others have fallen upon, and pro- 
pofed, a machine fimilar to this % it may not be amifs to add the following remarks 
upon it. The firft mover, in this, is compofed of four arms, fixed to the bottom of 
a perpendicular fpindit ;' each arm is furnifiied with a vane, which opens one way, 
and ihuts the other, as fome have attempted the making of horizontal wind-mills. 
Thb, by being carried through the water progreflively, will turn round, and the fiifter, 
as the fhip moves fader: but to judge, whether it will do it proportionably in all 
velocities of the fhip, let us confider, 

I. That a good failing fhip will frequently fail at the rate of ten fea miles (fixty 
€0 a degree) an hour, which is at the race of feventeen feet per fecond. 



'^ Mr. Rvssers plate was joined to a shank, who never found it to jump out of the water, at any 
timit^ whin kc made use-of it. 

2. SuppoflAg 

V ♦ 



22 



MACHINE FOR MEASURING, &c. 



2. Suppofing the fide of the fly, where the vanes arc clofed, to be retained by the 
water at reft , the oppofite fide of the fly, where the vane is open, muft meet the 
water with a velocity double to that of the (hip, or at the rate of thirty-four feet in a 
fecond : as would be the cafe with the upper part of a coach-wheel, whofc velocity 
through the air is double to that, wherewith the coach moves forward. 

3. That a plane furface of three inches fquare, moving through the water with a 
velocity of thirty-four feet /?er fecond, will meet with a refiftancci at leaft, equal to 
feventy pounds avoirdupoife. 

4. That the refiftance, which the open vanes will meet with in the water, will, kk 
fwift motions, be very confiderable, and, of confequence, the fly will move much 
flower than it ought to do, if thefe refiftances were lefs. 

5. That from hence there is much reafon to doubt, whether the refiftance of the 
medium, and friftion of the machine, taken together, will always produce fuch diminu- 
don, in the number of turns, as, that the number of revolutions, aftually fhewa by 
the indexes, may be the fame when the fame fpace is gone over with a great velocityj^ 
as with a fmall one. 



AN 



[ 23 ] 



AN ACCOUNT of some Improvements of the Mariner's Compass, in order to 
render the Card and Needle proposed by Dr. Knight, of general Use, by 
John Smeaton, Philosophical Instrument Maken 

Prefcntcd July 5th, 1750^ and printed, with Alterations. 

THE cover of the wooden box being taken off, the compafs is in a condition to be 
made ufe of in the binaclc, when the weather is moderate : but if the fea runs 
high, as the inner box is hung very free on its, centres, (the better to anfwer its other 
purpofcs,) it will be ncceflary to flacken the milled nut, placed upon one of the axes 
that fupporte the ring, and to tighten the nut on the infidc that correfponds to it. By 
this means the inner box and ring will b« lifted up from the edges, upon which tliey Teft 
when free 5 and the friftion will be incrcafed, and that to any degree neceflary to pre- 
vent the too great vibration, which otherwifc would be occafioned by the motion of 
the Ihip. 

To make the compafs ufefiil in taking the magnetic azimuth, or ampUtude of the 
fun and ftars, as alfo the bearing of headlands, (hips, and other objects, at a diftance, 
the brafs cdgei, defigned at firft to fupport the card, and throw the weight thereof ju 
near the circumference as poflible, is itfelf divided into degrees and halves 1 which may 
be ealily eftimated into fmaller parts, if neceilkry« 

The divifions are determined by means of a cat-gut line, ftretched perpendicularly 
with the box, as near the brafs edge as may be, that the parallax arifing (rom ft dtfiercnt 
pofition of the obferver may be as litde as poflible. 

Underneath the card are two fmall weights. Aiding on two wires, placed a€ r^t 
angles to each other, which being moved nearer to, or farther from the centre, counter- 
balance the dit>ping of the card in different latitudes, or reftore the equilibrium of it^^ 
where it happens by any other means to be jgot too much out of level. 

• • 
* There is alfo added an index at the top of the iooer box, which may be put on and 
taken ofiT at pleafure, and ferves for all altitudes of the obje£L It confifts of a bar 

cqu^ 



24 AN ACCOUNT OF SOME IMPROVEMENTS 

equal In length to the diameter of the inner box, each end being fumiihed with a per- 
pendicular ftile, with a flit parallel to die fides thereof. One of the flits is siarrow^ t» 
which the eye is applied, and the other is wider, with a fmall cat-gtit ftretched up the 
middle of it, and from thence continued horizontally from the top of one ftilc to the 
top of the other : there is alfo a line drawn along the upper furface of the box. Thcfc 
four, viz. the narrow flit, the horizontal cat-gut tiiread, the perpendicular onej and the 
line on the bar, arc in the fame plane, which difpofes itfelf perpendicular to the horizon> 
when the inner box is at reft, and hangs free. This index does not move round, but 
is always placed on fo as to anfwer the fame fide of the box. 

When the fun*s azimuth is defired, and his rays are ftrong enough to caft a (hadow> 
turn about the wooden box, till the ftiadow of the horizontal thread, or (if the fun be 
too low) till that of the perpendicular thread in one ftile, or the light through the flit 
in the other, falls upon the line on the index bar, or vibrates to an equal diftance on each 
fide of it, gently touching the box, if it vibrates too far : obferve at the fame time the 
degree marked upon the brafs edge by the cat-gut line. In counting the degree for the 
azimuth, or any other angle that is reckoned from the meridian, make ufe of the out* 
ward circle of figures upon the brafs edge, and the fituarion of die index bar, with 
regard to the card and needle^ wilt always diredt upon what quarter of the compafs the 
objeA is placed* 
• • 

But if the fun does not throw out fufficiently ftrong, place the eye behind the narrow 
flit in one of the ftiles, and turn the wooden box about, till fome part of the horizontal 
or perpendicular thread appears to interfe6t the centre of the fun, or vibrate to an equal 
diftance on each fide of it, ufing fmoked glafs next the eye, if the fun's light is too 
ftrong. In this method another obferver will be generally neceflary to note the degree 
out by the nonius^ at the fame time the firft gives notice that the thread appears to 
fpUt the objed. 

From what has been faid, the other obfervations will be eafily performed ; only in 
cafe of the iun*^ amplitude, take care to number the degrees by the half of the inner 
circk of figured on die card> which are ;he complements of the outer to ninety^ and 
confeqaently (hew the ^iftuce from eaft or weft. 

The azimuth of the ftars may alfo be obftrved by night : a proper light ferving 
equally for one bbfirrrcr to fee die thread, and the other the degree upon the caid. 

If 



1 1 



pubucl:::.. 



1 



-J 



/ 






f ■ 



/ ■ 






OF THE MARINER'S COMPASS. 9ft 

It may not be amifs to remark farther, that, in cafe the inner box fhould lofe its 
equilibrium, and confequeridy the index be out of the plane of a verdcal circle, » 
accurate obfervacion may ftiil be made, provided the fun's (hadow is diftinA : for, by 
obferving firft with one end of the index towards the fun, and then the other, a mean 
of the two obfervacions will be the truth. 



Explanation of the figures, Plate III. 

Fig. i, is a perfpeftive view of the compafs, when in order for obfervation. The 
point of view being the centre of the card, and the diftance of die eye two feet. 

A B is the wooden box. 

C and D are two milled nuts ; by means ^whereof the axis of the inner box and ring 
are taken from the edges oh which they move, and the fii6tion increafed when 
neccfiary. 



-■•*•■ 



£ F is the ring tliat fupports the inner box. 

G H is the inner box; and 

I is one of its axis, by which it is fufpended on the ring E F*. 

K L is the magnet, or needle ; and 

M a fmall brace of ivory, that confines the cap to its place. See fig« i. 

The card is a fingle varnifhed paper, reaching as far as the outer circle of figures^ 
which is a circle of thin brafi, the edge whereof is turned down at right angles to the 
plane of the card, to make it more flifF. 

O is a catgut line drawn down the infide of the box i for determiniog the degree 
upon the brafs edge. 

P Q R S is the index bar, with its two ftiles and catgut threads ; which« being taken 
off from the top of the box, is placed in two pieces T and Vj notched (fioperly to 
receive it. 

W is a piece cut out in the wood, ferving as a handle. 

E Fig. 



c% 



AN ACCOUNT OF SOME IMPROVEMENTS, 8?c. 

Fig. s> is the card in plano^ with the needle filled ui>on ic i being one third of the 
dkoietcr of the reel card. 

Fig- 3> is a pcrlpeftive view of the back fide of the card, where 
A B reprcfcnts the turning down of the brafe edge* 

C is the under part of the ivory cap. 

D and £ are the two Aiding weights to balance the card ^ and 

F and G, two fcrews that fix the brafs edge, &c. to the needle. 

Fig. 4, is the pcdeftal that fupports the card, containing a fcwmg needle, fixed iit 
two fmall grooves to receive ir^ by means of the collet C, in the manner of a port 
-crayon. 

A D, the ftem, is filed into an odagon> that it may be the more eafily unfcrewed«. 



r 



T:'E VK^^ YOilK 

I J Lj . i^ :-.•->. vAivY 



1 



1 


1^ 


1 




■ 


n 




y&fe -l.pme 17 




7*Z>i.rr«, 


J. VolJU. T4B I\>. -.i-t?-/. ^1 








r 






1 




■ii-j 


T 


\ 


Wf 




■III' 


\ ■ 








\ 


^E- 












\ 


^ 










I 




\i 






M 






T 


^j^r^ M ^^e 






1 




A 


r 

I'l, ■ 


1 










^^ 


-^ 






J 


1 


j^O.-to. y.ii . 








/..v^..-ln 


1 


_ J 



1^1 V 

AN Experimental Enquiry concerning the Natural Powers of AVater and 
Wind to turn Mills, and other Machines, depending on a Circular Motion. 

Read before the Royal Society, May 3d and loth, 1759. 

WHAT I have to communicate on this fubjeft was originally deduced from ex- 
periments made on woricing models, which I look upon as the beil means of 
obtaining the outlines in mechanical enquiries. But in this cafe it is very neceflfary to 
diftinguifli the circumftances in which a model differs from a machine in large ; other- 
wife a model is more apt to lead us from the truth than towards it. Hence the com- 
mon obfervationjthat a thing may do very well in a model that will not anfwer in large. 
And, indeed, though the utmoft circumfpedion be ufed in this way, the beft flru£turc 
of machines cannot be fully afcertained, but by making trials with them, when made 
of their proper "fize. It- is for this reafon that diough the models referred to, and the 
greateft part of the following cxperimentSj were made in the years 1752 and 17 $3, 
yet I deferred ofiering them to the Societyi until I had an opportunity of putting 
the dedufbioni .made therefrom in real pra&icet in a variety of cafes, and for Various 
purpofes i fo as to be able to aflure the Society that I have found them to anfwer* 




PART L 

. Cimctrning Undetshot Wst9r Whfi^lt^ 

Flats. IV. Fig. 1, is a peripedive v|cw of the machine for jexperiments on water 
vheebi wherein • 

A B C D .ia tb^ lower. ciilem« or magazine^^ for. receiving the water^ after it has 
quitted die wheel % and for fupplying 

D E the upper ciftem> or head 5 wherein the water being raifed to any height re- 
quiredj by a pump» that height is (hewn by 

F G, a fmall rod, divided into inches and parts j with a float at the bottom, to move 
Ae rod up and down^ as the furfacc of the water rifcs and falls. 

HI 



.« 



28 EXPERIMENTAL ENQUIRY, ice. 

H I is a rod by which the fluicc is drawn, and flopped at any height required^ bf 
iTicans of 

K a pin, or peg, which fits fcveral holes, placed in the manner of a diagonal fcale, 
upon the face of the rod H I. 

G L is the upper part of the rod of the pump,, for drawing the water out of the lower 
ciftern, in order to raife and keep up the furface thereof at its dcfired height^ in the 
head D £i thereby to fiipply the water expended by the aperture of the fluicc. , , 

M M is the arch and handle for working the putnpi which is limited in its ftroke 
by 

« 

N, a piece for flopping the handle from raifing the piflon too high s that alfo being 
prevented from going too low, by meeting the bottom of the barrel. 

O is the cylinder, upon which a cord winds, and which, being condu(fled over the 
puUies P and Q, raifes 

R, the fcale, into which the weights are put, for ti7ing the power of the water. 

S T> the two ilandards, which fupport the wheel, are made to Aide up and down^ 
in order to adjuft the wheels as near as poffible to the floor of the conduit. 

W the beam which fupports the fcale and pullies ; this is reprefented as but little 
higher than the machine, for the fake of bringing the figure into a moderate compafs^ 
but in reality is placed fifteen or fixteen feec higher than the wheel. 

Plate V. Fig. 2, is a feffion of the fame machine, wherein the fame parts are 
marked with the fame letters as in fig. i. Befides which 

X X is the pump barrel, beyiig five inches diameter^ and eleven inches long. 
Y is tl^ pifton s and 

Mm • 

Z the fixed valve. 

G V is a cylinder of wood, fixed upon the pump- rod, and reaches above the furface 
of the water : this piece of wood being of fuch a thickncfs, that its fection is half the 

area 



f 
/ 



feXl^ERIMENTAL ENQUIRY, &c/ 2» 

area of that of the pump-barrcI, will caufe the furface of the water to rife in the head, a^ 
much while the pifton is defccnding, as while it is rifing : and will thereby keep the 
gauge-rod F G more equally to its height,— A^o/e, The arch and handle M M is here 
reprefented on a different fide to what it is fhewn in the preceding .figures, in ordi^r 
that its dimenfions may the better appear. 

t 

a a fliews one of the two wires which fcrvt as direftors to the float, in order that 
the gauge rod F G may be kept perpendicular j for the fame purpofe alfo fcrves w, a 
piece of wood with a hole to receive the gauge- rod, and keep it upright. 

b Is the aperture oi the (luice* 

c c a kant-board, for throwing the water more direftly dowa the opening^ c d, into 
the lower cidern -, and 

c e is a Hoping board, for bringing back the water that is thrown up by the floats 
of the wheel. 



/ 



jg. 3, repj^efents one end of die main axis, with z feflioa of the move^d^le cylinder^ 
marked O in the preceding figures* 

A B C D is the end of the axis ; whereof the parts 
B and D are covered with ferrules or hoops of brafs.^ 
£ is a cylinder of metal ; whereof the part marked 
F is the pivot or gudgeon^ 

c c is the fcftion of an hdlow cylmdcr of wood, the diameter of die interior part 

being fomewhat larger than the cylindrical ferrule B. 
« 

tf a is the ftftion of a ferrule of brafs, drivea into the end of tlvc hdlow cylinder, 
md which is adjufted to that marked B, ib as to Aide freely theieupon, but with as 
Uttle Ihake as poinble. 

bbfddygfft reprefcnt the fc£tioB of 9 Biafi ferrule, plate, and ipcket, fixed upon 
the other end of tifc hollow cylinder i the locket d d being; adjufted to Hide freely 

upon 



90 EXPERIMENTAL ENQUIRT, Bee. 

upon the cylinder E» in the (kmc manner as the ferrule a a Hides upon the cylinder B& 
che outer of the focket at 

g g\s formed into a fort of button ; by pufliing wheieoC the hollow cylinder will 
move backwards and forwards, or turn round at pkafure upon the cylindrical parts of 
the axis B and E. 

€ €i % i, o, rcprefcnt die fedion of a brals feirule, alfo fixed upon the hollow 
cylinder : the edge of this ferrule 

e e is cut into tccth^ in the manner of a contrate wheel i and the edge thereof 

o\% cut in the manner of a ratchet. 

Of conf quence^ when the plate b d d b is pufhed clofe to the ferrule Dj the teeth 
of the ferrule e e will lay hold of 

G, a pin fixed into the axis ; by which means die hollow cylinder is made to turn 
along with the wheel and axis : but being drawn back by the button g g^ the hoUow 
cylinder is thereby difcngaged from the pin G, and ceafes turning.— A^o^«, The weight 
in the fcale is prevented from running backj by a catch that plays in and lays hold of 
the ratchet o o. 

By this means the hollow cylinderj upon which the cord winds and raifes the weight, 
is put in aftion and difcharged therefrom inftantaneouflyj while the wheel is in modon : 
for, without fome contrivance of this kind, it would not be eafy to make this fort of 
experiments with any tolerable degree of exa£hiefs. 



The ufe of the apparatus now defcribed will be rendered more Intelligible, by giving 
a general idea of what 1 had in view j but as I Ifaall be obliged to make ufe of a term 
which has heretofore been the caufe of difputation, I think it neceflfary to aflign the 
fenfe in which I would be undeiitood to ufe it i and in w!hich 1 apprehend it is ufed by 
praAical mechanics. 

The word potver^ as ufed in practical mechanics, I apprehend, to fignify the exertion 
of ftrength, gravitation, impulfe, or preflure, fo as to produce motion : and by means 
of ftrength^ gravititioni impulfe^ or prcffiiiti compounded with motion, to be capable 

of 



EXPERfMENTAL BJNtXUmTi atts 8f 

^fA \ wA that no cficft i& properly mcchanicalj but wha 
K>wer itq pmducc it« 



requires 



The raifing of a weight, relative to the height to which it can be raifi^d in a given 
time^ is the moft proper mcafure of power -, or, in other words, if the weight raifed .is 
snulciplied by the height to which it can be raifed in a given time, the produft is the 
meafurc of the power raifing it ; and confcqucntly, all thofe powers are equal, whole 
produds, made by fuch multiplication, are equal : for if a power can raifc twice the 
weight to the fame height ; or the fame weight to twice the height, in the fame time 
that another power can, the firft power is double the fecond : and if a power can raiie 
half the weight to double the height ;. or double the weight to half the height -, in the 
lame time that another can, thofe two powers are equaL But twte, all this is to be under-^ 
ftood in cafe of flow or equable motion of the body raifed ;. for in quicks accekratedj^ 
or retarded motions, the vis inert ue of the matter moved will, make a variation^ 

In comparing the eflCedts produced by water-wheels with the powers producing 
them ; or, in other words, to know what part of the original power is neceilarily loft 
in the application,, we muft previoufly know how much of the power is fpent in over« 
coming the fridion of the machinery, and the reflftance of the air ; alfo what is the 
leal velocity of the water at the iaftant that it ftiikes the wheel ; and the real quandtf 
of water expended is a given time* 

From the velocity of the water> at die inftant that it ftrikes the wheel, given,, die 

height of head producdve of fuch velocity can be deduced, from acknowledged and 

experimented principles of hydroftatics : fo that by muldplying the quantity,, or weight 

of water^ Kally expended in a given dme, by the height of a head fo obuined ; which 

mull be confidered as the height from which that weight of water had defcended in that 

given dme i we Ihall have a product, equal to the original power of die water, and 

dear of all uncertainty that would arife from the fricdon of the water, in pafling fmalL 

apertures s and from all doubts, ariling from the different meafure of fpouting waters,. 

afligned by different authors. On the other hand, the fum of the weights raifed by the 

acdon of this water, and of the weight required to overcome the fricdon and. relift- 

ance of the machine, muldplied by the height to which the weight can be railed ip the 

dme given, the product will be equal to the effect of that power i and the proponion 

of the two products will be the proportion of the power to the effect : fo that by 

loading the wheel .with diflSnent weights fucceffively, we ihall be able to determine at 

what pardcobur load| 4Kid velocity i>f the wheels tiK c&ctii^^nummtmp 

The 



te EXPERtMENTAL fiN^JUIRY, &c. 

The maDner of finding the real velocity of the water; at the inJbnt of its ftriking 
the wheel ; the manner of finding the value of the frictibn^ refiftancej &c. in any 
given cafe ; and the manner of finding the real expence of watcr^ fo far as concerns 
the foUowmg experiments, without having recourfe to theory ; being matters upon 
which the following determinations depend, it will be neceflary to explain them. 

To determine the Velocity oj the Water striking the Wheel. 

It has already been mentioned, in the references to the figures, that weights are 
raifed by a cord winding round a cylindrical part of the axis. Firft, then, let the 
wheel be put in motion by the water, but widiout any weights in the fcale \ and ice 
the number of turns in a minute be fixty : now it is evident, that were the wheel free 
fix>m friftion and refiftance, that fixty times the circumference of the wheel would be 
the fpace dirough which the water would have moved in a minute % with that velocity 
wherewith it ftruck the wheel : but the wheel being incumbered by friftion and re- 
fiftance, and yet moving fixty turns in a minute, it is 'plain that the velocity of the 
water mufl: hayc been greater than fixty circumferences before it met with the wheel. 
Let new the cord be wound round the cylinder, but contrary to the ufual way, and put 
a weight in the fcale ; the weight fo difpofed (which may be called the count er-ioeight) 
will endeavour to aflift the wheel in turning the fame way, as it would have been 
turned by (he water: put therefore as much weight into the fcale as, without any 
water, will caufc it to turn fomcwhat fafter than at the rate of fixty turns in a minute ; 
fuppofe fixty-threc ; let it now be tried again by the water, affifted by the weight ; 
the wheel therefore will now make more than fixty turns ; fuppofe fixty-four : hence 
we conclude the water ftill exerts fomc power in giving morion to rhe wheel. Let the 
weight be again increafed, fo as to make fixty-four and a half turns in a minute with-* 
out water: let it once more be tried with water as before; and fuppofe it now to 
make the fame number of turns with water as without, viz. fixty-four and a half: hence 
it is evident, that in this cafe the wheel makes the fame number of turns in a minute, 
as it would do if the wheel had no friftion or refiftance at all ; becaufc the weight is 
equivalent thereto; for were it too little the water would accelerate the wheel beyond 
. the weight ; and if too great, retard it ; fo that the water now becomes a regulator 
of the wheel's motion ; and the velocity of its circumference becomes a mcafurc of 
the velocity of the water. 

In* like manner, in feeking the greateft product, or maximunh of effect ; having 
found by triids what weight gives the greateft product^ by Amply multiplying the 

weight 



EXPERIMENTAL ENQUIRY, &c; 58 

weight in the fcalc bjrihc number df? turns of the wheel, find what weight In the fcale, 
when the cord is on the contrary fide of the cylinder, wijl caufe the wheel to make the 
fame number of turns the4ame way, without water j it is evident. that this weight wtU 
be nearly equal to all fridlion and refinance taken together; and confequently, that 
the weight in the fcale, with twice ♦ the weight of the fcale, added to the back or 
counter- weight,, will be equal to the yeight that.could have been raifcd, fuppofing the 
maclune had beea without fridion ori>efi(iance ; and which multiplied by the height to 
which it was railed, the product will \)C the greateft efieft of tliat power. 

. The .Quantity of. Water expended is found ihus.: 

The pump made ufe of for replenilhing the head with water was (b carefully made,, 
that, no water efcaping back hy^ the leathers^ it delivered the famf qjuantity of water at 
every ftroke, whether- worked quick or flow -, and as the length of the ftroke was 
limited, confequently the vihic of 6ne ftrbke (or, on account of more exaftnefs, 
twelve ftrokes) was known, by the height to which the water was thereby raifcd in the 
head ; which, being of a regular figure,* wa& eafily meafured. The duice, by which 
the water was drawn upon the wheel, was made to ftop at certain heights by a peg ^ 
6> that when th^ peg was in the fame hole, the aperture for the effluent water was the 
fame. Hence the quantity of Water e^nded by any given head; and opening of the 
fluicej^ may be obtained : ifQf> ^X ^t^f^^^^g how maay ftrokes a minute was fufficient 
to keep tip the furface. of ^thc water at the given height, and multiplying the number 
^ ef ftrpkes by the value of f ach, the water expended by any given apecture and head 
in a given time will be given. 

TJhcfe . tljiogs will be futthei> JUuftratcd by going, ovec tbfi calculus of fmc let of 



t) 



Spcchien of a Set of Experiments^ 



:^...ai :. i.. jvr .. ...r...; Tkfe (luice drawn to the firfl hole. 

The water above the floor of the fluice ----- 30 inchest 

Sttokes^f the pump in a minute ...... J9^ 

The head raifed by i4 ftrokes --..---ax 
The wheel raiied the empty fcale, and made turns in. a itiihute - - fo 
With a counter-weight of I fi). Soz*. it made ---f.-^-85; 
DLtto tried with water -^--^--r*. *-----'86' 



/I 



* The Vf ight of the Kale make* part of the weight both ways. 

F No. 



3i ON THE POWER OP WIND AND WATER, 

No. Weight. Tuhu in a minute. Broduft. 

I - - . - 

a - - - - 

3 - - - - 

4 - - - - 

S - - - - 

6 - . - - 

7 - - - - 

8 - - - - 

9 - - - - 

Counter-weight, for 30 turns ^thout water, a 02. in-the fcale. 

viV. if. The area of tlv? head was 105,8 f^uare Inehes. 
Weight of the empty fcale and pulley, 10 oz* 
Circumference of the cylinder, 9 inches. 
Circumference of the water-wheel, 75 ditto. 

Reduction of tht above Set of JEsperiments. 

The circumference of the wheel, 75 inches, multiplied by 86 turns, gives 44$o 
inches for the velocity of the water in a minute ; ^ <:if wiiich will be Ac velocity in^a 
fecofid; equal to 107,5 inches, or 8,96 feet, which is due to t head of fifteen inches'f f 
and this we call the virtual or effective head. . • -• 



lb. oz. 




• 




4 - - . - - 


45 - - 


- - 


180 


50 


42 - - 


« ' 1* 


110 


60 


3H' ' 


- - 


217* 


70 


3J| - - 


- - 


*36i 


80 


30 - - 


- • 


240 maxitnum^ 


90 


&6^ - . 


• .- 


23H 


10 - - - - - 


aa - - 


- - 


220 


11 - - * - • 


i6i- - 


- . 


iBi} 


12 • ceaied work ing. 









» * 



The area of the head being 105,8 inches, this muldpfied by the weight of -wkier of 
tlie inch cubic, equal to the decimal ,579 of the ounce avoirdupoife, gives 61,16 OifiQes 
for the weight of as much water, as is conuined in the head, upon one inch in depth, 
yV©^ which is 3,83 pounds; this mulriplied by the depth -21 inches, gives 80,431b. 
for (he value of 12 Itrokcs; and by proportion, 39^ (die number made in a minute) 
will give 264,7 lb. the weight of water expended in a minute^ 



^i^t 



• y. A. When the w4ioel moves so slosr as not to rid the wiUcr so fast as su{»pli<:d by tbe sluice, the 
ii4*r\iiiuihU(*<l wuti-r fulls back upon tine aperture, and the wlicci iamediatcly ceases moving* 

4 'riiiv is drtermiiu'd upon llie Common tnaxini of hjdroMatics, that tiie velocity of.^uting waters 
i^ KK\\\^\ t«» rtM^ v«^()cify that an heavy body would acq«ire in falling from the betgblof the jrtflorv!«ir{ and 
li Mv\«U by thtf riMDg of jcU io the hdght of their roservoirs nearly* 

Now, 



TO TURN MILLS, &d-; ** 

Now» a$ ft64»7 ib. of water may be confidcred as iiaving dcfccndcd through a fpace of 
15 inches in a minute^ the produdt of thefe two numbers 3970 will exprefs the power 
of the water to produce mechanical efieAs i which were as follows : 

The velocity of the wheel at the maximum^ as appears above, was 30 turns a 
minute J which multiplied by 9 inches, the circumference of the cylinder, makes 270 
inches; but as the fcale was hung bjy a pulley and double line» the weight was only 
raifed half of this, viz. 135 inches. 

The weight in the fcale at the maximitm ilb. 00^ 

Weight of the fcale and pulley - • o 10 i^ 

Counter-weight, fcale, and pulley - • o 12 ^^^ ^ 

Sum of the rcfiftancc • * • 9 <5 '^'' 

or /A. 5,37 5* 

Now, as 9,3751b. is raifed 135 inclies, die& two numbers being multiplied together^ 
theprodu£tis 1266, which exprefles the efieft produced at a marimiim : fo that the 
proportion of the power to the effect is as 3970 : ia6tf, or as 10 : 3,18* ^ 

But though this is the .greateft single eficft prDducU>Ie from die power vientiomd^ 
by the impuUe of the water upon an underfliot wheel s yeCt as the whole power of the 
water is not exhaufted thereby, this .will not be the true ratio between the p<nver of 
the water, and the sum of all the effects producible therefrom : for as the watser muft 
iieceflarily leave the wheel with a velocity equal to the wheel's circumference^ it is plaiD 
that fome part of the power of the water muft remain after the quitting the wheeL 

Tlie velocity of the wheel at the maximum k 30 turns a minute j and oon&qucntlf 
its circumference moves at the rate of 3, 1 23 feet a lecond^ which anfwers €o a head 
i,8c^ inches ; this being multiplied by the expence of water in a mtntite^ viz. 264,7 lb. 
produces 48 1 for the power remaining in the water after it has pafled the wheel : this 
being therefore deducted from the original power 3970^ leaves 3489» which is that 
part of the power which is fpent io producing the efiect 1266 1 and confrquently the 
part of the power ipent in producing the t&ct^ is to the greateft efiect producible 
thereby as 3489 : 1266 : : 10 : 3,62^ or aa 1 1 to 4* 

The velocity of-^fke water ftrikiog the wiieel has been determned to be cqualta 
86 circum&rences of the wheel per n&n\M^ and tfat velocity of the wheel at the 
maximum to4>cf 30 i the velocity d die water will ihcicfere be to that of the wheel as 

46 to 30s or as 10 to 3>5» » at am 7* 

The 



se ON THE POWER OF WIND AND WATER, 

The load at the maximum has been (hown to be equal to 9 lb. S oz. ahd that* tlie 
wheel ceafed moving with lalb. in the fcale: to which, if the weight of the fcalic is 
added, viz. 10 ounces*, the proportion will be nearly as 3 to 4 between the lead at the 
maximum and that by which the wheel is ftoppcd. 

It is fomewhat remarkable, that though the velocity of the wheel in relation tb.thci 
water turns out greater than 4- of the velocity of the water, yet the impulfc of tbci 
water in the cafe of a maximum is more than double of what is affigncd by theory 1 
that is, inftead of 7 of the column, it is nearly equal to the whole column. 

It muft be remembered, therefore, that in the prefcnt cafe, the wheel was not 
placed in an open river, where the natural current, after it has communicated its im- 
pulle to the float, has room on all Hdes to efcape, as the theory fuppofes ; but in a 
conduit, or race, to which the float being adapted, the water cannot othcrwifc efcape 
than by moving along with the wheel, k is obfervable, chat a wheel working in this* 
manner, as fooo as the water meets the float, receiving a fudden check, it rifejs up 
againd the floaty like a wave againft a flxed object ; infomuch that when the (heec of 
water is not a quarter of an inch thick before it meets the float, yet this iheet will 
act upon the whole furface of a float, whoTe height is three inches ; and conlcque&tJy 
were the float no higher than the thicknefs of the (heet of water, as the theor7i al(b 
fuppofes, a great part of the force wouid have been loft, by the water d&fhing' dver 
the float f. 



* The resistance of the air in this case ceases, and the friction is not added, as 12 lb. in the scale was 
floflicirnt to rtop chc wb^ after it had inxsn ia fuU iDotion-; and thiTeforc somewhat more 'than a' coun- 
terbalance to 4be impulse of the water. 

t Since the above was wriuen, I And that Profi*sior Eulor, in |he Berlin Acts for the year 1748, in a 
mc mpir entitled Maxims pour tranter le plut axaiitogcuswcnt les mtwhi/iei dentins a chxer dc Vvau par h 
moycik dt pQmpei, \^h»,v 192. § <^. iias the fuUowing passai^e^ whidi seems to be the more roroarkablcy as 
I do not find hq has i^iTen any demoitstnttion of tlie principle therein contained, either fiom theory or 
expi*rimenl; or lias made any use thereof in his calculations on this snbject: — ** CeptMidant dans cc ca« 
*' ptiikque IVaci i^ rrflechte, 6t ^ii'clio dicoule tur los aubcs verfe k*s cotus, elle y exerce encore une foivc 
*' p«irticuliere, dont IVffet de rinipiilMon ^pra au^mente; & eKfserie^ce Joiniea la theorie a fail voir que 
** dans ce cas, la force est presquc double: de sorte qui'il faiit prendre Ic double de le s<Ttion du fil d eau 
<< pour ce qui rcpoml datu ee cas a ie iiurfnco de| aubes, po&rvu qu'dles soient asac2 larges pour rccevoir 
^ ce supplement de force. Car si let aubes aetoicnt plus largesuuc 4c fi], on trait dVuu on oe devsoit 
*• pmidre f ne jic.simple section^ tout p.ouipie dans le^pnrinier cus, qu I'aube toule entire est pappco 
•* pur IVau." 

TABLE 



^-4 



TO TURN MILLS, &c. 



37 



TABLE I. 



' 1 

t • 

i 


b* 


3 

75 


educed 


S 

3 
C 


• 

£ 
.2 

'tZ 


ximum. 


as 

•3 ' 


1 
1 

1 

1 






1 


Number. 


if 

•s ^ 


3 


r 3 2i 


S5 

S 

C 
3 


s 

el 


ce 
P 

■ '^ 


^ 3 


• 


• 
• 


O ^ 




J 3 -:t 

-•= - 1 

.2 -3 -3 


• 

a 

1 
1 




In. 




in. i 


/6. 


oz Ih, oz. 
















I 


33 


88 


15,85, 30, 


13 


10 10 9 


27.1, 


4358 


1411 


10:3;24 


10:3,4 


10:7,75 


/ 


2 


30 


8() 


15,0 i 30, 


12 


10] 9 6 


26*,7 


3P70 


1266 


10:3,2 


10:3,5 


10:7,4 




3 


27 


82 


13,7 28, 


11 


2 8 6 


243, 


332.9 


1044 


10:3,15 


10:3,4 


10:7,5 




4 


24 


78 


12,3 277 


9 


iq 7 5 


235, 


2890 


901,4 


10:3,12 


10:3,55 


10:7,'»3 


At 


5 




75 


11,4 j 25.5) 


8 


id 6 5 


214, 


2439 


7-^5 7 


10:3,02 


10:3,45 


10:7,32 


tbc 


6 


18 


70 


9n05 1 23,5 


6 


10 5 5 


199, 


1970 


561,8 


10:2,85 


10:3,36 


10:8,02 


1st 


7 


15 


6*5 


8,54 1 23,4 


5 


2 4 4 


178,5 


1 524 


442,5 


10:2^ 


10:3,6 


10:8,3 


hole. 


8 


12 


60 


7,29 5 22, 


3 


10 3 5 


16I,- 


1 1 73 


328 


10:2.8 


10:3,77 


10:9,1 




9 


9 


52 


5,47 19, 


2 


12 


2 8 


134, 


733 


2L3,7 


10:2,9 


10:3.65 


10:9,1 




to 


6 


42 


3, .70 


16, 


1 


12 


1 10 


114, 

342, 


404,7 


117 


10:2,82 


10:3,8 


10:9,3 




11 


24. 


84 


14,2 


30,75 


13 


10 


10 14 


4890 


1505 


10:3,075 


10:3,66 


10:7,9 


« 


12 


21 


81 


13,5 


2<), 


11 


10 


9 6 


297, 


4009 


1223 


10:3,01 


10:3,62 


10:8,05 




13 


18 


72 


10,^; 


26, 


9 


10 


8 7 


285, 


2993 


975 


10:3,25 


10:3,6 


10:8,75 


At ^ 


14 


15 


69 


9,(i 


25, 


7 


la 


6 n 


277, 


2659 


774 


10:2,92 


10:3,62 


10:9, 


the 


15 


12 


6a 


8,0 


25, 


5 


10| 


4 14 


234, 


1872 


549 


10:2,94 


10:3,9: 


10:8,7 


2a. 


16 


9 


56 


6,37 


23, 


4 


0< 3 13 


201, 


1280 


390 


10:3,05 


10:4,1 


10:9,5 




17 • 


6 


46 


4,25 


21, 


2 


8 


2 4 


167,5 


712 


212 


J 0:2,98 


10:4,55 


10-9, 


1 
1 

1 


18 


15 


72 


10,5 


29, 


11 


10 


9 6 


357, 


3748 


1210 


10:3,23 


10:4,02 


10:8,05 


1.9 


12 


66 


8,75 


26,75 


8 • 


'10 


7 .6 


330, 


2887 


878 


10:3,05 


10:4,05 


10:8,1 


The 


20 


9 


58 


6,S 


24,5 


5 


8 


5 


255, 


1734 


541 


10:3,01 


10:4,22 


10:9,1 


3d. 


21 


6* 


48 


4,7 


23,5 


3 


2 


3 


228, 


1064 


317 


10:2^9 


10:4^ 


10:9,6 




22 


12 


68 


9,3 


27, 


9 


2 


8 6 


359, 


3338 


1006 


10:^,02 


10:3^7 


10:9,17 




23 


9 


58 


tf,S 1 26,25 


6 


2 


5 13 


. 332, 


2257 


686 


10:3,04 


10:4,52 


10:9,5 


4th. 


24 


6 


48 


4,7 i 24,5 

1 


3 


12 


3 8 


1 262, 


-1231 


385 


10:3,13 


10:5,1 


10:9,35 


5th. 


25 


.9 


60 


7,29 


27,3 


6 


12 


6 6 


355, 


2588 


783 


10:3.03 


10:4,55 


10.9,45 


26 


6 


50 


5,03 , 24,6 


4 


6 


4 1 


307, 


1544 


450 


10:2,92 


10:4,9 


10:9,3 


27 


6 


50 

• 


5,03 


26, 


4 


15 


4 S 


360, 


1811 


534 


10:2,95 


10:5,2 


1 0:9,25 
13. 


6th. 


1 . 


2. 


3 . 


4. 

1 


1 
5 . 


6 


• 


7. 


8. 

1 


9. 


1 to. 


11 . 


l*-\. 



38 ON THE POWER OF WIND AND WATER, 

In further confirmation of what is already dellvercdj I have adjoined a table, 
(TABLE I.) containing the refult of 27 fea of experiments, made and reduced in the 
manner above fpecified. What remains of the theory of undcrfhot wheels, wilt naturally 
follow fciom a comparirun of the different experiments together. 

3faTtmg and Obicrvalions deduced from thejoregoing Table of Experiment$. 

Maxim. I. That the virtual or efFedive head being the fame, the efFcft will be nearly 
as the quantity of water expended. 

This wilt appear by comparing the-contcats of the columns 4, 8, and 19, in the fore- 
going fets of experiments ; as for 

Example ift, taken from No. S> and 25, viz. 

No. Virtual Head. Water expended. EffeA. 

• - - - - 7,29 - - ,- 161 - - - - 328 

25 - - - - 7.«9 - . - ' 3SS - - - - 785 

Nov tlic beads being equal, if the effe^s are proportioned to the water expended, we 
Iball have by maxim ift, i6i ; 355:: 328 : 713; but723 fails Ihorto." 785, as ittum* 
qpt in experiment, according to No. 2;, by 62; the efFeft therefore of No. 25, 
compared with No. 8, u greater than accortUng to the prcfent maxim in the nuo of 
14 to »3. 

The foregoing example, with four fimilar ones, in Iccn at one view in the fblknriiig 
Table. 



bi 


i 

6 

Z 


II 






Compartfbn. 


J 


i 


Ift 


> 


7.2» 
7.>9 


Ik 
161 

355 


328 
785 


161 : 355 = • 328 : 7»3 


62 + 


14 : 


»3 


id 


•3 
18 


10,5 
lO.S 


285 
357 


975 
1210 


=85 : 357 ' : 975 ■■ ■"■ 


ll^' 


121 : 


132 


Jd 


23 


6,8 
6,8 


"5$ 
33^ 

228 

262 


686 


Hi •■ 33^--- 541 •• 704 


18— 


38 : 


39 


4th 


21 

24 


4.7 
4.7 


3"7 

38? 


228 : 262 :": 317 : 364 


21 + 


18 : 


'7 


s-\^ 


5.03 
5.03 


307 
360 


45° 
534 


307 : 3'o::4SO : 53' 


3 + 


178 : 


■77 



TO TURN MILLS. &c. a» 

HcDCC therefore, in comparing difierent experiments, as fome fall (hort, and others 
exceed the maximum^ and all agree thecewith. as near as can be expcAed, in ia affair 
where fo many different circumftances are concerned, we may, according to the l»ws of 
reafoningby-induftbn, conclude the maxim true t viz. that the effefts are neaHy as the 
quantity of water expended. 

Maxim 11. That the expence of water being the fame, the efieft will be nearly as tlic 
height of the virtual or effeftive head. 

This alfo will appear by comparing the contents of columns 4, 8, and 10, in any of the 
fcB of ^periments. 

Example ift> of No. 2, and No. 24, viz. 

No- Virtual Head. Expence. Effect. 

a--^. 15--- 264,7 - - - J 266 

»4 - - - 4.7 - : - , 262 r - - 385' 
Now, at the expences are not quite equal, we mud proportion one of the ^ci£t$ 
accordingly: thus 

by maxim ift, 262 t 264,7 ' • 3^S * 3^9 
and by max. 2d, 15 : 4,7 : : 1266 : 397 

Difference - - ^ - 8 

The eSeffc therefore of No. 24, compared with No, 2, is lefs than according to the 
prelent maxim in the ratio of 49 : 50. 

The foregoing, and two other fimilar examples, arecompiifedm die following Table: 



1 


i 

2 


1 

> 





1 


Comparifon. 


^ 


.2 


ift 


2 


»5 

4.7 




1266 
385 


) Max. ift, 263 : 264,7 ; : 3S5 : 319J 
i Max. 2d, 1 5 ; 4,7 : : 1 266 ; 397 J 


S — 


49 ^5° 


2d 


I 
10 


... 
3.55 


275 
114 


1411 
117 


7Max. ift, 114: 275,:: 117:2821 
5Max.2d,is,85: 3,55 : : 1411 : ji6S 


34— 


S : 9 


3i 


11 

»7 


14,2 
4,25 


'J4J 
1675 


113 


JMax.lft, 167,5 ! 341:! »>»:433] 
jMax.ad, 14,2 : 4,25 : : isoj : 4SOj 


'7- 


25 : 26 



40 ON THE POWER OF WIND AND WATER, 

Maxim in. That the quantity of water expended being the fame, the cfieft is 
nearly as the fquare of its velocity. 

ThiK will appear by comparing the contents of columns 3, 8, and 10, in any of the 
.fcts of experiments ; as for 

Example ift, of No. 2, with No.. 24, viz. 



Turns in a minu:c. 


Expcnce. 


Esta 


- - 86 - - ■■ 


- - 2«4.7 - 


- - 1266 


- - 48 - , - 


- - 262 - 


- - 38s 



The velocity being as the number of turns, we ihall hayc, 
by maxim ift, 262 : 264,7 - 3^S '■ 3^9 



and by maxim 3d, 



J 86* : 48* 
[7396 : 2304 

Difference 



}■ 



1266: 394 



The effeft therefore of No. 24, compared with No. 2, is lefs than by the prefcnt 
maxim in the ratio of 7S : 79. 

The foregoing, and three other fimilar examples, are compriled in the following 
Tablet 



1 




P 




1 


Comparifon. 


> 


l> 


-1 


2 
24 


86 
48 


264,7 
262 


1266 
J8j 


1 rMax. itt. 262:264,7 — J85 : J89 


}- 


^8:79 


'1 


I 
10 


88 

-42 


114 


1411 
"7 


J f Max. I ft, 114:275 ::ii7 :283 


}3^ 


7!» 


.] 


II 

'7 


84 
46 


342 

■«7.5 


1505 
212 


1 rMax. Ill, 167,5:342 :: 212 : 433 
"Max.3d.{,«|;;f„J.:.505:45. 


|.8_ 


U<: 25 


..] 


11 


72 
4S 


357 

218 


1210 
3"7 


1 fMax. ift. 228:357 : : 317 : 456 

Hm.. 3d, {,^j;-4;.|-.:. 2.0:538 


|42- 


12:13 



TO TURN MILLS, &€• «^- 

Maxim IV. The aperture being the fame, the effcft will he nearly as the cube of 
the velocity of the water. 

• This alfo will appear by comparing the contents of columns 3, 8, and 10 i as for 

Example ift, of No. 1, and No. 10, viz. 

No. Turns. Expence, EfFcft. 

I - .. - 88 . ... - 275 r - -^ 1411 

10 - - - - 42 - - - . - 114 - - - iiy 



1 1 



Lanma. Ic muft here be obferved, that if water paflcs out of an aperture, in the 
fame (cdionj but with different velocities, . the expence will be proportional to the 
velocity ; and therefore converfely, if the expence is not proportional to the velocity, 
the fedtion of the water is not the fame. 

t 

Nowj comparing the water difcharged with the turns oi No. i^ and 10, we Ihall 
have 88 : 42 : : 275 : 131,2 ; but the water difcharged by No. 10, is only 1141b. 
therefore, though the fluice was drawn to the fame height in Ho. 10, as an No. i, 
yet the feftion of the water paffing out, was lefs in No. 10, than No. i, in the pro- 
portion of 114 to 131,2; confequently, had the efiedive aperture or fedion of the 
water been the fame in No. 10, as in No. i, fo that 131,21b. of water had been 
difcharged inftead of 1 14, the efieft would have been increafcd in the fame proportion ; 
that is 

• • ... 

. by the Zewma, 88 : 42 : : 275 : 131,2 
by maxim id, 114 • i3\A • • u? • ^34>S 

and by maxim 4th.[gg^^^j ! ^^^^l^ : : 14«» : H3»S 

Dificrencc - - - - 19 

The effcft therefore of No. 10, compared with No. i, is Icfs than it ought to be 
by the prefent maxim in the ratio of 7 : 8, 



The 



« Oit THE PoWr of Wlim AND WATER, 

The foregoing, and three other fimtW pnmptes, are contained 'ja the foUo^^ng 
Table : 



E 

1 

ill 


1 

i 


is 


, 


it 

U 


Comparifw. 




1i 


U 


38 

41 


S7S 
114 


1411 

117 


"Lemma. 83 : 42 : : 275 : 131,2 
Max. I. 114: 131,2 ; : 117 : 134,5 I 
tMax. 4. 881: 42!::i4il : 153,5 J 


19— 


7:8 


:d 


\\\ 


«4 
46 


342 
!«7.S 


212 


r Lemma. 84 : 46 : : 342 ; 187,3 
Max.l. 167,5: 187,3: : 212 : 2371 
Max. 4- 84! : 461 : : 1505 : 247 \ 


10- 


13:24 


3d 


li! 


72 
48 


3S7 
S2§ 


I2IO 

3>7 


fLemma. 72 : 48 : : 357 : 23S 

Max.l. 228 : 238 : : 317 ; 331 7 
(Max. 4. 721 : 481 ; :iaio : 355) 


24— 


14:15 


4th 


1^: 


68 

4S 


26^ 


.{Max.1.26^ : 2^3,4: : 585 : 3727 
-I 'jtMix. 4-6S1 : 481 : : looS : 3J4 J 


i3 + 


20 : 19 



Observ. ift. On, compadag column 2d and 4.th,, T^bl? \- it is evident that the 
Kir/ua/ Aea*/ beats ijo ccrt^o pcoporuoa to, tjii; hend^ of ipater ; but that when the 
aperture is greater, or the velocity of the water iffuing therefrom lefs, they approach 
r.carer to a cotncideuce ; and confcqu^oU^ ip the U:;ge openings of voS^^9i ftnd fluices, 
where great quantkie« of water are difchargcd from moderate heads, the head of water, 
and virtual head detcrmintd from the. nJocity, will nearly agree> as experience 
copfirms. 

Observ. 2d. Upon comparing the fcveral proportions- between thepoaJepan4 ^^^^ 
in column nth, the mod general is that of 10 to 3; the extremes 10 to 3^1 and 10 
to 2,3 i but as it is obfcrvablc, that where the quantity of water, or the velocity 
thereof; that is, where the power is grcateft, the 2d term of the ratio is greateft alio : 
we nriay tlicreforc well allow the proportion fubfifting in large works, as 3 to 1. 

ObsetT. 



• / 



TO TURN MILLS, &c. 4S 

;. Qbstrv^ 3d. The proportions of velocities between the water and wheel in colunnn 
12, are contabed in the limits of 3 to x and 2 to i ; but as the greater velocities' 
approach the linait of 3 to i, and the greater quantity of water approaches to that of 
2 to J J the beft general proportion will be that of j to 2. 

Observ. 4th. On comparing the numbers in column 13, it appears, that there is 
no certain ratio between the load that the wheel will carry at its viaximum^^ and what 
win .totally ftop itj but that fShHy sore contained within tht limits of 20 to 195 aiid 
of so to 15 ^ bot BB chtf efieft^proachfes qeiErrefl: to the ratio df 20 to 15, or of 4 to 
3, when the po^et is greateft, whether by increafe of ve^locity, or quantity of water, 
this feems to be the moft applicable to large works ; but as the load that a wheel 
otight to kahre,, in pnder to yirotk t6 the beft advantage, can be lUTigned, by knowing 
the effedt it ouglit to ftroduce^ and the vdk>city it ought to have in producing it; the 
exa& knowledge of ciie grexteft: load it will bear, is of the lefs confeqiience in 
pra£iiccr 

Ir if to be nwtd, fk2X in stU the examplei und^r the lift three of the fear preceding 
ifOOMi^r ^ ^^flr- of th« kfllfr power fall^ ftiort of its due propof don to the greater, 
when compared bf its maKifti y ctctpt ^e laft example of maxim fourth : 2Snd hence, 
if the e3CperimeiKts are taken ftriAly, wt muft inftr^ that the effedb indreafe and 
dimimilL in afn lughet ratio than thofe maodms^ fuppofe; but as the deviation is not 
vctry coiifideiltbki, the greateft being about one-eighth of the quantity in queftion ; 
andlarit isnoeeafy to make experiments of fo compounded a nature with abfokrte 
Ifvecifiota *r "vre may rkther fuppofe, that the leifer power is attended with fome friAion, 
cr works* under ibme diiadvantage, which has not been duly accounted for; and 
tiierfefere we may conclude^ dw thefe maxims will iiold very Dearly, when applied to 
woikip in hrge; 

Aiier the eXperiffteiMs sAove mcmidned 1^^ the wheel, which had originally 

t9^tntf^)Wf SjOild^ was reduced to twelve; which caufed a dimimitk>n in the effe£b, 
on account of a gt^eater quantity of water elcaping between the floats and the floor; 
but a circular fweep being adapted thereto, of fuch a length, that one float entered 
the curve before the preceding one quitted it, the effect came fo near to the former, as 
not to give hopes of advancing it by bcreafmg the number of floats beyond twenty* 
lour ifltkis panicular wheeL 



PART 



44 ON THE POWER OF WIND AND WATER, 







PART IL 
Concerning Overshot JVheth. . 
Read before the Royal Society, May a4thj 1759. 

■ 

TN the former part of this efTay, we have confidrred the impulfe of a confined 
-*■ ftream, zamg on Undershot fVheets. We now proceed to examine die powor 
and application of water, when acting by its gravity on Overshot IVheels* . 






In reafbning without experiment, one might be led to imagine, that however' 
different the mode of application is ; yet, that whenever the fame quantity of wattr 
defcends through the fame perpendicular fpace, that the natural effi^ctivc power would 
be equal ; fuppofing the machinery free from friction, equally calculated to receive 
the full effcft of the power, and to make die moft of it : for if we fuppofe the hdght 
of a column of water to be 30 inches> and Ceding upon a bafe or aperture of one inch 
fquare» every cubic inch of water that departs therefrom will acquire the fame velocity, 
or momentum^ from the uniform prefTure of 30 cubic inches above it, that .one cubic 
inch let fall from the top will acquire in falling down to the level of the aperture ; 
. viz. fuch a velocity as, in a contrary diredtion^ would carry it to the level from whence 
it fell ; * one would therefore fuppofe, that a cubic inch of water, let fall through .a 
fpace of 30 inches, and there impinging upon another body> would, be capable of 
producing an equal eSeA by collifion, as if the fame cubic inch had defcended chmugh 
the fame fpace with a (lower motion, and produced its effedts gradually : foe iq: bokh 
cafes gravity acts upon an equal quantity of matter, through an equal ipaceif aod 
confcquently, that whatever was the ratio between the power and efiect in undcrfhot 
wheels, the fame would obtain in overlhot, and indeed in all others : yet, however 
conclufive this reafoning may feem, it will appear, in the cotirfe of the foUoving 
deductions, that the eflfecc of the gravity of dcfcending bodies is very diflfcrent from 



• Tbis a conspqucncc of the rising of jets to the height of their reservoirs nearly.* 

t Gravity, it is true, acts a longer space of time upon the body that descends slowly than upon that 
which falls quickly ; but this cai>not occasion the difien nee in the eflfect : for an elastic body falling through 
the same space in the same time, will, by collision upon another clastic body, a^bound nearly to the 
height from which it fell ; or, by communicivting its motion, caiibC an cnunl one to ascend to the same 



height. 



the 



TO TURN MILLSi &c. 45 

the effcft of the (troke of fuch as arc non elastic^ though generated by an equal 
inechanical power. 

The alterations in the machinery already dcfcribedj to accommodate the fame for 
experiments on overfl^ot wheels, where principally as follows : 

Plate V. Fig. 2. t'he fluice I b being Ihut down, the rod 11 1 was unfcrewcd and 
takeo ofE 

The underfliot watcc- whe'ch was taken off the axis, and inftead thereof an overfhot 
wheel of the fame diameter was pur into its place. Note^ This wheel was two inches 

in the (hroud or depth of the bucker; the mimber of the buckets was 36. 

• . . . 

The ftandardt S and T, Plat^ IV, were raifed half an inch, fo that the bottom of the 
wheel might be clear of ilagnant water. 

A trunk> for bringing the water upon the wheel; was fixed according to the- dotted 
lines y^j Fig* 2. The aperture was adjufted by a fhuttle h f, which alfo clofcd up 
the outer end of the trunks when the water was to be (topped. 

Fig. 3. The ratchet 0, not being of one piece of metal with the ferrule c e, 1 i 
(choi^h fo defcribed before, to prcvenr unneceffary diftinctions) was with its^ catch 
turned the contrary fide ; consequently the moveable barrel would do its office equally^, 
i|Qt«ithftanding the water-wheel, when at work, moved the contrary way. 



/ ■ 



Sptcimen 



4tf ON THE POWER OF WIKD AND WATER, 

Specimen of a Set of Expenmcnts. 

Hcacl 6 inches. 
14 ^ ftrokcs of the pump in a minute, la ditto s^ 86 lb. * 
Weight of the fcate (being wet) loj oz. 
Counterweight for 20 turns, befides the Icale, j 02. 







Weight 


r in 














No. 




the Scale. 




Turns. 


Product. 


Obfepvations. 


I 

2 

3 


- 


- olb. 
* I - 

- 2 - 


•• 


- 


60 ' 

S6 - 

52 - 


." 


:;} 


Threw mod part of the 
water out of the wheet 


4 


• 


- 3 


- 


- 


- 


49 - 


- 


«477 
i88> 


Received the water naorc 


5 


- 


- 4 


- 


- 


- 


47 - 


- 


quicdy. 


6 


- 


- 5 


- 


- 


- 


45 - 


- 


225 




7 


- 


- 6 


- 


- 


- 


42* - 


- 


255 




8 


- 


• 7 


- 


•I> 


- 


41 •* 


- 


487 


1 


• 

9 


• 


« 8 


- 


•ii 


•* 


3fii' 


• 


308. 




10 


• 


- 9 


- 


- 


•• 


3H' 


• 


3aH 




II 


- 


- 10 


- 


- 


- 


35^} ' 


- 


355 




12 


• ■ 


- II 


-■ 


- 


- 


3^' 


•• 


3^k 


t 


^J 


- 


- 12 


- 


- 


- 


3ii- 


% 


375 


• : . • 


14 


- 


- n 


• 


- 


-• 


a8i - 


^ 


37oi' 


. .'T 


»5 


- 


- 14 


- 


• 


- 


27i- 


- 


3.H 




16 


- 


- 15 


- 


- 


- 


26 - 


• 


390 




17 


- 


- 16 


- 


- 


- 


24^- 


- 


39^ 




18 


• 


- 17 


• 


- 


- 


22| - 


- 


386* 




19 


- 


- 18 


• 


- 


- 


2I|- 


- 


39>i 




21 


w 


- 20 


a. 


f 


•• 


aof - 
19I - 


« 


394i7 
395 3 


maximum. 


22 


- 


- 21 


- 


- 


- 


iH - 


■ 


3m 




23 


• 


- 22 


- 


- 


.- 


18 - 


- 


39^ Worked irregular. 


^4 




- 33 


h 


* 


• 


Overfet'by its load. 





* The small diflcrencc^ in ihc value of 1^ strokes cf tbe pump, from the former cxperimcntSf Was 
oMing to a small diffenrTicc in the lougth of the stroke, occasioned by the warping of the wood. 

Reduction 



I. • -. •- 



TO T0RN MILLS, kc. 47 

Reduction of the preceding Specimen. 

In thcfe experiinents. the head being 6 inches^ and the height of the wheel 24 inches^ 
the whole defcent 'will be jp inches : the expcnce of water was 14^ ftrokes of the 
, pump in a minute, whereof 1 2 contained 80 lb. ; therefore the water expended in a 
iDinute was 9.6^ lb. which, multiplied hy 30 inches, gives the power =: 2900. 

If wc take the 20th experiment for the fnasimum, we (hall have 2o| turns in a 
minute, each of which raifed the weight of 4^ inches, that is, 93,37 inches in a^ 
minxite. The weight in the fcalc was 1 9 lb. the weight of the fcale iio J oz. i the 
counterweight 3 oz. in the fcale, which, with the weight of the fcale 10^ oz. makes 
in the whole 20 i Vb. which is the whole refiftance or load : this, multiplied, by 93,37 
inch^j makes. 1914 for che eflfect 

The rati^ therefore of th% power and effect mil be as^ 2900 :, 1^9 14,, or asr ta: 6,6^ 
« a$^: xne2alf. 

But li we compute the power from tfte hcigjht of the wheel only, we fhall have 
f^T lb« nauittplie^ by 24 inches 3; 2320 for iht power ^. and this will be to. the effeat 
a(|2jea: 1914^ or as 10: 9a> or as f :4KneaiJy.. 

The reduction of this fpedmen is &t down in l^o. 9, of the foUowing Table ; and 
the reik Merre. deduced fram a iimilar fct o£ experiments^ leduced in the fame 
ttanjpcn. 



TABLE 



ON THE POWER OF WIND AtfD WATER, 



TABLE II. 

Containing the Rcfult of Sixteen Sets of Experiments on Overlhot Wiiecls. 



1 

z 


1 


Ii 

SB 


S E 


7 E 

■as 


=^1 


•5 

It 

1^ 


1 


•gg.| 




1: 




f»c//. 


Ib. 




«. 














1 


^7 


JO 


19 


6i 


810 


720 


55* 


10 : 6,9 


10 : 7,7 





1 


=7 


565 


■'^ 


•4+ 


1530 


1360 


1060 


10 : 6,9 


10 : 7,8 


E 


3 


27 


504 


zo% 


I2i 


1530 


I J 60 


1167 


10 : 7,6 


10 : 8,4 


+ 


=7 


M* 


207 


Mi 


1710 


1524 


■245 


10:7,3 


lo ; 8,2 


"B 


5 


17 


7<4 


2,i 


'54 


2070 


1S4O 


1500 


10 : 7,3 


10 : 8,2 


S 


6 


2Si 


7Jt 


I8j 


i7i 


2C90 


J 764 


1476 


10:7, 


10 : 8,4 


CO 


7 


aSi 


96, 


20i 


20i 


2755 


2J20 


1S68 


.10:6,8 


10:8, 


. 


8 


JO 


9° 


20 


.0+ 


2700 


2160 


'755 


10 : 6,5 


10 ; 8,1 


.' «*• 


9 


3° 


964 


20i 


2°1 


2900 


,2J20 


1914 


10 : dfi 


10 : 8,2- 


s- 


lO 


J° 


"Jt 


21 


23i 


3400 


2720 


2221 


10 : 6,5 


10 : 8,2 


II 


33 


?6r 


20J 


■3i 


1870 


1360 


■230 


10 : (>,(> 


io : 9, 


*« 


12 


33 


1064 


22i 


21^ 


3520 


2560 


■^H3 


10 : 6,1 


10 : 8,4 




'3 


33 


1464 


2J 


27i 


4840 


J52O 


2846 


10 : 5,9 


to : 8,1 


•»: 


■4 


35 


65 


19* 


I6J 


2275 


1560 


1466 


10 : S,^ 


10 : 9,4 


■^ 


M 


35 


123 


2l4 


25* 


4200 


2880 


2467 


10:5,9 


10 ;8,6 




lb 


35 


163* 


25 


26J 


5728 


39H 


2981 


lo ; 5,2 


10 : 7,6 




■■ 


2. 


3- 


4- 


5- 


6. 


7- 


8. 


9- 


10. 


II. 



Observations and "DtdnctionsfroiH theforegmag Ex'periments, 

L Concerning the Ratio between the Power And Effect of Overfiiot Wheels. 

The effective power of the water muft be reckoned upon the Whole defcent j becaufe 
it mud be raifcd that height, in order to be in a conditicm of producing the fame effect a 
fecond time. 

The 



TO TURN MILLS> &c. 40 

The ratios between the powers fo cftimated, and the effects at the maximum deduced 
from the feveral fcts of experiments, arc exhibited at one view in column 9. of 
Table II. 5 and from hence it appears, that thofc ratios differ from that of 10 to 7^6 to 
that of 10 : 5,a, that is, nearly from 4 : 3 to 4 : 2. In thofc experiments where tht 
heads of water and quantities expended are Icaft, the proportion is nearly as 4 : 3 5 but 
where the heads and quantities arc grcatcft, it approaches nearer to that of 4 : 2 ; and by 
a medium of the whole, the ratio is that of 3 : 2 nearly. We have fcen before, in our 
obfervations upon the effects of undcrfhot wheels^ that the general ratio of the power 
to the effect, when greateft was 3:15 the effect therefore of overshot wheels^ under 
the same circumstances of quantity andfalU is at a medium double to that of the 
undershot : and, as a confequencc thereof^ that non elastic bodies^ when acting by 
their impulse or collision, communicate only a part of their original power ; 
the other part being fpent in changing their figure in confequencc of the ftrokc 

The powers of water computed from the height of the wheel only, compared mxh 
\thc effects, as in column lo, appear to obftrve a more conftant ratio : for if wc take the 
medium of each clafs, which is fet down in column 11,. we (ball find the extremes to 
differ no more than from the ratio of 10 : 8,1 to that of to: 8^5; and as the fccond 
term of the ratio gradually increafes from 8,1 to 8,^5, by an increafe of head front 
3 inches to xi, the excels of S,5 above 8,1 is to be imputed to the fuperior impulfc of 
the water at the head of 1 1 inches above that of 3 inches : fo that if we reduce 8, i to 8^ 
oaaccount of the impulfc of the 3 inch head, we shall have the ratio of the poner^ 
computed upon the height of the wheel only, to the effect at a maximum as 10 ; 8^ 
or as $14. nearly : and from the. quality of the ratio between power and effect fub-*^ 
fifting where the coaftructions arc fimilar, wc. muff infer, that the effects, as well as 
the powers, are as the quantities of water and perpendicular heights multiplied 
together respectively. 



II- Concerning the moft proper Height of the Wheel in Proportion to tRc 

whole Defcent. 

Wc have already fcen- from the preceding obfcrvatipnj that the effect pf the fame 
quantity of water, defcending through the fame perpendicular Ipacc, is double, when 
acting by its gravity upon an overihot wheel, to what the fame produces when acting by 
its impidic upon an underfliot. It alio appears, thatby incrcafing the head from' 3 inches 
to 1 1, that is, the whole defcent, from 27 inches to 31^, or in the ratio of 7 to 9 nearly, 
the efitct is advanced no more than ia the ratio of 8,1 to 8,4, that is^ as 7 : 7,26 1 and 

H confequently 



50 ON THE POWER OF WIND AND WATER, 

confequcntly the increafc of effect as not i-yth of the increafe of perpendicular height. 
Hence it follows, that the higher the wheel is in proportion to the whole descent^ 
the greater will be the effect ; becaufe it depends lefs upon the impulfe of the head, 
and more upon the gravity of the water in the buckets : and if we confider how obliquely 
the water ifTuing from the head muft ftrike the buckets^ we (hall not be at a lofs to account 
for the litde advantage that arifes frOm the impulfe thereof: and (hall immediately fee 
of how litde confcquence this impulfe is to the effect of an ovcrfhot wheel. However, 
as every thing has its limits, fo has this : for thus much is.dcfirable that the water 
should have somexvhat greater velocitijy than the circumference of the wheels in 
coming thereon ; otherwife the wheel will not only be retarded, by the buckets (Iriking 
the water, but thereby dafhing a part of it over, fo much of the power is loft. 

The velocity that the circumference of the wheel ought to have, being known by the 
following deductions, the head requifite to give the water its proper velocity is eafily 
computed from the common rules of hydroftatics \ and will be found much lefs than 
what is generally practifcd. 

III. Concerning the Velocity of the Circumference of the Wheel, in order to produce 

the grcateit Effect. 

If a body is let fall freely from the furfacc of the head to the bottom of the defcent, 
k will take a certain time in falling ; and in this cafe the whole action of gravity is fpent 
n giving the body a certain velocity : but if this body in falling is made to act upon 
fome other body, fo as to produce a mechanical effect, the falling body will be retarded; 
becaufe a part of the action of gravity is then fpent in producing the effect, and the 
remainder only giving motion to the falling body : and therefore the slower a bodjf 
descends, the greater will be the portion of the action of gravity applicable to tkc 
producing a mechanical effect ; and in confcquence the greater that cffcct may be. 

If a (Iream of water falls into the bucket of an overfliot wh.ecl, it is there retained 
until the wheel by moving round difcharges it : of confcquence the flower the wheel 
moves, the more water each bucket will receive : fo that what is loft in fpced, is gained 
by the preflTure of a greater quantity of water acting in the buckets at once : and if con- 
fidered only in this light, the mechanical power of an over(hot wheel to produce effects 
will be equal whether it moves quick or flow : but if we attend to what has been juft 
now obfcrvcd of the falling body, it will appear that lb much of the action of gravity, 

as 



\ 



TO TURN MILLS, &c. 61 

as is employed in giving the wheel and water therein a greater velocity, muft be fub- 
tracted from its preflure upon the buckets ; fo that, though the product made by mul- 
tiplying the number of cubic inches of water acting in the wheel at once by its velocity 
will be the fame in all cafes; yet, as each cubic inch, when the velocity is greater does 
not prefs fo much upon the bucket as when it is less^ the power of the water to produce 
effects will be greater in the lefs velocity than in the greater : but hence we are led to 
this general rule, that cseteris paribus, the less the velocity of the ivheely the greater 
mil be the effect thereof. A confirmation of this doctrine, together with the limits 
it is fubject to in practice, may be deduced from the foregoing fpccimcn of a fet of 
experiments. 

From thefe experiments it appears that, when the wheel made about ao turns in a 
minute, the eflfect was near upon, the greateft. When it made .]o tuxM, the dScct 
was diminiihed about ^V P^rt ; but that when it made 40, it was diminilhed about \ ; 
when it made lefs than i8|, its motion was irregular; and when it was loaded fo as 
not to admit its making 18 turns, the wheel was overpowered by its load* 

It is an advantage in practice, that the veIppt^*of the wheel fhould not be diminiihed 
further than what will procure fome folid advantage in .point of power : becaufe c ceteris 
paribus, as the motion is flower, the buckets muft be made larger ; and the wheel being 
more loaded with water, the ftrefs upon every part of the work will be increafed in pro- 
portion : the best velocity for practice therefore tcill be such, as when the wheel 
here used made about 30 turns in a minute ; that isy xvhen the velocity of the cir-- 
cumference is a little more than 2 feet in a second. 

Experience confirms, that this velocity of 3 feet in a fecond is applicable to the higheft 
oyerihot wheels, as well as the loweft ; and all other parts of the work being properly 
adapted thereto, will produce very nearly the greateft effect poffible : however, this alfo 
is certain from experience, that high wheels may deviate further from this rule, 
before they will lose their power, by a given aliquot part of the whole, than low 
ones can be admitted to do; for awheel of 24 feet high may move at the rate of fix 
feet per fecond without lofing any confiderable part of its power * ; and on the other 
hand, 1 have feen a wheel of 33 feet high, that has moved very ftcadily and well with a 
velocity but little exceeding 2 feet. 



* The 24 feet wliccl going at 6 feet in a second, seems Owing to the small proportion that the head 
(requisite to give the water the proper velocity of the wheel) bears to the whole height. ^ 

IV. Concerning 



52 ON THE POWER OP WIND AND WATER, 

IV. Concerning the Load for an Ovcrfliot Wheel, in order that it may produce 

a Maximum. '^ 

The maximum load for a7i overshot xvheel^ is that xchich reduces the circum* 
ferenccs of the wheel to its proper velocity ; and this will be known, by dividing 
the effect it ought to produce in a. given time by the fpace intended to be defcribed bf 
the circumference of the wheel in the fame time j the quotient infill be the refiftancc 
overcome at the circumference of the wheel , and is equal to the load required, the fric- ' 
tion and reliilance of the machinery ittcluded. 

V, Concerning the greateft poffible Velocity of an Overfhot Wheel. 

The greateft velocity that the circumference of an overfhot wheel is capable ofj 
depends jointly upon the diameter or height of the wheel, and the velocity of falling 
bodies ; for it is plain that the velocity of the circumference can never be greater, than 
to defcribe a feml-circumfcrence, while a body let fall from the top of the wheel will 
defcend through its diameter ; nor indeed quite fo great, as a body defcending through 
the fame perpendicular fpace cannot perform the fame in fo fmall a time when paflioig 
through a femi-circle, as would be done in a perpendicular line. Thus, if a wheel is 
1 6 feet I inch high, a body will fall through the diameter in one fecond: this wheel 
therefore can never arrive at a velocity equal to the making one turn in two feconds ; 
but, in reality y an overfliot wheel can never come near this velocity ; for when it 
acquires a certain fpced, the greateft part of the water is prevented from entering the 
buckets; and the reft, at a certain point of its deicent, is thrown out again by the cen- 
trifugal force. This appears to have been the cafe in the three firft experiments of the 
foregoing Ipecimen s but as the velocity, when this begins to happen, depends upon the 
form of the buckets, as well as other circumftances, the utmost velocity of overshot 
wheels is not to be determined generally : and, indeed, it is the lefs neceflary in prac- 
tice, as it is in this circumfl:ance incapable of producing any mechanical effect^ for 
reafons already given. 

VI. Concerning the greateft Load that an Overfhot Wheel can overcome. 

The greatest load an overshot wheel will overcome^ considered abstractedly^ is 
unlimited or infinite : for as the buckets may be of any given capacity, the more the 

wheel 



TO TURN MILLS, &c- 63 

wheel is loaded, the flower it turnsi but the flower it turns, the more will the buckets be 
filled witli water J and confequcntly though the diameter of the wliccl and quantity of 
water expended, are both limited, yet no rcfiftance can be aOigned, which it is not able to 
overcome : but in practice we always meet with fomcthing tKat prevents our getting into 
infinitefimals j for when we really go to work to build a wheel, the buckets mufl: ne- 
cefTarily be of fomc given capacity j and confequcntly such a resistance will stop the 
wheel, as is equal to the effort of all the buckets in one semi-circumference filled 
with water. 

The flructure of the buckets being given; the quantity of this effort may be 
alligned ; but is not of much confequence to the practice, as in this cafe alfo the whed 
lofes its power j for though here be the exertion of gravity upon a given quantity of 
water, yet being prevented by a counterbalance from moving, is capable of producing 
no mechanical effect, according to our definition. But, in reality, an overfliot wheel 
generally ceafes to be ufeful before it is loaded to that pitch ; for when it meets with 
such a resistance as to diminish its velocity to a certain degree, its motion becomes 
irregular ; yet this never happens until the velocity of the circumference is less 
than 1 feet per second, where the resistance is equable, as appears not only from the 
preccdiiig fpecimcn, but from experiments on larger wheels. 

Scholium* 

Having now examined the different effects of the power of water, when acting by its 
impulse, and by its weight, under the titles of undershot and overshot wheels *, we 
might naturally proceed to examine the effects when the impulfe and weight are combined^ 
as in the fcveral kinds of breast wheels, S^c. but, what has been already delivered being 
carefully attended to, the application of the fame principles in thefe mixt cafes will be 
eafy, and reduce what I have to fay on this head into a narrow compafs : for all kinds of 
wheels where the water cannot defcend through a given fpace, unlefs the wheel moves 
therewith, are to be confidered of the nature of an overihot wheel, according to the per* 
pcndicular height that the water dcfcends fi-om s and all thofc that receive the impulfe or 
(hock of the water, whether in an horizontal, perpendicular, or oblique direction^ are to 
be confidered as iinderfhots. And therefore a wheel which the water ftrikes at a certain 
point below the furfacc of the head, and after that defcends in the arch of a circle^ 
prelfing byitsgravity upon the wheel; the effect of such awheel will be equal to 
the tffe€t of an undershot^ whose head is equal to the difference of level between 

the 



^r'.m-, A.-^ 



44 ON THE POWER OF WIND AND WATER, 

the surface of the water in the reservoir and [the point where it strikes the 
^iJieel, added to that of an overshot^ whose height is equal to the difference of 
level J between the point where it strikes the wheel and the level of the tail^water^ 
It is here fuppofed, that the wheel receives the (hock of the water at right angles to 
its radii j and that the velocity of its circumference is properly adapted to receive 
the utmoft advantage of both thefc powers ; otherwife a reduction mull be made 
on that account. 

Many obvious and confiderable improvements upon the common praftice naturally 
offer thcmfclves, from a due confideration of the principles here cftabliflied, as well as 
many popular errors (hew themfelves in view : but as my prcfcnt purpofe extends no 
farther than the laying down fuch general rules as will be found to anfwer in pradtice, 
I leave die particular application to the intelligent arcill^ and to the curious in thefc 
niatters. 



PART 




t 

'•%. 



I 



TO TURN MILLS, &;c. 5J 



PART IIL 

On the Construction and Effects of Tl'indmill Sails. 

Read before the Royal Society, 31ft May and 14th June, 1759. 

N trying experiments on wind mill fails, the wind itfelf is too uncerEain to anfwer 
the purpofe ; we muft therefore have recourfe to an artificial wind. 



This may be done two ways ; either by caufing the air to move againfl: the machine, 
or the machine to move againft the air. To caufe the air to move againft the machine, 
in a fufficicnt volume, with fteadinefs and the requifite velocity, is not cafily put in 
practice : to carry the machine forward in a right line againft the air, would require 
a larger roona than I could conveniently meet with. What I found moft practicable, 
•thcrcfbrc, was to carry the axis, whereon the fails were to be fixed, progreflively 
round in the circumference of a large circle. Upon diis idea* a machine was con^ 
ftructed, as follows : 

Plati VL Fig. X. 

A B C is a pyramidical frame for fupporting the moving parts, 

D E is an upright axis, whereon is framed 

FG,,an arm for carrying the fails at a proper diftance from the centre of the 
upright axis. 



* Some years ago Mr. Rouse, an ingenious genlleman of Flarboroughi in Leicestershire, set about 
trying experiments on the velocity of the wind, and force thereof upon plain surfaci^ and wind mill sails : 
fUidy much about the same time, Mr. Ellicott contrived' a machine for the use of the late celebrated 
Mr. B. Robins, for trying the resistance of plain surfaces moving through the air. The machines of 
both these gentlemen were much alike, though at that time totally unacquainted with each otHer'r 
inquiries. But it often happens, that when two persons think justly upon the same subject, their ex- 
periments are alike. This machine was also built upon the same idea as the foregoing ; but diflercd in 
iuiving the hand for the first mover, with a pendulum for its regulator, inste&d of a weight, as in the 
former ; which was certainly best for the purposes of measuring the impulse of the wind, or resistance 
of plains: but the latter is more applicable to experiments on windmill sails ; because every change of 
fiosition of the same sails will occasion their meeting the air with a different velocity^ though urged by 
the jame weight. 



se ON THE POWER OF WIND AND WATER, 

t 

H is a barrel upon the upright axis^ whereon is wound a cord; which^ being drawn 
by the hand» gives a circular motion to the axisj and to the arm F G ; and thereby 
carries the axis of (he fails in the circumference of a circle, whofe radius is D I^ 
cauling thereby the fails to ftrikc the air, and turn round upon their own axis. 

At L is fixed the end of a fmall line, which pafling through the pullies M N Oj 
terminates upon a fmall cylinder or barrel upon the axis of the fails, and, by winding 
thereon raifes 

P the fcale, wherein the weights are placed for trying the power of the fails. This 
fcale, moving up and down in the direction of the upright axis, receives no difturbance 
from the circular motion. 

Q R two parallel pillars Handing upon the arm F G, for the purpofe of fuppordng 
and keeping fteady the fcale P i ivhich is kept from fwinging by means of 

S T, two fmall chains, which hang loofely round the two pillars* 

W IS a weight for bringing the centre of gravity of the moveable part of the 
machine into the centre of motion of the axis D E. 

V X is a pendulum, compofcd of two balls of lead, which are moveable upon Z 
wooden rod, and thereby can be fo adjufted, as to vibrate in any time required. This 
pendulum hangs upon a cylindrical wire, whereon it vibrates, as on a rolling axi^. 

Y is a perforated table for fupporting the axis of the pendulum. 

Note, The pendulum being fo adjufted, as to make two vibrations In the time 
that the arm F G is intended to make one turn ; the pendulum being fet a vibrating^ 
die experimenter pulls by the cord Z, with fufficient force to make each half revolu- 
tion of the arm to correfpond with each vibration, as equal as.pollible during the 
number of vibrations that the experiment is intended to be continued. A little 
pracdce renders it eafy to ^ve motion thereto with all the regularity that is necefTary. 



Specimen 



/ 



TO TURN MILLS, &c 



57 



Specimen of a Set of Experiments. 



Radius of the Huls - . « 

Length of ditto in the doth - - - - 

Breadth of ditto ------ 

f Angle at the extremity - • • - 

1 Ditto at the greatcft inclination - . - 
20 turns of the fails railed the weight 
Velocity of the centre of the fails, in the cir- "j " 

cumference of the great circle, in a fe- >6 feet o inches. 

cond . - - - - -J 

Continuance of the experiment - - - 52 feconds. 



21 inches. 
18 

10 degrees. 
".3 



No. 




Weight 


: in the fcale. 






Turns. 




Produft. 


I 


- 


- 


olb. 


- 


- 


- 


108 


- 





2 


- 


- 


6 


- 


- 


- 


85 


- 


- 510 


J 


- 


- 


H 


- 


- 


- 


81 


- 


- 5^H 


4 


- 


- 


7 


- 


- 


- 


78 


- 


- 546 


5 


- 


- 


7* 


- 


- 


- 


73 


- 


- 5471^ maximum 


6 


- 


- 


8 


- 


- 


- 


65 


- 


- 520 


7 


- 


• 


Q 


m 


- 


- 





• 






JST. B. The weight of the fcale and pulley was 3 oz. ; and that i oz. fufpended 
upon one of the radii, at i^ inches from the centre of the axis, juft overcame the 
fticdon, fcale and load of 7^ lb. ; and placed at 14 44 inches, overcame the fame re- 
fiftances with 9 lb. in the Icale. 



Reduction of the preceding Specimen. 

No. 5* being taken for the maximum^ the weight in the fcale was 7 lb. 8 oz. which, 
with the weight of the fcale and pulley 3 oz. makes 7 lb. 11 oz. equal to 123 oz. ; 



* Ift all the following ^xperime&ts the angle of the sails is accounted from the plane of their motion ; 
that isy wIma they stand at right angles to the axis, their angle is denoted 0^9 this notation being agreeable 
' to the language of practitioners, who call the angle so denoted, the weather of the sail; which tbey dc- 
aoininate greater or less, according to the quantity of this angle. 

I this^ 



«8 ON THE POWER OF WIND AND WATER, 

this, added to the friftioii of the machinery, the fum is the whole refiftance •. The 
friftion of the machinery is thus deduced : fincc 20 turns of the fails raifed the weight 
11,3 inches, with a double line, the radius of the cylinder will be .18 of an inch ; but 
had the weight been raifed by a fingle line> the radius of the cylinder being half the 
former, viz. .09, the refiftance would have been the fame : we fhall therefore have this 
analogy j as half the radius of the cylinder, is to the length of the arm where the fmall 
weight was applied ; fo is the weight applied to the arm, to a fourth weight, which i% 
equivalent to the fum of the whole refiftance together -, that is, .09 : 12,5 :: i oz. : 139 oz. 
this exceeds 1230Z. the weight in the fcale, by 16 oz. or i lb. which is equivalent 
to the fridlion; and which, added to the above weight of 71b. ix oz» makes 
81b. 1 1 oz. = 8,69 lb. for the fum of the whole refiftance ; and this, multiplied by 
73 turns, makes a produdl of 634, which may be called the rcprefentativc of the effect 
j)roduced. 

In like manner, if the weight 9 lb. which caufed die fails to reft after being in 
motion, be augmented by the weight of the fcale and its relative fri6tion, it will be- 
come 10,37 lb. The refult of this fpecimen is fet down in No. 12, of Table III. and 
the refult of every other fet of experiments therein contained were made and. reduced 
in the fame manner. 



i*«*l«MaM>^M 



* The resistance of the air is not taken into the account of resistance, because it is inseparable from. 
the application of the power. 



TABtE 



TO TURN MILLS, &c OS 

TABLE III. 

Contaioing NinctMn Sets of Experiments on Windmill Sails of various Structures, 
Pofidonsi and Quanuties of Surfaces. 



:■ 








i ^: 


3 






« 


i i> 


\\ 


-s 


























3 


The kind of fails 




j; 


u 


i 
si 


2 . 
"BE 




■6 




s 


Hi 


S3 


S 


made ufe of. 


S 


i 




f 


\ 


•6 


.s* 


-n 
■'-'}. 


o3 i 


11 






r 


t% 




1 


1 


■g 


? 


■lis 


?si 








^ 


o 


^ 


H 


O 


eu 


^ 


a 


t6 


c: 


Plain sails at an i 
angle of 55» ( 


1 


35 


35 


66 


42 


ih. 
7,56 


a. 

12,59 


318 


S7. /». 

404 


10:7 


10:6 


10:7,9 




2 


12 


12 




70 


6,3 


7.56 


441 


404 




10:8,3 


10:10,1 


accorJing lo llie 


a 


15 


15 


105 


6f) 


0.72 


8.12 


464 


404 


10;ft,( 


10; 8,; 


10:10,13 


common practice. 


4 


IS 


18 


96 


6b 


7,0 


9,81 


^6l 


404 


10;7, 


10:7, 


10:10,15 


WpatUcrtd accoril- 


S 





2ft; 




(i6 


7,0 




4 62 


404 






10:1 1,* 


■ ingtirjIfflc/awiH* 


ti 


12 


24; 




70* 


7,35 




518 


404 






10:12,-S 


tiicartm. 


7 


Ij 


3 'if 




oa. 


8.3 




637 


404 






10:13, 


C 


a 





15 


120 


03 


4.75 


5,31 


442 


404 


I0:?,7 


10:a,f 


10:11, 


Saili weatheml in 1 


'1 


3 


18 


12t 


7'» 


7.0 


S,12 


553 


404 


10:6,6 


10:8.1 


10:13,7 


Jhc Dutch man-j 


10 


5 


eo 




7S 


7,5 


8,12 


5S5 


401. 




10:9," 


10:14.5 


nor, tried in va- 


II 


7i 


■j-jf 


11.' 


77 


8,3 


9,81 


63Q 


404 


10:6,1 


10:8... 


10:15.8 


rioui poiitioni. 


I'j 


10 


ih 


lot 


73 


8. 6,9 


10,37 


634 


404 


10:6.1 


10:8. 


10:[5-.7 


L 


13 


12 


57 


iOO 


t)6 


8,41 


10,94 


580 


404 


10:6,6 


1(1:7,- 


10:U,4 


Siiils weathcrffd in 
the Dttt<:h man- 
ner, but enlarged-^* 
towards ihe ex- 
tremities. 


14 


n 


2'2i 


123 


75 


10.65 


i2,5y 


7!)9 


505 


10:6, 


lOiH, 


I0;J5.S 


15 

I ft 


10 
13 


25 
27 


117 
114 


74 
ftfi 


U.08 

I2,0() 


13. (IS 
14,23 


820 
799 


505 
605 


10:6,3 
I(t:5,(i 


10:8, 
10:B,4 


10: 16,2 

10:15,S 


17 


15 


30 


96 


63 


12,0." 


14,78 


762 


505 


10;6,6 


10:«.' 


10:15,1 


Eight sails bein^f 


























sectors at' clhpset] 


IR 


1? 


22 


to.-' 


6t; 


lf>.4? 


27,87 


10.19 


8.14 


106, 


10:5,f 


10:12,4 


in their best po-1 
sitions. (_ 


ly j V2 


2'.; 


y-j 


(i4! 


18,00 




ll6a 


11.16 


10:5.0 




10.10,1 




..!,. 


3. j 4. 1 5. 


6. 


7. 


8. 


9. 


10. 


11. 


.5. 



OJisevvallona 



60 ON THE POWER OF WIND AND WATER, 

Obsei^ations and Deduct ions from the preceding Experiments. 

I. Concerning the bed Form and Poficion of Windmill-Sails. 

In Table III. N^ i. is contained the refult of a fet of experiments upon fails fct at 
the angle which the celebrated Monf. Paring and fucceeding geometricians for many 
years, held to be the bed ; viz. thofe whofe planes make an angle 55* nearly with the 
axis i the complement whereof, or angle that the plane of the fail makes with the plane of 
their motion, will therefore be 35**, as fet down in columns 2. and 3. Now if we multiply 
their number of turns by the weight they lifted, when working to the greateft advantage^ 
as fct down in columns 5. and 6. and compare this produft (col. 8.) with the other pro- 
ducts contained in the fame column, inftead of being the greateft, it turns out the leaft 
of all the reft. But if we fet the angle of the fame planes at fomewhat lefs than half 
the former, or at any angle from 1 5* to i8% as in N*. 3. and 4, that is, from 72* to 75* 
with the axis, the product will be increafed in the ratio of 31 : 45 ; and thb is the angle 
moft commonly made ufe of by practionersj when the furfaces of the fails are planes* 

If nothing more was intended than to determine the moft efficacious angle to make a 
mill acquire motion from a ftate of reft, or to prevent it from pafting into reft from a 
ftate of motion, we (hall find the pofition of N*. i. the beft j for if we confult col. 7* 
which contains the leaft weights, that would make the fails pafs from motion to reft, we 
fliall find that of N*. i. (relative to the quantity of cloth) the greateft of all. But if 
the fails are intended, with given dimenfions, to produce the greateft efieft poflible in a 
given time, we muft entirely rejedl thofe of N^ i. and, if we are confned to the use of 
planes, conform ourselves to some angle between N*. 3. and 4. that isi not les^ 
than 72^ or greater than 75, with the axis. 

The late celebrated Mr. Maclaurin has judiciouflydiftinguiihed between theaflion of 
the wind upon a fail at reft, and a fail in motion ; and, in confequencCj as the motion b 
more rapid near the extremities than towards the centre, that the angle of the difl^nt 
parts of the fail, as they recede from the centre, (hould be varied. For this purpofe he 
has furnifhcd us with the following theorem *. " Suppofe the velocity of the wind to 
•' be rcprcfcnted by a, and the velocity of any given part of the fail to be denoted by Ci 

Maclaurin's account of Sir Isaac Newton's philosophical discoTcrics, p. 176, ait. 29. 

«* then 



TO TURN MILLS, &c. 



61 



*^ then the effort of the wind upon that part of the fail will be greatcft when the tangent 
<' of the angle> in which the wind ftrikes it^ is to radius as 



fC 




gcc 



2 + 



3C 

+ to !.•• 

4,aa 2a 



This theorem then affigns the law, by which the angle 



is to be varied according to the velocity of each part of the fail to the wind : l)ut as it is 
left undetermined what velocity any one given part of the fail ought to have in refpeit 
to the wind, the angle that any one part of the fail ought to have, is left undetermined 
alfo ; fo that we are ftill at a lofs for the proper data to apply the theorem. However, 
being willing to avail myfclf thereof, and confidering that any angle from 15** to 18* 
was beft fuited to a plane, and of confequence to the beft mean angle, I made the fail, 
at the middle diftance between the centre and the extremity, to ftand at an angle of 
150 41' with the plane of the motion: in which cafe the velocity of that part of the 
fail, when loaded to a maximumy would be equal to that of the wind, or c=tf. Thia 
being determined, the reft were inclined according to the theorem, as follows : 



Farts of the radius 
from the centre. 



i 

T 



I - 





Angle with 


Angle of 




the axis. 


weather. 


C=:4^ - 


- Sz"" 26' - 


- 26<>34' 


C=^l . 


. 69 54 - 


- ao 6 


c=a 


. 74 19 . 


- 15 41 middle. 


c=i4^ - 


- 77 CO - 


- 12 40 


czniia - 


. 79 27 . 


- 10 33 


czzia - 


- 81 - 


- 9 extremity 



The refult hereof was according to N^. 5, being nearly the fame as the plane falls, 
in their beft pofition : but being turned round in their fockets^ fo that every part of 
each fail ftood at an angle of 3^, and afterwards of 6^, greater than before, that is, 
their extremities being moved from 9^ to 12^ and 15^, the products were advanced 
to 518 and 527 refpeftivcly. Now from the fmall difference between thofe two pro- 
du£tsi we may conclude, that they were nearly in their bcft pofition, according to 
N^. 7, or fome angle between that and N^. 6 : but from thefc as well as the plane 
fails and others, we may alfo concludcj that a variation in titt angle of a degree or 
two makes very little difference in ihe effect ^ when the angle is near upon the 
best. 

It is to be obfervcd, that a fail inclined by the preceding' rule will expofe a convex 
fur&cc to the wind: whereas the Dutch, and all our modem mill- builders, though 

they 



62 ON THE POWER OF WIND AND WATER, 

make the angle to diminifh, in receding from the centre towards the extrennity, yet 
conftantly do it in fuch manner, as chac the furfacc of the fail may be concave towards 
the wind. In this manner the fails made ufe of in N^. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, and 13, 
were conftrurlcd ; the middle of the fail making an angle with the extreme bar of 12^ 5 
and the greateft angle (which was about -J- of the radius from the centre) of 15^ 
therewith. Tbofe fails being tried in various pofitions« the beft appears to be that 
of N*'. II, where the extremities flood at an angle of 7®^ with the plane of motion, 
the produft being 639: greater than that of thofe made by the theorem in the ratio of 
9:11, and double to that of N^. i ; and this was the greateft product that could be 
procured wici.out an augmentation of furface. Hence it appears, that tchen the wind 
Jails up07i a concave Burfac^^ it- is an aXlvantage to the powtr of the whole^ though 
every party taken separately^ should not be disposed to the best advantage^. 

Having thus obtained the beft polition of the fails, or manner of weatherings as it is 
called by the workmen, the next point was to try what advantage could be made by an 
addition of furface upon the fame radius. For this purpofe, the fails made ufe of had the 
fame weather as thofe N**. 8 to 13, with an addition to the leading fide of each of a trian- 
gular cloth, whofc height was equal to the height of the fail, and whofe bafe was 
equal to half the breadth: of confcquence the incrcafe of furface upon the whole was 
one-fourth part, or as 4 : 5, Thofe fails, by being tufned round in their lockets, 
were tried in four different pofitions, fpecified in N^. 14, 15, 16, and 17.5 from 
whence it appears, that the beft was when every part of the fail made a greater angle 
by 2«^, with the plane of the motion, than thofe without the addition, as appears by 
N** 15, the product being 820: this exceeds 639 more than in the ratio of 4.: 5, or 
that of the increafe of cloth. Hence it appears, that a broader sail requires a 

• By several trials in large I have found the following angles to answer as well as any. The radius is 
supposed to be divided into six parts and one-sixth, reckoning from the centre, is called one, the ex- 
tremity being denoted six. 









Angle with 






M 


igle 


with the plane of 


N^ 






the axis. 








the motion. 


1 


• 




72* 










18« 


9 


- 




71 










19 


3 


- 




72 










IS middle. 


4 


• 




7^ 










16 


5 


• 




rii 










12* 


6 


. 


*i 


83 








» 


7 o^tremity. 



greater 



to TURN MILLS, &c. 63 

greater angle ; and tlM when the sail is broader at the extremity ^ than near 
the centre^ this shape is more advantageous than that of a parallelogram * 

Many have imagined, that the more fail, the greater the advantage, and have 
therefore propofed to fill up the whole area : and by making each fail a feftor of an 
ellipfit, according to Monfieur Parint, to intercept the whole cylinder of wind, and 
thereby to produce the greaccft efFeft poffible. 

Wc have therefore proceeded to inquire how far the effect could be increafcd by a 
further enlargement of the furface, upon the fame radius of which N*'. i8 and 19 
are fpecimens. i^he furfaces indeed were not made planes, and fet at an angle of 35'', as 
Parint propofed ; becaufe, from N*^. i, we learn, that this pofition has nothing to do, 
when we intend them to work to the grcatcft advantage. We therefore gave them 
fuch an angle as the preceding experiments indicated for fuch fort of fails, viz. 12° at 
the extremity, and 22** for the greateft weather. By N. id we have the product 
1059, greater than N*. 15, in the ratio of 7 : 9 ; but then the augmentation of cloth is 
almoft 7 : 12. By N^ 19, we have the produdt 11 65, that is greater than N\ 15, as 
7 : 10; but the augmentation of cloth is nearly as 7 : 16; confequently had the fame 
quantity of cloth as in N**. 18, been difpofed in a figure fimilar to that of N'\ 15, 
inilead of the product i059> ^^ fliould have had the produd 1386 ; and in N^ 19^ 
inftead of the product 11 65, we fhould have had a produd of i860; as will be 
further made appear in the courfe of the following dcdudions* Hence it appears, 
that beyond a certain degree, the more the area is crouded with fail, the lefs e^ect is 
produced in proportion to the furface : and, by purfuing tlic experiments ftill further, 
I found, that though in N\ 19, the furface of all the fails together were not more 
than feven-cighths of the circular area containing them, yet a further addition rather 
diminiflied than increafed the effeft. So that when the whole cylinder of wind is 
intercepted^ it does not then produce the greatest effect for want of proper 
interstices to escape. 



* The figure and proportion of tho enlarged suils^ which I have found best ta atiswer in large, af« 
represented in the figure, Plate VI. where tbc extreme bar i^ one-third of the radius (or whip, as it is 
called by the workmen), and is divided by tire whip rn the proportion of 3 to 5. The triangular or 
leading sail is covered wixkbuard from tho poiiu downwards one-third of its height, tbc rest with cloth 
as usual. The angles of weather in the preceding note are best for the enlarged sails olso; for in 
practice it is found, that the sails iuid better iiave loo Uul« |bM much wtather. 

It 



64 



ON THE POWER OF WIND AND WATER, 



It is certainly defirable that the fails of windmills (hould be as fhort as poflible ; but 
at the fame time it is equally defirable, the quantity of cloth fliould be the leaft thac 
maybs; toavoirf damage by fuddcn fqualls of wind. The beft ftrufturc, therefore, for 
large mills, is that where the quantity of cloth is the greateft, in a given circle, that 
can be: on this condition, thac the efiect holds out in proportion, to the quantity of 
cloth i for otherwife the effect can be augmented in a given d^^ by a IcITer increafe 
of cloth upon a larger radius, than would be required, if die cloth was increafcd upon 
the fame ladlus. The moft ufcfui figure therefore for practice, is that of N°. 9 or 10, 
as has been experienced upon feveral mills in large. 

tABLE IV. 

Containing the Refulc of fix Sets of Experiments, made for determining the Dif- 
ference of Effect, according to the different Velocity of the Wind. 

N. B. The fmis were of the fame fizc and kind as thofe of N-. 10, 11, and la. 
Table III. 

Continuance of the Experiment one Minute, 



E 


1 

< 


•sl 


1 

sl 


If 

IS 

H 


1 

S E 
1 6 


1 
1 

s 




y 


Maximum load for 
the halfvclocity. 
Turns of the fails 
therewith. 


ill 




2 

OS 


1^1 

III 


111 

OS 


I 

2 


s° 

5 


r. in. 

44J 

8 9 


96 

207 


66 
122 


U. 

4.47 
16,42 


5.37 
18,06 


29 J 
2003 


4.47 


180 


~o; 


10 : 27,3 


10:6,9 

10:5,9 


10:8,5 
10:9,1 


3 
4 


7i 


44J 
8 9 


— 


65 
•3° 


4,62 
'7.52 


— 


300 
2278 


4.62 


180' 832 


10 : 37,8 





— 




5 
6 


ro 

(O 


4 4* 

8 9 


9' 

178 


61 
110 


S'°3 
18,61 


5.87 

21,J4 


307 
2047 


S.03 


■58, 795 


10 : 26 


10:6,7 
10:6,2 


IO;8,5 
•10:87 


I 


2 


3 


4 


5 


6 


7 


8 


9 


10 I II 


12 


U 


•4 



n. CoHcmiaig 



TO TUI^ MILLS, 6cc. 65 

II. Concerning the Rario between the Velocity of Windmill Sails unloaded, and their 

Velocity when loaded to a Madimuin. 

Thofe ratios(f as they turned out in experiments upon different kinds of fails, and 
with different inclinations (the velocity of the wind being the fame) are contained in 
column lo of Table III. where the extremes differ from the ratio of lo: 7,7 to that 
of 10 : 5,8 ; but the most geutral ratio of the ^n'hole will be ?iearly as 3 : 2. 
This ratio alfo agrees fufficiently near with experiments where the velocity of the wind 
was different, as in thofe contained in Table IV. column ij, in which the ratios differ 
from 10 : 6,9 to that of 10 : 5,9. However, it appears in general, that where the 
power is greater, whether by an enlargement of furface, or a greater velocity of the 
wind, that the fecond term of the ratio is lefs. 

III. Concerning the Ratio between the greateft Load that the Sails will bear without 
flopping, or what is nearly the fame Thing, between the leftft Load that will ftop 
the Sails^ and the Load at the Maximum. 

Thoie ratios for different kinds of fails and inclinations, are collefled in column 11, 
Table III. where the extremes differ from the ratio of 10 : 6 to that of 10: 9,2 ; but 
taking in thofe fets of experiments only, where the fails refpedfcively anfwered bcft, 
the ratio's will be confined between that oj* 10 i S and 0/10:9; and at a medium 
about 10 : Sf3 or of 6 : 5. This ratio alfo agrees nearly with thofe in column 14 of 
Table IV. However it appears, upon the whole, that in thofe inftances, where the 
angle of the fails or quantity of cloth were greateft^ that the fecond term of the ratio 
was Ieis« 

IV. Concerning the Effects of Sails, according to the different Velocity of the 

Wind. ' 

Maxim 1. The velocity of windmill fails, whether unloaded, or loaded, lb as t9 
produce a maximum^ lis nearly as the velocity of the wind, their fliape and pofitioQ 
being the fame. 

This appears by comparing together the refpective numbers of columns 4 and 5, 
Table IV. wherein . thofe of numbers 2, 4, and 6, ought to be double of numbers 
I, J, and 5 : but as the deviation is no where greater than what may be imputed to 

K the 



66 ON THE POWER OF WIND AND WATER, 

the inaccuracy of the experiments themfelvcs, and hold good exactly in numbers 

3 and 4 ; which fcts were deduced from the medium of a number of experiments, 
carefully repeated the fame day, and on that account are mod to be depended upon^ 
we therefore conclude the maxim true. 

Maxim 11. The load at the maximum is nearly, but fomewhat lefs than, as the 
fquare of the velocity of the wind, the (hape and pofition of the fails being the fame. 

This appears by comparing together the numbers in column 6, Table IV. wherein 
thofe of numbers 2, 4, and 6, (as the velocity is double), ought to be quadruple of 
thofc of numbers i, 3, and 5 ; inftead of which they fall fhort, number 1 by t"^, number 

4 by tVj an^ number 6 by tt P^rt of the whole. The greateft of thofe deviations is 
not more confiderable than might be imputed to the unavoidable errors in making the 
experiments ; but as thofe experiments, as well as thofe of the greateft load, all deviate 
the fame way ; and alfo coincide with fome experiments communicated to me by Mr. 
Roufe upon the refiftance of planes j I am led to fuppofc a fmall deviation, whereby the 
load falls fhort of the fquares of the velocity j and fince the experiments No. 3 and 4, 
are moft to be depended upon, we muft conclude, that when the velocity is double^ 
the load fells (hort of its due proportion by -,V* or, for the lake of a round number, 
by about ^ part of the whole. 

Maxim III. The effects of the fame faik at a maximtuii are nearly, but fomewhat 
lefs than, as the cubes of the velocity of the wind. 

It has already been proved, Maxim ifl, that the velocity of fails at the maximum^ 
is nearly as the velocity of the wind ; and by Maxim ad, that the load at the maximum 
is nearly as the fquare of the fame velocity : if thofe two maximums would hold prc- 
cifcly, it would be a confequence that the effect would be in a triplicate ratio thereof: 
how this agrees with experiment will appear by comparing together the products in 
column 8, of Table IV. wherein thofe of No. 2, 4, and 6, (the velocity of the wind being 
double) ought to be octuple of thofe of No. i, 3, and 5, inftead of which they fall fhort. 
No. 2 by ;., No, 4 by ^V, and No. 6, by \ part of the whole. Now, if We rely on 
No. 3 and 4, as the turns of the fails are as the velocity of the wind ; and fince the 
load of the maximum falls fhort of the fquare of the velocity by about ^ part of 
the whole : the product made by the multiplication of the turns into the load, mufl 
alfo fall fhort of the triplicate ratio by about -^V part of the whole product. 

Maxim 



^ ». .'i L t^.j. 



\ 



TO TURN MILLS, &e. 67 

Maxim IV. The load of the fame f^s at the maximum is nearly as the fquares, 
and their efiect as the cubes of their number of turns in a given time. 

This maxim may be efteemcd a conlcquence of the three preceding ; for if the 
turns of the fails are as the velocity of the wind, whatever quantities are in any given 
ratio of the velocity of the wind, will be in the fame given ratio of the turns of the 
fails : and therefore, if the load at the maximum is as the fquare, or the efiect as the 
cube, of the velocity of the wind, wanting Vv P^^t when the velocity is double ; 
the load at the maximum will alfo be as the fquare, and the effect as the cube, of the 
number of turns of the fails in a given time, wanting in like manner -^ part when the 
number of turns are double in the fame time. In the prcfent cafe, if we compare . 
the loads at the maximum, column 6, with the fquares of the number of turns, 
column 5, of No. i and 2, 5 and 6, or the products of the fame numbers column 8, 
with the cubes of the number of turns column 5, inftead of falling Ihort, as No. 3 
and 4, they exceed thofe rados : but as tlie fets of experiments No. i and 2, of 5 and 6, 
are not to be efteemed of equal authority with thofe of No. 3 and 4, we muft not 
rely upon them further than to obfervc, that in comparing the gross effects of large 
machines, the direct proportion of the squares and cubes respectively, will hold 
as near as the effects themselves can be observed; and therefore be fufficient for 
practical eftimation, without any allowance. 

Maxim V. When fails are loaded fo as to produce a maximum at a given velocity, 
and the velocity of the wind incrcafes, the load continuing the fame 5 ift. The in- 
creafe of effect, when the increafc of the velocity of the wind is fmall, will be nearly 
as the fquares of thofe velocities : adly. When the velocity of the wind is double, the 
effects will be nearly as 10 : 27 j : But, 3dly, When the velocities compared, arc 
more than double of that where the given load produces a maximum^ the effects 
increafe nearly in a Gmple ratio of the velocity of the wind. 

It has already been proved, maxim ift and 2d, that when the velocity of the wind 
is increafed, the turns of the fails will increafc in the fame proportion, even when 
oppofcd by a load as the fquare of the velocity : and therefore if wanting the oppofition 
of an increafe of load, as the fquare of the velocity, the turns of the fails will again 
be increafed in a fimplc ratio of the velocity of the wind on that account alfo ; that is, 
the load continuing the fame, the turns of the fails in a given time will be as the 
fquare of the velocity of the wind ; and the effect, being in this cafe as the turns of 

the 



68 ON THE POWER OF WIND AND WATER, 

the fails will be as the fqiiare of the velocity of tlie wind alfo ; but this muft be under- 
ftood only of the firfl: increments of the velocity of the wind : for, 

2dly, As the fails will never acquire above a given velocity in relation to the wind, though 
t\t: load wore diminifhed to nothing ; when the load continues the fame, the more the ve- 
locity of the wind increafes (though the cflFectwill continue to increafc) yet the more it 
will fall Ihort of die fquarc of the velocity of the wind ; fo that when the velocity of 
the wind is double, the increafc of effect, inftead of being as i : 4, according to the 
fquares, it turns out as 10 : 27^, as thus appears. In Table IV. column 9, the loads 
of No. 2, 4, and 6, are the fame as the maximum loads in column 63 of No. i, 3, 
and 5. The number of turns of the fails with thofe loads, when the velocity of the 
wind is double, are fet down in column 10, and the products of their multiplication 
in column 1 1 : thofe being compared with the products of No. i, 3, and 5, column 8, 
furnifli the rarios fet down in column 12, which at a medium (due regard being had 
to No. 3 and 4.) will be nearly as 10 : Tj^. 3dly. The load continuing the fame, 
grows more and more inconliderable, refpecting the power of the wind as it increafes 
in velocity ; fo that the turns of the fails grow nearer and nearer a coincidence with 
their turns unloaded j that b, nearer and nearer to the fimple ratio of the velocity of 
the wind. When the velocity of the wind is double, the turns of the lluls, when 
loaded to a maximum^ will be double alfo; but, unloaded^ will be no more than 
triple, by deduction 2d : and therefore the product could not have increafed beyond 
the rario of 10 : 30 (inftead of 10 : 27J) even fuppofing the fails not to Iiave been 
retarded at all by carrying the maximum load for the half velocity. Hence we lee» 
that when the velocity of the wind exceeds the double of that, where a conftant load 
produces a maximum^ that the increafc of effect^ which follows the increafc of the 
velocity of the iails» will be nearly as the velocity of the wind» and ultimately in that 
ratio precifely. Hence alfo we fee that windmills, fuch as the difierent fpecies for 
raifing water for drainagCj &c. lofe much of their full effect, when acting againft one 
invariable oppofidon. 

V. Concerning the EffeAs of Sails of different Magnitudes the Strudure and Pofition 

being fimilar, and the Velocity of the Wind the fame. 

Maxim 6. In fails of a fimilar figure and pofition^ the number of turns in a given 
tin.e w ill be reciprocally as the radius or length of the faiL 

The 



/ 



TO TURN MILLS, &c. 69 

The extreme bar having the fame inclination to the plane of its motion^ and to the 
wind ; its velocity at a maiVimum wiU always be in a given ratio to the velocity of the 
windj and therefore, whatever be the radius, the abfolute velocity of the extremity of 
the fail will be the fame : and this will hold good refpcfting any other bar, whofe in- 
clination is the fame, at a proportionable diftance from the centre; it therefore follows, 
that the extremity of all fimilar fails, with the fame wind, will have the fame abfolute 
velocity; and therefore take a fpace of time to perform one revolution in proportion to 
the radius ; or, which is the fame thing, the number of revolutions in the fame given 
time, will be reciprocally as the length of the fail. 

Maxim 7. The load at a maximum that fails of a finlilar figure and pofition will over- 
come, at a given diftance from the centre of motion, will be as the cube of the radius. 

Geometry informs us, that in fimilar figures the furfaces are as the fqnares of their 
fimilar fides ; of confequence the quantity of cloth will be as the fquare of the radius : 
alfo in fimilar figures and pofinons, the impulfe of the wind, upon every fimilar fedlion 
of the cloth, will be in proportion to the furface of that fedtion ; and confequently, the 
impulfe of the wind upon the whole, will be as the furface of the whole : but as the 
diftance of every fimilar fedion, from the centre of motion, will be as the radius ; the 
diftance of the centre of power of the whole, from the centre of motion, will be as the 
radius alfo; that is, the lever by which the power a6ls, will be as the radius : as there- 
fore the impulfe of the wind, refpefting the quantity of cloth, is as the fquare of the 
radius, and the lever, by which it afts, as the radius fimply j it follows, that the load 
which the fails will overcome, at a given diftance from the centre, will be as the cube of 
the radius. 

Maxim 8. The effefl of fails of fimilar figure and pofitioiij are as the fquare 
of the radius. 

By maxim 6. it is proved, that the number of revolutions made in a given time, are 
as the radius inverlely. Under maxim 7. it appears, that the length of the lever, by 
which the power afts, is as the radius dircftly ; therefore thefe equal and oppofite ratios 
deftroy one another : but as in fimilar figures the quantity of cloth is as the fquare of 
the radius, and the aftion of the wind is in proportion to the quantity of cloth, as alfo 
appears under maxim 7 ; it follows that the cflfcft is as the fquare of the radius. 

COROL* 



I* 

k- 



70 ON THE POWER OF WIND AND WATER, 

CoROL. I. Hence it follows, that augmenting the length of the fail, without aug- 
menting the quantity of cloth, docs not increafe the power ; becaufe what is gained by 
the length of the lever, is loft by the flownefs of the rotation. 

CoROL. 2. If fails are increafedin lengthy the breadth remsuning the fame, the effect 
will be as the radius. 



VI. Concerning the Velocity of the Extremities of Windmill Sails, in refpect to the 

Velocity of the Wind, 

Maxim 9* The velocity of the extremities of Dutch fails, as well as of the enlarged 
fails, in all their ufual pofitions when unloaded^ or even loaded to a maximum, are con- 
fiderably quicker than the velocity of the wind. 

The Dutch fails unloaded, as in Table ^III. No. 8. made 120 revolutions in 52^^: the 
diameter of the fails being 3 feet 6 inches, the velocity of their extremities will be 25,4 
feet in a fecond ; but the velocity of the wind producing it, being 6 feet in the fame 
time, we (hall have 6:25,4: : 1 14,2; in this cafe therefore, the velocity of their ex*- 
tremities was 4,2 times greater than that of the wind. In like manner, the relative 
velodty of the wind, to the extremities of the fame fails, when loaded to a maximum, 
making then 93 turns m 52^, will be found to be as i : 3,3 1 or 2^3 times quicker than 
that of the wind. 

The following table contains 6 examples of Dutch fails, and 4 examples of the en- 
larged fails, in different pofitions, but with the conftant velocity of the wind of 6 feet in 
a fecond, from Table III. : and alfo 6 examples of Dutch faik in different pofitions,. witli 
different velocities of the wind from Table IV; 



TABLE 



TO TURN MILLS, &c. 71 

TABLE V. 

Containing the Ratio of the Velocity of the Extremities of Windmill Sails to the 
Velocity of the Wind. 



1 


l1 


ii 




Ratio of the 
Velocity of the Wind, and 
Extremities of the Sails. 




unloaded. 


loaded. 


I 

2 

3 
+ 


8 

9 
to 
It 
ta 
■J 


o" 
3 
5 
7 

lO 
12 


6' o" 
6 o 
6 o 
6 o 
6 o 
6 o 


- 


4,2 
4,1 

4, 

3,8 

3,5 


I : 3.3 
I : 2,8 

I ■■ »,75 
I : 2,7 
I : 2,6 
I : 2,3 


3 
H 


7 
8 

9 

lO 


'4 

w 

■7 


7i 
to 
12 

'5. 


6 

5 o 

6 o 
6 o 




4,3 
4.1 
4, 
3,35 


I ; 2,6 
I : 2,6 
I : 2.3 
I : 2,2 


II 

12 

■3 
■4 


I 

2 

3 

4 
5 
6 


5 

7^i 
7i 

10 
10 


4 4i 
8 9 
4 4i 
8 9 
4 4i 
8 9 


■ ■■ 4. 

I : 4,3 

■ : 3,8 
> : 3,4 


I : 2,8 
I : 2,6 
I : 2,8 
I ; 2,7 
1 : 2,6 
I : 23 


E 
1 


■ 


2 


3 


4 


J 


6 





It appears from the preceding collcAIon of examples, that when the extremities of 
the Dutch fails are parallel to the plane of motion> or at right angles to the wind,. and 
to the axis, as they are made according to the common practice in England, that their 
velocity, unloaded, is above 4 times, and loaded to a maximum^ above 3 times greater 
than that of the wind : but that when the Dutch fails, or enlarged fails, are in their beft 
p«iiti6ns, their velocity xinloaded is 4 times; and loaded to a maximum^ at a medium the 

V Dutch 



72 ON THE POWER OF WIND AND WATER, 

Dutch fails are 2,7, and the enlarged fails 2,6 times greater than the velocity of the 
wind. Hence we are furniflicd with a method of knowing the velocity of the wind, 
from obfcrving the velocity of the windmill fails; for knowing the radius, and the 
number of turns in a minute, we (hall have the velocity of the extremities; which, 
divided by the following divifors, will give the velocity of the wind, 

-^ • -., . , ^ . ("unloaded 4.2 
Dutch fads in the common pofition j Iq^^JcJ Z ^ 

Dutch fails in their beft pofition - 7 [^ , j a Z'^ 

Enlarged fails in their befl: pofition ] , , ^ ^I'g 

From the above divifors there arife the following compcndiumsjtfuppofing the 
radius to be 30 feet, which is the mod ufd&l length in this country, and the mill to 
be loaded to a ma.vimurn, as is ufually the cafe with com mills -, for every 3 turns 
in a miiiuie, of the Dutch sails in their common position^ the wind will move at 
the rate oj 2 miles an hour ; for every 5 turns in a minute^ of the Dutch jsails 
in their best position^ the wind moves 4 rhilei an hour ; Jmd for every 6 turns in 
a minute, of the enlarged sails in their best position, the wind will move 5 miles 
^h hour. 

The following table was communicated to me by my friend Mr. Route, and 
appears to have been con(tru£ted with great care, from a cgnfiderable number 
of facts and experiments ; and having relation to the fubject of this article, I 
here infert it as he fent it to me: but at the fame time mud obferve, that the 
evidence for thofe numbers where the velocity of the wind exceeds 50 miles an hour, 
'does not feem of equal authority with that of 50 miles an hour and under. It is alio 
to be obfcrved, that the numbers in column 3. are calculated according to the fquare 
of the velocity of the wind, which, in moderate velocities, from what ha$ been before 
obfervcd, will hold very nearly. 



TABLE 



TO TURN MILLS, &c. 



73 



TABLE VI. 

Containing the Velocity and Force of Wind, according to their common Appella 

tions. 



Velocity of 
the Wind. 



c 
o 






I 

2 

3 
4 

5 

lO 

15 

20 

25 
30 

35 
40 

45 

50 
60 

80 

100 



c • 

c o 

\X4 



^A7 

2>93 
4,40 

5>87 

7>33 
14,67 

22,00 

29»34 
36,67 
44,01 

5^34 
58,68 

66,01 

73>35 
88,02 

ii7>36 
146,70 



C C CO 

D O ^ 

'^ 'S 
c c 

o 1) 2 

^ O CI4 



,005 

,020 

,044 

1079 

,1^3 
,492 

1,107 

1,968 

3.075 

4*429 
6,027 

73873 

9*963 
12,300 

17*715 

31*490 
49,200 



Common appellations of the force of winds, 



1 

\ 



Hardly perceptible. 
Juft perceptible. 

Gentle pleafant wind. 

> Pleafant brifk gale. 

> Very brifk. 

[ High winds. 

[ Very high. 

A ftorm or tempeft. 
A great ftorm. 
An hurricane. 

An hurricane that tears up trees, carries 
buildings before it, &c. 



VII. Concerning the abfolute Effect, produced by a given Velocity of the Wind, 

upon Sails of a given Magnitude and Conftruction. 

It has been obferved by practitioners, that in mills with Dutch fails in the common 
poficion, when they make about 13 turns in a minute, they then work at a mean 

L rate : 



74 ON THE POWER OF WIND AND WATER, 

rate : that is, by the compendiums in the laft article, when the velocity of the wind 
is Similes an hour, or 127 feet in a fecond; which, in common phrafe, would be 
called a fresh gale. 

The experiments fct down in Table IV. No. 4, were tried with a wind, whofc ve- 
locity was %l feet in a fecond ; confcqucntly had thofc experiments been tried with a 
wind, whofe velocity was 124- feet in a fecond, the effect, by maxim 3d, would have 
been 3 times greater i becaufc the cube of I2-J- is 3 times greater than that of 8 J. 

■ 

From Tabic IV. No. 4, we find that the fails, when the velocity of the wind was 8|. 
feet in a fecond, made 130 revolutions in a minute, with a load of 17,521b. From 
the mcafures of the machine, preceding the fpccimen of a fet of experiments, we 
find, that 20 revolutions of the fails raifcd the fcale and weight 11,3 inches: 130 re- 
volutions will therefore raife the fcale 73,45 inches, which, multiplied by 17,521b. 
makes a product of 1287, for the effect of the Dutch fails in their beft pofition ; that 
is, when the velocity of the wind is S^J- (ttt in a fecond: this product therefore 
multiplied by three, will give 3861 for the effect of the fame fails, when the velocity 
of the wind is I2y feet in a fecond. 

Defaguliers makes the utmoft power of a man, when working fo as to be able to 
hold it for fome hours, to be equal to that of railing an hogfhead of water 10 feet 
high in a minute. Now, an hogfhead confiding of 6^ ale gallons, being reduced into 
pounds avoirdupois, and the height into inches 5 the product made by multiplying 
thofe two numbers will be 76800 ; which is 19 times greater than the product of the 
fails laft mentioned, at 12^ feet in a fecond: therefore, by maxim 8th, if we multiply 
the fquare root of 19, that is 4,46, by 21 inches, the length of the fail producing 
the effect 3861, we (hall have 93,66 inches, or 7 feet 9^ inches for the radius of a 
Dutch fail in its beft pofition, whofe mean power (hall be equal to that of a man : 
but if they are in their commoTi pofition, their length muft be increafed in the ratio 
of the fquare root of 442 to that of 6^^^ as thus appears ; 

The ratio of the maximum products of No. 8 and 1 1, Table III. are as 442 : 639: 
but by maxim 8, the effects of fails of different radii are as the fquare of the radii i 
confv-quendy the fquare roots of the products or effects, arc as the radii fimply ; and 
therefore as the fquare root of 442 is to that of 6395 fo is 93,66 to 112,661 or 9 
feet 44- inches. 

If 



\ . 

TO TURN MILLS, tec. 7.> 

If the fails arc of the enlarged kind, then from Table III. No. 1 1 and 15, we (hall 
have the fquareroot of 820 to that of 639 : : 93,66 : 82,8 inches, or 6 feet io| inches: 
fo that in round numbers we (hall have the radius of a fail, of fimilar figure to their 
refpeAive models, ^whofe mean power (hall be equal to that of a man ; 

The Dutch fails in tlieir common pofition •♦ 9J fc€t. 

The Dutch fails in their beft pofition - - 8 

The enlarged fails in their beft pofition - - 7 

Suppofe now the radius of a fail to be 30 feet, and to be conftrudled upon the 
model of the enlarged f^ils. No. 14 or 15, Table III. dividing 30 by 7, we (hall have 
4,28, the fquare of which is 18,3 5 and this, according to maxim 7, will be the rela- 
tive power of a fail of 30 feet, to one of 7 feet ; that is, when working at a mean 
rate, the 30 feet fail will be equal to the power of 18,3 men, or of 3^ horfcs; 
reckoning 5 men to a horfe : whereas the cfFeft of the common Dutch fails, of the 
fame lengdi, being lefs in the proportion of 820 : 442, will be fcarce equal to the 
power of 10 men, or of two horfcs. 

That thefc computations are not merely fpeculative, but will nearly hold good 
when applied to works in large, I have had an opportunity of verifying : for in a 
mill with the enlarged fails of 30 feet, applied to the cru(hing of rape (eed, by means 
of two runners upon the edge, for making oil ; I obferved, that when the fails made 
1 1 turns in a minute, in which cafe the velocity of the wind was about 13 feet in a 
fecond, according to article 6th, the runners then made 7 turns in a minute: 
whereas 2 horfes, applied to the fame 2 runners, fcarcely worked them at the rate of 
2i turns in the fame time. Laftly, with regard to the real fuperiority of the enlarged 
fails, above the Dutch fails as commonly made, it has fufficiently appeared, not only 
in thofe cafes where they have been applied to new mills, but where they have been 
fubftituted in xhe place of the others. 

VIIL Concerning horizontal Windmills and Water-wheels, with oblique Vanes. 

Obfervations upon the efie^s of common windmills, with oblique vanes, have led 
many to imagine, that could the vanes be brought to receive the diredt impulfe, like 
a (hip failing before the wind, it would be a very great improvement in point of 
power : while odiers attending to the extraordinary and even unexpected effeAs of 

oblique 



78 ON THE POWER OF WIND AND WATER, 

oblique vanes have been led to imagine that oblique vanes applied to water-mills, would 
as much exceed the common water-wheels, as the venical wind-mills arc found to have 
exceeded all attempts towards an horizontal one. Both thefe notions, but cfpccially 
the firn:, have fo plaufible an appearance, that of late years there has feldom been 
,wanting thofe, who have afliduoufly employed themfelves to bring to bear defigns of 
this kind : it may not therefore be bnacceptable to endeavour to fct this matter in a 
clear light. 

Plate VI. fig. 2. Let A B be the fedicn of a plane, upon which let the wind blow 
in the direftion C D, with fuch a velocity as to defcribe a given fpace BE, in a given 
time (fuppofe i fecond); and let AB be moved parallel to itfelf, in the direftion C D- 
Now, if the plane A B moves with the fame velocity as the wind ; that is, if the point 
B moves through the fpace B E in the fame time that a particle of air would move 
through the fame fpace ; it is plain that, in this cafe, there can be no prcfllire or impullc 
of the wind upon the plane : but if the plane moves flower than the wind, in the fame 
direftion, fo that the point B may move to F, while a particle of air, fctting out from 
B at the fame inftant, would move to E, then B F will exprefs the velocity of the 
plane; and the relative velocity of the wind and plane will bvr exprefled by the line 
F E. Let the ratio of FE to B E be given (fuppofe 2 i-j); let the line AB re- 
prcfcnt the impulfe of the wind upon the plane A B, when adling with its whole 
velocity B E ; but, when acting with its relative velocity ¥ E, let its impulfe be de- 
noted ,by fome aliquot part of AB, as for inftance -J- AB : then will 4- of the paral- 
hlogrim A F reprcfent the mechanical power of the plane ; that is, -J- A B x 4-B E. 

2dly, Let I N be the fcctlon of a plane, inclined in fuch a manner, that the bafe IK 
of the rectangle triangle I K N may be equal to A Bj and the perpendicular N K =:B E ; 
let the plane I N be (truck by the wind, in the direction L M, perpendicular to I K : 
then, according to the known rule of oblique forces, the impulfe of the wind upon the 
plane I N, tending to move it according to the direction L M, or N K, will be denoted 
by the bafe I K ; and that part of the impulfe*, tending to move it according to the direc- 
tion I K, will be exprefled by the perpendicular N K. Let the plane I N be moveable 
in the direction of I K onlvj that is, the point I in the direction of I K, and the point 
N in the direction N Q, pa'rallcl thereto. Now it is evident, that if the point I moves 
through the line I K, while a particle of air, fctcing forwards at the fame time from the 
point N, moves through the line NK, they will both arrive at the point K at the fame 
time; and confrquently, in this cafe alfo, there can be no prcflTiire or impulfe of the 
particle of the air upon the plane I N. Now let I O be to I K as B F to B E j and let 

the 



TO TURN MILLS, &c. 77 

the plane I N move at fuch a rate, that the point I may arrive at O, and acquire the 
pofition I Q; in the fame time that a particle of wind would move through the fpacc 
N K : as O Q is parallel to I N j (by the properties of fimilar triangles) it will cut 
N K in the point P, in fuch a manner, that N P = B F, and P K = F E : hence it ap- 
pears, that the plane I N, by acquiring the pofition O Q, withdraws itfclf from the, 
acdon of the wind, by thp fame fpace N P, that the plane A B docs by acquiring the 
pofition F Gj and confequcntly, from the equality of P K to F E, the relative impulfc 
of the wind P K, upon the plane O Q, will be equal to the relative impulfc of the wind 
F E, upon the plane F G : and fince the impulfc of the wind upon A B, with the re- 
lad vc velocity FE, in the direction B-E, is reprefcnted by 4- AB; the relative impulfe 
of the wind upon the plane I N, in the direction N K, will in like manner be repre- 
fcnted by -r I K ; and the impulfc of the wind upon the plane I N, with the relative 
velocity P K, in the direction IK, will be reprcfentcd by -J^' N K : and confequcntly the 
mechanical power of the plane I N, in the direction I K, will be ^ the parallelogram.^ 
I Q : that is^IK x^NK: that is, from the equality of I K = A B and N K = B E, 
we ftiall have 4-IQ=4.ABx*BE=^ABx4.BE = 4.ofthe area of the parallclr- 
ogram A F. Hence we deduce this 



GENERAL PROPOSITION"^ 

T/iat ali Pliinesy however situated^ that intercept the same Section of theJVind^ 
and having the same relative Velocity^ in regard to the fKindy when reduced intou 
the same Direction^ have equal Powers to produce mechanical Effects. 

For what is loft by the obliquity of the impulfci is gained by the velocity of the. 
modon. 

Hence it appears,, that an oblique foil is under no difadvantage in refpect of powcr^, 
compared with a direct one j except what arifes from a diminution of its breadth,, in. 
refpect to the fection of the wind : the breadth I N being obliquity reduced to LK.. 

The difadvantage of horizontal windmills therefore does not confift in this 5 that each, 
fail, when directly expofed to the wind, is capable of a lefs power, than an oblique one 
of the fame dimenfions ; but that in an horizontal windmill, litde more than one faiL 
ciUi be acting at once: whereas in the common windmill, all the four act together : and: 

therefore^. 



78 



ON THE POWER OF WIND AND WATER, 



therefore, fuppofing each vane of an horizontal windmill, of the fame dimenfions as 
each vane of the vertical, it is manifeft the power of a vertical mill with four fails, 
will be four tirres greater than the power of the horizontal one, let its number of 
vanes be what it will ; this difadvantagc arifes from the nature of the thing : but if we 
coafider the further difadvantage, that arifes from the difficulty of getting the fails back 
again againft the wind, &c. we need not wonder if this kind of mill is in reality foun^ 
to have not above ^ or ^V of the power of the common fortj as has appeared in 
fome attempts of this kind. 



In like manner, as little improvement is to be expedled from water-mills with oblique 
vanes : for die power of the fame fection of a dream of water, is not greater when 
acting upon an oblique vane, than when acting upon a direct one : and any advantage 
that can be made by intercepting a greater fection, which fometimes may be done in the 
cafe of an open river, will be counterbalanced by the fuperior rcfiftance, that fuch vanes 
would meet with by moving at right angles to the current : whereas the common floats 
always move with the water nearly in the fame direction. 

Here it may reafonably be aflced, that fince our geometrical demonftration is general, 
and proves, that one angle of obliquity is as good as another j why in our experiments 
it appears, that there is a certain angle which is to be preferred to all the reft ? It is to 
be obferved, that if the breadth of the fail I N is given, the greater the angle KIN, 
and the lefs will be the bafe I K : that is, the fcftion of wind interfered, will be lefs : on 
the other hand, the more acute the angle KIN, the lefs will be the perpendicular 
K N : that is, the impulfe of the wind, in the dircdion I K being lefs, and the velocity 
of the fail greater ; the refiftancc of the medium will be greater alfo. Hence there- 
fore, as there is a diminution of the feftion of the wind intercepted on one hand, and 
an increafc of refiftancc on the other, there is fome angle, where the difadvantage 
arifing from tbefe caufes upon the whole is the leaft of all -, but as the difadvantage 
arifing from refiftancc is more of a phyfical than geometrical confideration, the true 
angle will beft be affigned by experiments* 



Scholium. 



In trying the experiments contained in Table III. and IV. the different fpecific 
gravity of the air, which is undoubtedly different at different times, will caufc 9 dif- 
ference in the load, proportional to the difference of its fpecific gravity, though its 

velocity 



TURN MILLS, &c. 



70^ 



velocity remains the fame j and a variation of fpccific gravity may arife not only from 
a variation of the weight of the whole coluncin, but alfo by the difference of heat of 
the air concerned in the experiment, and pollibly of other caufes j yet the irregularities 
that might arife from, a difference of fpecific gravity were thought to be too fmall to 
be perceivable, till after the principal experiments were made, and their effcfts com- 
pared i from which, as well as fucceeding experiments, thofc variations were found to 
be capable of producing a fenfible, though no very confiderablc tffcA : however, 
as all the experiments were tried in the fummer feafon, in the day time, and 
under cover, we may fuppofe that the principal fource of error would arife 
from the different weight of the column of the atmofphere at different times : but as 
this feldom varies above tt P^''^ of ^^e whole, we may conclude, that though many 
of the irregularities contained in the experiments referred to in the foregoing eflay> 
might arife from this caufe ; yet as all the principal conclufions are drawn from the 
medium of a confiderablc number, many whereof were made at diflerent times, it is 
prefumed that they will nearly agree with the truth, and be altogether fujficient for 
i;egulaclng the practical conftruflion of thofe kind of machines^ for which ufe thejr 
were principally intendeds 



ji 



AN 



80 ON MECHANIC POWERS 



AN experimental Examination of the Quantity and Proportion of Mechanic 
Power necessary to be employed in giving different Degrees of Velocity to 
Heavy Bodies from a State of rest, by Mr- John Smeaton, F. R. S. 

Read before the Royal Society, April 25th, 1776. 

A BOUT the year 1686, Sir Isaac Newton firft publifhed his Prhicipia^ and, 
•^■^ conformably to the language of mathematicians of thofe times defined, that " the 
" quantity of motion is the mcafureof the fame, aiifiing from the velocity and quantity 
'* of matter conjointly.*' Very foon after this publication, the truth or propriety of 
this definition was difputed by certain philofophers, who contended, that the meafurc 
of the quantity of motion (hould be ettimated by taking the quantity of matter and the 
fquare of the velocity conjointly. There is nothing more certain, than that from equal 
impelling powers, acting for equal intervals of time, equal increafes of velocity arc 
acquired by given bodies, when unrefifted by a medium ; thus gravity caufcs a body, 
in obeying its impulfc during one fecond o( time, to acquire a velocity which would 
carry it uniformly forward, without any additional impulfe, at the rare of 32 ft. 2 in. 
per fecond j and if gravity is fuffcred to aft upon it for two fcconds» it will have, in that 
time, acquired a velocity that would carry it, at an uniform rate, juft double of the 
former] that is, at thfi rate of 64 ft. 4 in. jK>er fecond. Now, if in confequence of 
this equal increafe of velocity, in an equal increafe of time, by the continuance of the 
fame impelling power, we define that to be a double quantity of motion, which is 
generated in a given quantity of matter, by the action of the fame impelling power for 
a double time ; this will be co-incident with Sir Isaac Newton's definition above men- 
tioned J whereas, in trying experiments upon the total efiects of bodies in morion, it 
appears, that when a body is put in motion, by whatever caufe, the impreflion it will 
make upon an uniformly refifting medium, or upon uniformly yielding fubftances, will 
be as the mafs of matter of the moving body, multiplied by the fquare of its velocity : 
thequeftion, therefore, properly is, whether thofe terms, the (juantity of vioiioHy the 
momenta of bodies in motion, or forces of bodies in motion, which have generally 
been efteemed fynonymous, are with the moft propriety of language to be cfteemed 
equal, double, or triple, when they have been generated by an equable impulfe, acting 
for an equal, double, or triple, time; or that it (hbuld be meafured by the effects being 
equal, double, or triple, in overcoming refiftances before a body in motion can be 

flopped ? 



APPLIED TO BODIES AT REST. SI 

flopped ? For, according as thofe terms arcundcrftood in this or that way, it will neccffarily 
follow, that the momenta of equal bodies will be as the velocities, or as the fquares of 
the velocities, or as the fquares of the velocities refpeftivelyj it being certain, that, 
whichever we take for the proper definition of the term quantity of modon, by paying 
a proper regard to the collateral circumftances that attend the application of it, the 
fame condulion, in point of computation, > will refult. I fhould not, therefore, have 
thought it worth while to trouble the Society upon this fubject, had I not found, that not 
only myfelf and other pradtical artifts,. but alfo fome of the niofl: approved wriccrs, had 
been liable to fall into errors, in. applying thefe.. doctrines to practical mechanics, by 
fometimes forgetting or neglecting the due regard which ought to be had to thefe col- 
lateral circumflances> Some of thcfc errors are not only very confidcrable in thcmfelves, 
but alib of great confequence to the public, a^ they, tend greatly to miflead the practical 
artift ih works that occur daily, and which: often require very great fums of money in 
their execution^ I fhall jxiention. the followiiigjfift4nce^ ..*. 

DssAGULiERs, in his fecond vcJume of Experimental Philofophy, treating upon t^e 
qucftion concerning the forces of bodies in motion, afte^ taking much pains to mew 
that the difpute, which had then fubfifted fifty years, 'was a difpute about the meaning df 
words; and that the fame conclufion will be brought out, when things. are rightly under- 
ftood, either upon the old or new opinion, as he dij[lii>gui(hes them ; among other things, 
tells us, that the old and new opinion may be eafily reconciled in this inftance: 
that the wheel of an uMerfliot wjiter-mill is C2lpabte'<if doing quadruple work when the 
velocity of the water is doubled, mfteaid df double work only \ " becaufe (the adjutage 
^^ being the fame), iky^he^ we find, that as-the water's volocity is double, there 4irc 
^' twice the number of particles, of water that iiTue out, and .therefore the ladle-board is 
^\, ftruck by twice the matter^ which matter moving with twice the velocity that it had 
^\ in the fir(( cafe, the whole, eflfcft muft be quadruple, though the inftantaneous ftroke 
<* of each particle is incitafed only in a fimple proportion of the velocity/' See voK 
U. Annotations on lefhire 6th, p. 92. 



!t 



Again, in the fame volume, ledture 12th, p. 424, referring .t6 .what went before, iie 
tells us, i* The knowledge df the foregcwng paiticulars. is abfolutely.ncccflary for^fctung 
" an undirfliot wheel to wo A : but the advantage to be reaped from it would be ftill 
'* gucfswork, arid we fhould b(^ ftill at a lofs tb find ©ut the utntoft it can pierfbrm, if 
'^ we had not an ingenious pro|>oTition of that excellent mechinjcM. Parbnt, of the 
^ Royal Academy of Scfeacesj who has given us a mOiWiwwm in jhis cafe, by flijewing, 

M i . .. *' |hat 



& ON MECHANIC POWERS, 

*< th&t an undcrfbot wheel can do the mbft worlc^ wken its velocity is equal to the third 
*• part of the velocity of the water that drives it, i&c; becaufe thcii two-thirds of the 
^ water is employed in driving the wheel with a force proportionable to the iquare of its 
^' velocity. If we muldply the ftxrface of the adjutage or opening by the height of the 
^^ water^ we fhall have the column of water that morves the wheeL The wheel thus 
^' moved will fuftain on the oppofite fide only fimr^ninths of that weight, which will 
^^ keep it in equilibrio ; but what it^can move widi the velocity it goes with, will be 
^' but one- third of that weight of equilibrium; that is, ^ths of the weight of the firft 
*^ cdumn^ ^c.-^This is the utmoft that can be expected." 

The Ame conclufion is likewife ' adopted by NfACLAURiN, in art. 907. p. 728. of his 
Fluxions, where, giving the fliixionary ^duftion df M. Parent's propofition, lie (ays, 
** that if A repreients the weight which would balance the force of the ftrcam, when its 
•' velocity is a ; and u rcprefcnts the vclocityirf' th^ part' of -die engine, which it (bikes 
*• when the motion of the machine is uniform, &c, — ^the machine will have the greateft 

'^ effect when v is equal to — i that is, if the weight that is raifed by the engme be Icfi 
«( than the weight which would balance the power, in the proportioik of 4 to 9, and the 
.^' momentum of the weight is ^— - 4 

Finding tfa»tdiereconclufions were far fitim the tnMhA <rid!^ many qtbef 

circitfiiftances, tb»t the praftical theory of tftaking ^faqei ami wi^rtnUls yrz& but very 
impcrfeftty delivered by any authior I bad thtn an opportiviity «f confultiAg *i in- the 



r - ^ - ■ -• :ii J.'-l ... . — >..->^. '■ ■ ■ i ■ I I I « I 



• • 



* BBLXDoHy Architecture Hydraulifue^ greatly prefers th'ci appncittion '6f water to an undftrskot mill, 
H»tefid of an overshot; and attempts to.dcttionstraVp, llmt ^waier' Applied 'utidenliotwi)l-€U> six times 
more aaecutioa than the same applitil ovafshqt. See ted. Lp.^^iad. WbUc.Dksiov^iBaay casdeaviNiritag 
to invalidate what had been advanced by B£Lii>ORy and gr^t^y.^r^ftflinf jM oyc^ot to an undersboity 
saysy Annotat. on lecture 12, vol. IL p. 552, that from his own experieace, ^' a well-made overshot mill 
** ground as much com in the same time with ten times less water i' so that betwixt Bs&i1>OR and 
DuAttvUEBs, heieifta^iffercBca of noks|.tbaa6(^to I. ' ,\ 

Again, BiUMia, vol. II. f. 79> ays^ tba4 tbe ceatie etf gmdty oC>eae)i iiiii' oflit %iD^-injM;siMakt 
^mvfil in its own cir^ witb enc^Uiiri of |h# ve^l^ of Ike wind 1 aq ibal, i^vf^ tliA dia^tpot of tbia 
cenUa of gravity fvona Iba centre of nolioa aA 20 feet, aa be ftatoi it, p. 9a» artiple 849f Un circum- 
Icieacewill b^ axceedipg \^ fe^t Snglish measure : a wind, therefore, to make the miU gp twenty 
turns ppr minute, which they frequently do with a fresli wind and all their clptfa spread, would require 
liie wind to hiove above 80 miles (in bour; a vt^locity perhaps lartly equalled in the gfcat^t storms we 
•yperience in this climate. 

year 



APPLIED TO BODIES AT REST. 8a 

year 1751 I began acotirfcof experiments upon this fubjcft. Thcfc experiments, with 
the conclufions drawn from them, have' already been communicated to this Society, who 
printed them in vol. li. of their Tranfa&ions for the year 1759, and for this communis 
cation t had the honour of receiving the annual medal of Sir GoDFR£y Coplev, from 
the hands of our very worthy Prefident the late Earl of Macclesfield. Thofe experi- 
ments and conchifions ftand uncontroverted, fo &r as I know, to this day ; and having 
fince that time been concerned in direfUng the conftruAion of a great number of mills, 
which were all executed upon the principles deduced from them, I have by that means 
had many opportunities of comparing the efFcdls aftually produced with the cfFcfts which 
might be expected from the calculation ; and the agreement, I have always found between 
thefe two, appears to mc^ully to eilablilh the truth of the principles upon which they 
were conllrudled, -when applied to great works, as well as upon a fmaller fcale in 
models. 

Reipedii)g the explanatory deduction of Desaguliers in the firft example above- 
mentioned, which, indeed, I have found to be the commonly received doftrine among 
theoredcal fnechanics, it is Ibewn abovf, in my former Eilay, page 41 , &c. part i. 
maxim 4. thatj where, the velocity of water is double, the adjutage or aperture of the 
fluice remaining the faoie, the effect is eight times ; that is, not as the fquare but as the 
cube ojf tjnc v/elocity I and the i^me is investigated concerning the power of the wind 
ariGngfrpm d'lSkttnca of yelocity, p. 67. being part 3. maxim 4« 

The concluHon in the fecond example above-mentioned, adopted both by Desagu- 
liers and Maclavrjn, is not lefs wide of the truth than the foregoing; for if that 
conclufion were -^e, only ^V^^ ^^ ^^ water expended could be raifed back again to 
the hci^t of the refervoir from which it had defqended, exclujfively of all kinds of 
friction, 6cc. which would make the actual quantity raifed back again ftill lefs ; that is, 
left than one-feventh of the whole i whereas it appears, from Table I. of the preceding 
eflky, that in fome of the esfiperiments there related, even upon the fmall fcale on which 
they were tried, the ; work done was equivalent to the railing back again about one 
quarter of the wateir expended i and in large wotks the effect is dill greater, approach* 
ing towards )ialf, whigh (e^ms to be me limit for the underfhot mills, as the whole would 
be th; limit for the .overlhot mills, if it were poffible to fet afide all friction, refiftance 

from die air, &c. . 

■*■...■.■■-. ,, ' , _• 

The velocity aifo of the wheel, which, according tb M* 1^4 Rent's determination, 
ft^pptcd by DESAdULims smdMACLAVRiNj ought to be no mote inaii one-third of that 

of 



84 ON MECHANIC POWERS, 

of the water, varies at the maximum in the above mentioned experiments of Tabte t 
between one-third and one-half; but in all the cafes there related, in which the mod 
work is performed in proportion to the water expended, and which approach the neareft 
to the circumftances of great works, when properly executed, the maximum lies much 
nearer to one-half than one-third i one-half, ieeming to be the true inaaimum^ if no* 
thing were loft by the refiftance of the air, the fcattering of the water carried up- by the 
wheel, and thrown off by the centrifugal force, &c- all which tend to diminrfli the effect 
more>^ at what would be the maximum if thefe did not take place, than they do when 
the motion is a litde flower,. 

Finding thefe matters, as well as others, to come out m tnc experiments, fo very 
different from the opinions and calculations of authors of the firft reputation, who, 
reafoning according to the Newtonian definition, muft have been kd into thefe errors 
from a want of attending to the proper collateral circumftances ; I thought it ytrj 
material", cJpecially for the praftical artift, that he ftiould make ufe of a kind of 
reafoning in which he fliould not be fo liable to miftakes ; in order, therefore, to make 
this matter perfeftly clear to myfelf, and poffibly fo to others, I refolved to try a fet 
of experiments from whence it might be inferred, what proportion or quantity of 
mechanical power is expended in giving the fame body different degrees of velocity. 
This foheme was put in execution in the year 1759, ^^^ ^^^ txperinricnts were then 
(hewn to feveral friends, particularly my very wwthy and ii)genious friend Mp# 
William Russell* 

* • • • - ^ • 

I 

la my experrmental inquiry concemmg the pbv^rs ofwatdr ancf wind before referred 
to, I have, pu 30, part i, defined what I meant by jpbwer^ as apf^ied to praftical 
mechanics, that is, what I now call mechanical power i which, in terms fynonynious 
to thofc there ufcd, may be laid to be tAeafured by multiplying the weight of the 
body into the perpendicular height from which it can defcend j thus the fame weight, 
defcending from a double height, is capable of^ producing a double mechanical effeft, 
and is therefore a double mechanical power. A double weiglit defcending from the 
fame height is alfo a doubte power, becaufe. it ^iftewlfe fs capable of producing' « 
double effefti and a given body, defcending thrpugh a given peYj^'ehdlctilar height, isr 
the fame power as a double body defcending through half that ^^rpendi^ular j for, 'by' 
the intervention of proper levers, they wiU counter-balance one another, cbhforfnably 
to the known law;s of mechanics, which have never been controverted. It muft, h9W- 
^er, be always^ underftood, that the defcending body,, when afting as a meaf6fe' of 

power. 



.i 



•»^» ■>^ . ■ . r 



f I 






APPLIED TO BODIES AT REST, 85 • 

power, is fuppofcd to defccnd flowly, like the weight of a clock or "a jack } for, if 
quickly defcending, it is fcnfibly compounded with another law^ viz. the law of accelc^ 

ration by gravity. 

• ... 

DESCKIPTION OF THE MACHINE. 

Plati VI. 

• ■ ■ . ■ ■ 

A B IS the bafe of the machine^ placed upon a table^ 

A c is a pillar or flandard. * . 

c D is an arm, upon the extremity of which is fixed a plate f g%. which- is here feen 
% edge-ways^ through which is a fraiall hole for receiving a fmall fteel pivot c, fixed in 
the top of the upright axis e b ; the lower end of this axis finifhes in a: conical ffeel 
point, which reds upon a fmall cup of hard ileel polifhed at b« 

H I is a cylinder of white fir, which palles through a perforation in the axis, and 
therein fixcSki and, upon the two arms formed thereby^ 'are capable of Aiding. 



'■I k I 



K L two cylindric weights of lead of equal fize,. which are capable of being fixed 
upon any part of the cylindric arms, from the axis to their extremities, by means of 
two thin wedges of wood. The' two weights, therefore, being at equal diftances fit>m 
the centre, and the axis perpendicular, the whole will be .bdsfnced upon the point 
at B, and moveable thereupon by an impelling power witK vtiylitde: fri£tion. 

Upon the upper part of the axis arc formed m n, two cylindiica] barrels, whereof 
M is double the diameter of n : they have a little pin ftuck. into one fide of each 

Q is a piece capable of (liding higher or lower; as occafibh reqiims ; and carries 



> :: . . 



R, a light pulley of about three inches diameter, hung upbhik fteel axis, and 
moveable upon two fmall pivots. The plane of the pulley, however, is not direfted 
to the middle of the upright axis, but a litde on one fidfe, A> as to point (at a mean) 
between the furfiice ^ the bk;ger barrel* and the lefi. • : -: • 

sis 



h.*^ 



80 ON MECHANIC POWERS, 

8 is a light fcalc for receinng weights, and hangs by a fmall twine, cord, or Um^ 
that pafies the piilky and termiiiaces either upon the Ugger barrel or the kfs, as tnay 
be required i the fliding-piece q being moved higher or lower for each, that the line, 
in paifing from the pulley \o the barrel, may be nearly horizontal* The end of the 
. line that is furtheft from the fcale is terminated by a fmall loop, which hangs on 
upon the pin o, or the pin p, accordbg as the bigger or the Icfler barrel is to be 
ufcd. 

Now, havmg wound up a certain number of turns of the line upon the barrel, and 
having placed a weight in the fcale s, it is obvious, that it will caufe the axis to turn 
round, and give modon to ics arms, and to the weights of lead placed thereon, which 
«are the heavy bodies to bi put in motion by the impulfe of the weight in the fcale; 
and when the line is wound off to the pin, the loop flips off, and the fcale then falling 
down, the weight will ceafe to accelerate the motion of the heavy bodies, and leave 
them revolving, equably forward, with the velocity they have acquired, except fo fir 
as it mud be gradually leflcned by the frifUon of the machine and refiftance of the 
air, which being fmall, the bodies will revolve fometime before their velocity is appa* 
rently diminihed. 

Measures of some Parts of the Machine. 

Inches. 
Diameter of the cylinders of lead^ or the heavy bodies, - 2,57 
Length of ditto, --^----^ 1,56 
Diameter of the hole therein, - - - - r ,72 

Weight of each cylinder 3 lbs. Avoirdupois, 

Greater diftance of the middle of each body from thei ^ 

centre of the axis, .•--••3 -^ 

The fmaller 4UUDce of ditto, - - - * • g,^2 

10 turns of the fmaller barrel raifes the fcale, < ditto off 

\ 4 ^5>^5 



tibe bigger ditto. 



SokBlkx diftanee above fpecified from the ni$ of rotation^ 
the greater diftance irom that ajdsi fiu> fiice the axis 

itfelf. 



APPUED TO BODIES AT REST. Kt 

itfelf, «nd the cyHndric anna of. wood, keep an unraried diftanrt from tfie centre pf 
rocation, the bodies themfdws muft be moved nearer than half their forotcr diftance, 
in order that, compounded with the unvariable parts, thejr may be vireuaHy at the 
half diAance. In order to Bnd this half diftance nearly, I put in ao arm of the fame 
wood, that only went through the axis, without extending in the oppofite direftion ; 
one of the bodies being put upon the end of this arm^ at the diftance of 8,25 inches, 
the whole machine was inclined till the body and arm became a kind of pendulum, 
and vibrated at the rate of 92 times per minute { and as a pendulum of the half length 
vibrates quicker in the proportion of v/i to \/ai that is, in the proportion of 
92 to I JO nearly; therefore, keeping the fame inclination of the machine, the weight 
was moved upon the arm till it made i jo vibrations per minute ; whicji was found to 
be, when it was at 3,92 inches diftance from the centre as above ftatcd, which is 
about Aths of an inch nearer than the half diftance. The doaUe arm was thea put 
in, and marked accordingly, and the bodies being mounted tbcrcon, the whole was 
adjufted ready for ufe j and with u were tried the following experiaients, each of which 
was repeated fo many tixnea as to be fully fatis£i£lory. 



Table of Experitnents. 











a'g 




°^^ 












1 


~3 


3 . 


-3 
l-s'i 


III 


Time of the D 
fcent of t 
Weight in I 
Scale. 


Hi 

£ 3 


I 


8 


M 


w 


5 


Hj 


aj 


2 


8 


N 


w 


10 


28J 


29i 


3 


8 


N 


w 


=i 


.4 


584 


4 


3» 


M 


w 


s 


7 


'+, 


5 


32 


N 


w 


10 


14 


'♦f 


« 


32 


N 


w 


=i 


7 


.8} 


7 


8 


M 


H 


5 


7 


■44 


8 


8 


N 


H 


10 


'4 


•J 


9 


8 


N 


H 


=J 


; 7 


JO} 


I 


a 


3 


* 


J 


« 


7 



The 



88 ON MECHANIC POWERS, 

The 5%^^^ in number 3, column 7, was determined in faft from 7.^^^ being the 
time of making 10 equable revolutions after the weight was dropped ofT, in order to 
prevent the fenfible retardation that might take place, and afieft the obfervation, if 
continued for 20 revolutions made fo flowly. 



Further Dtfinitions. 

I have already defined what I mean by mechanic power j but, before I proceed further, 
it will be neceflary alfo to define the following terms : 

Impulfe or Jmpulfion, ^ By all which, I underiland the uniform endeavour thai 
Impulfive Force or Power, > one body exerts upon another, in order to make it moves 
Impelling Force or Power, j and that, whether it produces or generates motion by this 
endeavour or not ; and the quantity of this impelling power may be meafured either by 
its being a weight of itfelf, or by being counterbalanced by a weight. It may alio act 
either immediately upon the body to be moved, fo that if motion is the cdnfequence, 
they move with the fame velocity ; and that, either by a fimple contact, or by being 
drawn as by a cord, or pufhed as by a ftaff*: or it may act by the intervention of a lever 
or other mechanic inftrument, in which the velocity of the body to be moved may be 
very difierent from the velocity of the impelling power or mover ; but in comparing 
thesn, the impelling powers muft be reduced according to the proportional velocities of 
the mover and moved ; or, in levers of different lengths, they may be qompared by a 
Aandard length of lever, which is the method taken in the fubfequent rcafoning upon 
the preceding experiments. An impelling power, therefore, confiding of a double weight; 
or requiring a double weight to counter-balance it, when acting with equal kvers^ is a 
double impelling power, or an impelling power of double the intcnfity. 



Observations and Deductions from the preceding Experiments. 

ift. By the firft experiment it appears, that the mechanic power employed, con- 
fiding of 8 ounces in the fcale, deliberately defcending (by 5 turns of the bigger barrel) 
.through a perpendicular fpace 25^ inches, will reprefent the quantity of mechanic power 
which caufes the two heavy bodies, from a ftate of reft, to acquire a velocity, fuch as 
to carry them equably through 20 circumferences of their circle of reyoludon in the 
fpace-of 29^^; and that the timejji. which the mechanic power produced this effedt was 
iV^I, as appears by colum^ 6th. And this ipcchanic power we fhaU exprefs; by dhe 

number 



* t . 



APPMED TD BOI>IES AT REST. 89^ 

number 002, the product of the numbei* of ounces in the fcale multiplied by the inches 
in its perpendicular defcent, for 8 x 254 = 202. 

2dly, By the fecond experiment, as 10 turns of the fmaller barrel arc equal to the 
^ fame perpendicular height as 5 turns of the bigger, it follows, that the fame mechanic 
power, viz. 202, afking upon the fame heavy bodies to accelerate them, produces the 
very fanlc efFcft in generating motion in the bodies as it did before, viz. 20 revolutions 
in 29^^^, the fmall difference of ^ of a fecond being no more than may reafonably be 
attributed to the unavoidable errors arifing from friftion of the roachine, want of per- 
feft accuracy in its meafures, refiftance of the air, and imperfeflions in the obfcrva- 
tions themfelves, which muft not only be allowed for in this, but the reft ; but as riic 
impelling power is adting here Upon a lever of but half the length, and. confcqucntly, 
but half the intenfity, when referred to the bodies to be moved, it takes juft double 
the time to generate the fame velocity therein.. 

» 

Deduction. It appears from hence, that the fame mechanic power is capable of 
producing the fame velocity in a given body, whether it is applied fo as to produce it 
in a greater or Icflcr. time 5 but that the time taken to produce a given velocity, by an 
uniformly continued aflion, is in a fimple inverfc proportion of the intenfity of the. 
impulfive power. 

• * • • 

jdly. The third experiment being made with 2^ turns of the lefTer barrel, the 
lame weight in the fcale of 8 ounces defcending only one quarter part of the former 
perpendicular, the mechanic power employed will be only one quarter part of the forhier, 
vix. 50J} but as one quarter part of the mechanic power produces half of the former 
velocity in the heavy bodies; that is, they make 20 revolutions in 58^^^; that is, 
nearly 10 revolutions in 2^^; we may conclude, in thia. inftance,. that the mechanic 
power,, employed in producing motion^ is as the Iquarc of the velocity produced in 
die. fame body j and that the velocity produced is as the time that an impelling power, 
of the fame intenfity, continues to aft upon it, as appears by the near agreement of 
numbers 2 and 3, column 6th. 

4thly, In the fourth expcrim<*nt, the apparatus is the fame as the firft, only here 
the weight in the fcale is 32 ovnces; that is> the impelling power is the quadruple of 
die firft, and hereby a double velocity is given to the bodies i for they make 20 re- 
voludons in 14^^ which is a fmail matter Icfs than half the time, taken up in making. 
20 revolutions in the firft experiment. It alfo appears, that the velocity acquired is 

N fimply 






90 ON MECHANIC POWERiS, 

(imply as the impellihg power compounded with the time of its aftion : for a quadruple 
impulGon acting for ^" inftcad of 14^^ generates a double velocity, while the mechanic 
power employed to generate it is quadruple, for 32x25^=808. And here the me* 
chanic power employed being four times greater than the firft, it holds here alfo, 
that the mechanic power, to be neccflarily employed, is as the fquare of the velocity 
to be generated ; that is, in the fame proportion as turned out in the third experi* 
ment, where the mechanic power employed was only a quarter part of the firft. 

fthly, The fifth and fixth experiments were made with a mechanic power four times 
greater than thofe employed in numbers 2 and 3 relpectively ; and fince the fame de- 
ductions refult from hence as from numbers 2 and 3, they are additional confirmations 
of the conclufions drawn from them and from the laft article. 

6thly, In the feventh experiment, the difpofition of the apparatus is the fame as 
number i, only here the bodies are placed upon the arms at the half-length; from 
whence it appear3i that the fame mechanic power ftill produces the fame velocity in 
the fame bodies; for though 20 revolutions were performed in 14!'^ (fee column 7) 
which is nearly half the time that 20 revolutions were performed in the firft experi- 
ment J yet, fince the circles in which the bodies revolved in the feventh are only of 
half the circumference as thofe of number i, it is obvious, that the abfolute velocity 
acquired by the moving bodies in the two cafes is equal. But, by column 6th, the 
time in which it was generated is only half; yet, notwithftanding, this will coincide 
with the former conclufions, if the intenfity of the impelling power is compounded 
therewith ; for, though the barrel was the fame with the fame number of turns as in 
number i, and therefore the lever the fame, by which the impelling power acted, yet, 
as the bodies, upon which this lever was to act, were placed upon a lever of only half 
the length from the centre, the impelling power acting by the firft lever, would act 
upon the fecond with double the intenfity, according to the known laws of mechanics j 
that is, it would require a double weight oppofing the bodies, to prevent their moving, 
in order to balance it. An impulfive power, therefore, of double the intenfity, acting 
for half the time, produces the fame effect in generating motion, as an impulfive power^ 
of half the intenfity, acting for the whole time. 

7thly, The eighth and ninth experiments afford the fame deductions and confirmir 
tions relative to the feventh experiment, that the fifth and fixth do refpecting the 
fourth, and that the fecond and third do refpecting the firft ^ and firbm the near agree- 
ment 



f. mk 



APPUED TO BODIES AT REST. 91 

mcnt of the whole, when the ncceflary allowanocs before mentioned are made, together 
with fome fmall inequality arifing from the mechanical power loft by the difference of 
the motion given by gravity to the weight in the fcale : I fay, from thcfc agreements, 
under the very different mechanical powers applied, which were varied in the pro- 
portion of I to 1 6, we may fafely conclude, that this is the univerfal law of nature, 
refpecting the capacities of bodies in motion to produce mechanical effects, and the 
quantity of mechanic power neceffary to be employed to produce or generate different 
velocities (the bodies l^eing fuppofed equal in their quantity of matter) ; that the 
mechanic powers to be expended are as the fquares of the velocities to be generated, 
and vice versd ; and that the fimplc velocities generated are as the impelling power 
compounded with, or multiplied by, the time of its action^ and vice ver^d. 

We (hall, perhaps, form a ftill clearer conception of the relation between velocities 
produced, and the quantity of mechanic power required to produce them j together 
with the collateral circumftanccs attending, by which thefe propofitions, feemingly 
two, are reconciled and united, by ftating the following popular elucidation, which 
indeed was the original idea that occurred to me on confidering this fubject ; to put 
which to an experimental proof gave birth to the foregoing apparatus and experi- 
ments« 

Suppoie then a large iron ball of lO feet diameter, turned truly fpherical, and ,fet 
upon an extended plane of the fame metal, and truly level. Now, if a man begins to 
pulh at it, he will find it very refifting to motion at firft ; but, by continuing the impulfe, 
lie will gradually get it into motion, and having nothing to refift it but the air, he will, 
by continuing his efforts, at length get it to roll almoft as &ft as he can run. Suppofe 
jiow> in the firft minute he gets it rolled through a fpace of one yard ; by this motion, 
proceeding from reft (fimilar to what happens to falling bodies) it would continue to 
roll forward at the rate of two yards per minute, without further help ; but fuppofing 
him to continue his endeavours, at the end of another minute he will have given it a. 
velocity capable of carrying it through a fpace of two yards more, in addition to the 
Ibrmery that is^ at the rate of four yards per minute s and at the end of the third 
minute^ he has again added an equal increafe V velocity, and made it proceed at the 
rate of fix yards per minute i and fo on, increafing its velocity at the rate of two yards 
in every minute*. The mani therefore, in the fpace of every minute exerts an equal 
impulfe upon the ball,, and generates an equal increafe of movement correipondent to 
tlie definition of Sir Isaac Newton.. But let us fee what happens befides : the man» icl 
the fijit minute^, has moved but one yard from where he fet outs buc he muft. in the 

ftcondt 



9:2 ON MECHANIC POWERS, 

fccond minute move two yards more, in order to keep up with the ball; and as he ex- 
erted an impulle upon it, fo as at the end of the fecond niinute to have given it an ad- 
ditional velocity of the two yards, he muft alfo in this time have gradually changed its 
velocity from the rate of two yards per minute to that of four, and the ipace, that he 
will of confcquence have aftually been obliged to go through in the fecond minute, will 
be according to the mean of the extremes of velocity at the beginning and end thereof, 
that is, three -yards in the fecond minute; fo that being one yard from his original place 
at the begining of the fecond minute, at the end of it he will have moved the fum of 
the jouraies of the firft and fecond minute, that is, in the whole four yards from his origi- 
nal place. As he has now generated a velocity in the^ ball of four yards per minute, 
the third minute he muft travel four yards to keep up with the ball, and one more in 
generating the equal increment of velocity ; fo that in the third minute, he muft travel five 
yards to keep up the fame impelling power upon the ball that he did in the firft minute in 
travelling one, fo that thefe five yards in the third minute, added to the four yards that he 
had travelled in the two preceding minutes, fets him at the end of the third minute nine 
yards from whence he fet out, having then given tlie ball a velocity capable of carrying 
it uniformly forward at the race of fix yards per .minute, as before ftated. We may now 
leave the further purfnit of thefe proportions, and fee how the account ftands. He 
generated a velocity of two yards per minute in the firft minute, the fquare of which is 
four, when he had moved but one yard from his place; and he had generated a velocity 
of fixyai'ds/^cr minute, the fquare of which is thirty-fix, at the end of the third minute, 
when he had travelled nine yards from his place. Now, fince the fquare of the velocity, 
generated at the end of the firft minute, is to that of the velocity generated at the end of 
the third minute, as 4 : ^^^ that is, as 1:9; and fince the (paces, moved through by the 
man to communicate thefe velocities, are alfo as i : 9, it follows, that the ipaces through 
which the man moft travel, in order to generate thefe velocities refpeftively (prefcrving 
the impelling power perfeflly equal), muft be as the fquarcs of the velocities com- 
municated to the ball ; for, if the man was t;o be brought back again to his original 
place by a mechanical power, equally exerted upon the man equally rcfifting, this would 
be the meafure of what the man has done in order to give a motion to the ball. It there- 
fore diredtly follows, conformably to what has been deduced from the experiments, that 
the mechanic power that muft of necefiJcy be employed in giving different degrees of 
velocity to the fanac body, muft be as the fquare of that velocity ; and if the converfe of 
this propofition did not hold, viz. that if a body in motion, in being ftopped, would not 
produce a mechanical e6feft equal or proportional to the fquare of its velocity, or to liic 
mechanical power employed in producing it, the efFcd would not corfcfpond with its 
producing caufe« 

Thus 



APPLIED TO BODIJ^S AT REST. ©3 

Thus the confcqucnccs of generating motion upon a level plane cxaftly corrcfpond 
with the generating of motion by gravity ; viz. that though in two feconds of time the 
equal impulfive power of gravity gives twice the velocity to a body that it does in one 
fecond^ yet this collateral circumftance attends it, that at the end of the double time, 
in confequence of the velocity acquired in the firfl half, the body has fallen from where 
it fa forward through four times the perpendicular 5 and therefore, though the velocity 
is only doubled, yet four times the mechanical power has been confumed in producing 
it, as four times the mechanical power muft be expended in bringing up the fallen body 
to its firit place. 

This then appers to be the foundation, not only of the difputes that h^ve arifen, but 
of the miftakes that have been macie, in the application of the di^rent definitions of 
quantity of motion -, that while thoie that have adhered to the definition of Sir Isaac 
NewtoVj have complained o( their adverfaries, in not confidering th^ time in which 
dSkiks are produced^ they them&lvjes haye not always taken into (he account (he ipaqe 
that the impcUiog powiqr is obliged to praYeltthffpugh^ in, producing tlve difTerent degrees 
of velocity. It feems^ the vcfiorc 3 thzt^ wit^ou^ taking ji^ the cc41ateral .circuaiftaAi:;^ s 
both of time and fpace, the terms, quantity of motion, monie?itum, and force of bodies 
in motion, are abfolutely indefinite ; and that they cannot be fo eafily, diftincdy, and 
fundamentally compared, as by having recourfe to the common meafure, viz. mechanic 
power. 

From the whole of what has been inveftigated, it therefore appears, that time, pro- 
perly fpeaking, has nothing to do with the production of mechanical effects, otherwife than 
as, by equally flowing, it becomes a common meafure; fo that, whatever mechanical 
effect is found to be produced in a given time, the uniform continuance of the adion of 
the fame mechanical power will, in a double time, produce two fuch effects, or twice that 
effect. A mechanical power, therefore, properly fpeaking, is meafured by the whole of 
its mechanical effect produced, whether that effect is produced in a greater or a leflcr 
time ; thus, having treafured up 1000 tuns of water, which I can let out upon the overfhot 
wheel of a mill, and defcending through a perpendicular of 20 feet, this power applied 
to proper mechanic inftruments, will produce ascertain effect, that is, it will grind a cer- 
tain quantity of corn ; and that at a certain rate of expending it, it will grind this corn 
in an hour. But fuppofe the mill equally adapted to produce a propordonable effect, by 
the application of a greater impulfive power as with a lefs; then, if I let out the water 
twice as fafl upon tAe wheel, it will grind the corn twice as faft, and both the water will 
be expended and th^corn ground in half an hour. Here the fame mechanical effect is 

produced i 



94 ON MECHANIC POWERS, &c. 

produced ; viz. die grinding a given quantity of corn, by the fame mechanical power^ 
viz. looo tuns of water defcending through a given perpendicular of 20 feet, and yet 
this effect is in one cafe produced in half the time of the other. What time, therefore, 
has to do in the bufinefs is this : let the rate of doing the bufinefs, or producing the 
effect, be what it will, if this rate is uniform, when I have found by experiment what is 
done in a given time, then, proceeding at the fame rate, twice the effect will be produced 
in twice the time, on fuppoficion that I have a fupply of mechanic power to go on with. 
Thus 1000 tuns of water, defcending through 20 feet of perpendicular, being, as has 
been (hewn, a given mechanic power, let me expend it at what rate I will, if when this is 
expended, I muft wait another hour before it be renewed, by the natural flow of a liver^ 
or otherwife, I can then only expend twelve fuch quantities of power in 24 hours ^ but 
ifj while I am expending 1000 tuns in one hour, the dream renews me the fame quantity, 
then I can expend 24 fuch quantities of power in 24 hours ; that is, I can go on con« 
tinually at that rate, and the product or effect will be in proportion to time, which is the 
common meafure $ but the quantity of mechanic power ariflng from the flow of the 
two rivers, compared by taking an eqgal portion of time, is double in the one Co the 
other, though each has a mill, that, when going, will grind an equal quantity of com ia 
«nhour« 




KEW 



NEW FUNDAMENTAL EXPERIMENTS, jee. 



9i 



NEW Wndamental Experiments upon the Collision of Bodies, by Mr. John 

Smeaton, F. R. S. 

Read before the Royal Society, April i8th, 1782. 

TT is univerfally acknowledged, that the firft fimple principles of fcience cannot be 
-^ too critically examined, in order to their being firmly eftablilhed ; more efpecially 
thole which relate to the practical and operative parts of mechanics, upon which much 
of t|)e acdve bufinefs of mankind depends. A fentiment of this kind occalioned the 
preceding tract upon Mechanic Power. What I have now to offer was intended as a 
fupplement thereto, and the experiments were, in part, tried ; but the completion 
thereof was deferred at the time of its firft publication, pardy from want of leifure ; 
pardy to avoid too great a length of the paper itfelf i and pardy to avoid the bringing 
forward too many points at once. 

My prefent purpofe is to fhew, that the true doctrine of the collision of bodies hangs 
as it were upon the . fame hook, as the doftrine of the gradual genendon of mouon 
from reft, confidered in that paper : that is, that whether bodies are put into gradual 
motion, and uniformly .accelerated from reft to any given velocity ; or are put in modon, 
in an inftantaneous manner, when bodies of any kind ftrike one another ; the motion, 
or fum of the motions produced, has the fame relation to mechanic power therein de« 
fined, which is ncceflary to produce the motion defired. To prove this, and at the fame 
time to (hew fome capital miftakes in principle, which have been assumed as indifput* 
able truths by men of great learning, is the reafon of my now purfuing the lame 
fubjefb. 

I do not mean to point out the particular miftakes which have been made by particular 
men, as that would lead me into too great a length : I fhall therefore content myfelf 
with obferving, that the laws of coUifion, which have been inveftigated by mathematical 
philofophers, are principally of three kinds -, viz. thofe relating to bodies perfecdy 
clastic ; to bodies perfectly unelaftic^ and perfectly soft ; and to bodies perfecdy un- 
elaftic, and perfecdy hard. To avoid prolixity, I (hall confider in each^ only the fim- 
pie cafe of two bodies which are equal in weight or quantity of matter ftriking one 
another. Refpecting thofe which are perfecdy elaftic, it is.univerlaUy agreed^ that when 
two fuch bodies ftrike one another^ no motion is loft s but that in all cafes, what is loft 

b7 



90 NEW FUNDAMENTAL EXPERIMENTS 

by one is acquired by the other: and hence, that if an elaftic body in motion ftrikes 
another at reft, upon the ftroke the former will be reduced to a ftatc of reft, and the 
lacier will fly off with an equal velocity. ' 



Jk 



In like manner, if a non-elaftic sx>ft body ftrikcs another at reft, they neither of them 
remain at reft, but proceed together from the point of coUifion with exactly one half of 
the velocity that the firft had before the ftroke j this is alfo univerfally allowed to be 
true, and is fully proved by every good experiment upon the fubject. 

Kefpecting the third fpecics of body, that «, thofe that are non-elaftic and yet perfectly 
hard : the lawi of motion relating to them, as laid down by one fpecies of philofbpherSj 
have been rejected by another 5 the latter alkdging, that there are no fuch bodies to be 
found in nacure whereon to try the experinfientj but thofe who have laid down and 
afligncd the doctrine that would attend the collifion of bodies, of this kmd (if they 
could be fuuiid) have univerfiilly agreed, that if a non-elaftic hard body was to ftrike 
another of tlic fame kind at reft, that, in the fame manner as is agreed concerning non- 
elaftic foft bodies, they neither of them would remain at reft, but would in like manner 
proceed from tw point of collifion-, with exactly one half of the velocity that the firft 
had before the ft* "ke : in ftiort, they lay it dowa as a rule attending all non-elaftic tKkfies, 
whether hard or fofr, that the velocity after the ftroke- will be the feme in both, Viz. on% 
A^r//' of the velocity of the original ftriking body. 

■ Here is therefore the affumption of a principle, which in reality fs proved by no 
experiment, nor by any fair deduction of reafonthat I know of; vi2. that the velocity 
of non-elaftic hard bocRes after the ftroke muft be the fame as that refulting from, the 
ftroke of non-elaftic soft bodies ; and the queftion now is, whether it be true or nor? 

Here it may be very properly afl^ed, what ill effects ean refult to Jjractical men, if 
philoibphers fhould rcafon wrong concerning the effects of -what docs not exift in 
jaature, fince the practical men can have no- fuch materials to work upon, or mif- 
jtidgcof? But it is anfwered, that they vA\o infer an equality of cflfects between the 
two forts, may from thence be mifltd themftlvess arid in confcquence miflead practical 
men in their reaibnings and concluftons concbrnrnrg the fort with which they have 
abundant concern, to wit, the non-elaftic »cift iodies, of which water is onei which 
tbty have much tor do with ia their daily practice. 

Previous 



UPON THE COLLISION OF BODIES, 07 

Previous to tlic trying my experiment on mills, I never had doubted the truth of 
the doctrine, that the fame velocity rcfulted from the ftroke of both forts of non- 
claftic bodies j but the trial of thofe experiments made me clearly fee, at Icaft the in- 
conclufivenefs, if not the falfity of that doctrine : bccaufe I found a rcfult which I did 
not expect to have arifen from either fort ; and for the which, when it appeared from 
experiment, I could fee a fubftantial reafen why it fhould take place in one fort, and 
that it was impoffible that it could take place in the other s for if it did, the bodies 
could not have been perfectly hardy which would be contrary to the hypothefis : of 
this deduction I have given notice in my faid tract on mills, page 49. The effect 
thtnttf ore ^f overshot whetUy 4*C' 

It may alfo be faid, that fince we have no bodies perfecdy elaftic, or perfectly 
unelaftk: and soft^ why fhould we expect bodies perfectly unelaftic and hard f Why 
may not the effects be fuch as (hould refult from a fuppofition of their being imper- 
fectly elastic joined with their being imperfectly hard ? But here I muft obferve, 
that the fuppofition appears to be a contradiction in terms. 

We have bodies which are fo nearly perfectly elaftic, that the laws may be very 
well deduced and confirmed by them ; and the fame obtains with refpect to non-elaftic 
soft bodies ; but concerning bodies of a mixed nature, which arc by far the greateft 
number, fo far as they are wanting in elafticity, they are soft and bruise^ yields or 
lettoe a mark in collifion j and fo far as they are not perfectly foft they are elaftic, 
and obferve a mixture of the law relative to each 3 but imperfecdy elaftic bodies, 
imperfecdy bard, come in reality under the same description as the former mixed 
bodies : for fo far as they are imperfectly hard they are (oft, and either bruise and' 
yields or leave a mark in the ftroke ; and fo far as they want perfect elafticity, they 
are non-eU^ici that is to fay, they are bodies imperfedly elaftic, and imperfectly 
f6ft ; and in faft I have never yet feen any bodies but what come under this defcription. 
It feems, therefore, that refpe6ting the hardness of bodies they differ in degrees of it, 
in proportion as rfiey have a greater degree of tenacity or cohefion; that is, arc 
further removed from perfect foftnefs, at the fame time that their elaftic fprings, fo 
fer as they reach*, arc very ftiff*; and hence we may (by the way) conclude, that the 
fame mechanic power that is required to change the figure in a small degree of thofe 
bodies that have the popular appellation of hard bodies^ would change it in a great 
^ degree in diofe bodies that approach towards foftnefs, by having a vfm&ll degree df 
tenacity or cohefion. In the former kind we may rank the harder kinds of cast irony* 
and in the latter, soft tempered clay. 

O While 



»8 NEW FUNDAMENTAL EXPERIMENTS 

While tliC philofophical world was divided by the difpute about the old Md new opinion^ 
as ic was called, concerning the powers of bodies in motion, in proportion to their 
different velocities j thofe who held the old opinion contending, that it was as th^ 
velocity nmpli/^ alked thofe of the new, how, upon their principles, they would get^rid 
of the conclufions arifing from the doftrinc of unelaftic perfectly hard i>odies ? ThcV:, 
replied, they found no fuch bodies in nature, and therefore did not concern them(elveS|«'^ 
about them. On the other hand, thofe of the new opinion^afked thofe of the old, how 
they would account for the cafe of non-elaflic foft bodies^ whefe, according to thenni, 
the whole motion loft by the ftriking body was retained in the t^ after the ftroke (the 
two bodies moving together with the half velocity.), though the two non-elaftic bo4tfrs. 
had been bruifed and changed their figure by the ftroke ; for, if no motion was loft'^ 
the change of figure muft be an effect without a caufe ? To obviate this, thofe of the 
old opinion ferioufly fet about proving, that th^ bodies might change their figure, with-^ 
out any lo(s of motion in either of the ftriking bodies. 

Neither of thefe anfwers have appeared to me fatisfactory, efpccially fincc my mill 
experiments : for, with refpect to the firft, it is no proper argument to urge the im- 
pollibility of finding the proper material for an experiment, in anfwer to a conclufion 
drawn from an abftract idea. On the other hand, if it can be fhewn, that the figure of 
a body can be changed, without a p(^zi;er, then, by the fame law, . we might be able to 
make z forge hammer work upon a mafs of foft iron, without any other power than 
that neceflary to overcome the friction, refiftance, and original vU intrtics^ of the parts 
of the machine to be put in motion : for, as no progrellive motion is given the mafs of 
iron by the hammer (it being fupported by the anvil), no power can be expended that 
way i and if none is loft to the hammer from changing the figure of the iron, which is 
the only effect produced, then the whole power muft refide in the hammer, and it would 
jump back again to the place from which it fell, juft in the fame manner as if it fell 
upon a body perfectly elaftic, upon which, if it did fall, the cafe would really happen : 
the power, therefore, to work the hammer would be the fame, whether it fell upon 
an elaftic or non-elaftic body ; an idea fo very contrary to all experience, and even 
apprehenGon, of both the philofopher and vulgar artift^ that I (hall here leave it to its 
own condemnation. 

As nothing, however, is fo convincing to the mind as experiments obvious to the 
(erifes^ I was very defirous of contriving an experiment in point, and as I faw no hopes 
of finding matter to make a direct experiment, I turned my mind towards an indirect * 

one; 



UPON 



09 



enc : fo circumfcribcd, however, as to prove incontcftably, that the rcfuk of the ftrokc 
of two non-elaftic perfcftljr hard bodies could not be the fame as would refult from the 
collifion of two foft ones ; that is, if it can be bonafde proved, that one hat/of the 
original power is loft in the ftroke of foft bodies by the change of figure (as was very 
ftrongly fuggefted by the mill experiments) ; then fmce no fuch lofs can happen in the 
collifion of bodies perfeftly hard, the refult and confequcnce of fuch a ftroke muft be 
different. ^ ^ 

The confcquence of*a ftroke of bodies perfeftly hard, but void of elafticity, muft 
doubtlefstip different from that of bodies perfedly elastic: for having no fpring the 
body at reft could not be driven off* with the velocity of the ftriking body, for that is 
the confcquence of the a£tion pf the fpring" or elaftic parts between them, as will be 
ftiewn in the refult of the experiments j the ftriking body will therefore not be ftopped, 
and as the motion it lofes muft be communicated to the other, from the equality of 
action and re-action^ they will both proceed together, with an equal velocity, as in the 
cafe of non-elaftic foft bodies: the queftion, therefore, that remains is, what that 
velocity must be ? It muft be greater than that of the non-elaftic foft bodies, becaufe 
there is no mechanical power loft in the ftroke. It muft be lefs than that of the ftriking 
body, becaufe, if equal, inftead of a loss of motion by the collifion it will be doubled. 
If, therefore, non-elaftic foft bodies lofe half their motion, or mechanical power, by 
change of figure in collifion, and yet proceed together with half the velocity, and the 
non-elaftic hard bodies can lofe none in any manner whatever ; then, as they muft move 
together, their velocity muft be fuch as to prefcrvc the equality of the mechanic power,- 
unimpaired^ after the ftroke the fame as it was before it. 

For example, let the velocity of the ftriking body before the ftroke be ao, and its 
mafs or quantity of matter 8 ; then, according to the rule deduced from the experiments 
in the traft on Mechanic Power (fee exp. 3d and 4th) that power will be expreflcd 
by 20 X 20 = 400, which x 8 = 3200; and if half of it is loft in the ftrokc, in the 
cafe of non-elaftic foft bodies, it will be reduced to 1600; which -^ 16 the double 
quimtity of matter^ will give ipo for the fquare of their velocity ; the fquare root of 
which being I o> will be the velocity of the two non-elaftic foft bodies after the ftroke, 
being juft one. half of the original velocity, as it is conftandy found to be. But in the 
non-elaftic hard bodies^ no power being loft in the flxoke, the mechanic power will re- 
giain after it, as before it, = 3200 5 this, in like manner, being divided by 16, the 
double quanoty of: matter^ will give 200 for the fquare of the velocity/ i^e fquare root 

of 



:%. 









. «s 



100 



NEW FUNDAMENTAL EXPERI^«EN^B 



of which is I4«]4> &c. for their velocity after the ftroke^ which is to ip, the rel 

of the non-elaftic foft bodies after the ftroke^ as the fquare root of 2 to ij or as the 

diagooal of a fquare to its fide* 



Itremains^ therefore^ now to be proved, that precifely half of the mechanic power it 
lost in the coUifion of non-elaftic foft bodies 1 for which purpofe my^ mind fliggefttd the 
following reBe(5lions. In the coliiGon of elaftic bodies the e^ect feemingly inftantaneous^ 
is yet performed in time ; during which time the natural fprings rcfidiiig in elaftic bodies, 
and which conftitute them fuch, are bent or forced, till the motion of the ftriking body 
is divided between itfelf and the body at reft ; and in this (late the two bodies would 
then proceed together, as in the cafe of non-elaflic foft bodies; but as the iprings witt 
immediately reftore themfelves in an equal time, and with the fame degree of impntshe 
force, wherewith they were bent in this re^action^ the motion that remained 11^ the 
ftriking body will be totally deftroyed, and the total exertion of the two fprings, conv- 
munlcated to the original refting body, wtU caufe it to fly off with the fame velocity 
wherewith it was ftruck. 



Upon this idea, if we coukl conftruct a couple of bodies in fuch a way that they 
fbouki either act as bodies perfectly elaftic ; or that their fprings fhould at pleafure be 
hooked up, retained, or prevented from reftortng tbeat&lves, when' at their extreme 
degree of bending ; and if the bodies under thefe circumftances observed the laws of 
collifion of non^daflic foft bodies> then it would be proved, that one k^ of the rttt^ 
chanical power> refiding in the ftriking body, would be loft in the action of coUifion ; 
becaufe the impulfive force or power of the fpring in its reftitution beii^ cut off, or 
fufpended from afting, which is equal to the impulfive force or power to bend it (and 
which alone has been employed to communicate morion from one body to the other), 
it would make it evident^ that one half of the impulfive force is loft in the actidn^ 
as the other half remains locked up in the fprings, it alfo follows, as a callatend eir*^ 
cumstanccy that be the impuUivt power of the iprings what it may from firft to hStj yet 
as one half of the ihncof the action is by this means cut off, in thb &nfe tUo kmA 
follow, that one half of the mechanic power is deftfoyed 1 oc father^ m thi< cafe^ 
remains locked up in the fprings^ capable of being rercsetttd whenever they are ftt 
at liberty^ and of producing a freih mechanical eflfed> equivalent to cfasr xxotibs or 
mechanical power of the two non-elaftic foft bodia after ifactr colfifionu . 

■ * 

Hence we oioft infer, that the quaodty of mechanical power expendieA iii d(f^likcing 
the parts of non-elaftic foft bodies in coUifion^ is exactly the fame as that expended 

ia 



» • 




\ 



UPON THE COLUSION OP BODIES. tOl 

ill bending die iprings of pcrfedHy claftrc bodies } but the difference in the ultimate 
effeft isj that in the non-claftic foft bodies^ the power taken to diQ^ace the parts will 
be totally loft and deftroyed^ as it would require an equal mechanic power to be raifed 
a-freih, and exerted in a contrary dircftion to reftore the parts back again to their 
fbmser places ; whereas^ in the cafe of the elaftic bodies^ the operation of half the 
mechanic power is, as obferved already, only locked up and fufpended, and capable 
of being re^exerted without a further original acceiTion. 

Thefe ideas arofe from the refult of the experiments tried upon the machine de^ 
fciibed in tny faid tvdtct upon mechanic power, and were alfb communicated to my 
very worthy afnd ingenit>us friend William Russel^ Efq. F, R. S* at the fame time 
that I (hewtd him thofe experiments in 1759 ; but the mode of putting this matter to 
a full and fxtr mechanical trial has fince occurred ; and though, fome rough trials, fuf- 
ficient to fliew the effect,^ were made thereon, prior to die offering the Paper On 
Mechanicaf Power to the Society in 1776, yet the machine itfcif I had not leifure to 
complete to my fatis&ction till htely ; Which I mention to apologize fbr the length of 
ome that thc& fpeculations have taken in bringing forward. « 



• JDtscription of the MachiM for Collision. 

Plate VUL Fig^ 1. Ihewi the front of the machine as it appears at reft when fitted 
&r ttfe« 

r 

A is die pedefta^ and A B the pillar, which fiipports the whole, C D are two com* 
pound bodies of about a pound weight each> hoc as nearly equal in weight as may be. 
Thefe bodies are alike in conftruction, which will be more particularly explained by 
fig. 2. Thefe bodies are iufpended by twa white fir rods of about half an inch 
diameter, e f and g h being about four feet long from the point of fufpenfion to the 
centre of the bodies ^ and their fufpenfion is upon th^ crofs piece 1 1, which is mortifed 
du-oi^h, to let the rods pa& with perfect fi-eedom f- and they hang upon tf^o finally 
plates filed to an edge on the under fide, and pafi through the upper part of the rods. 
Their centres are at k and /, and the ed^s being let inta a litde notch, on each fide 
die nM>rtife> the rods are at liberty to vibrate fi'cely upon their refpective points (or 
zathe^.e(%es) of fiiipenfion». and aae determined to one plane of vibration. M N is 
% flat arch of white woo(^ which may be covered with paper^ that the marks there- 
upoa may be mote confpicuous*. ^ 

The 



> 



1X)2 NEW FUNDAMENTAL EXPERIMENTS 

The crofs piece 1 1 is made to project fo far before the pillar, that the bodies ia 
their vibrations may pafs clear of itj without danger of ftriking it ; and alfo the arch 
M N is brought fo far forward as to leave no more than a clearance^ fufficient for the 
rods to vibrate freely without touching it. ^ 

I 

Fig. 2, (hews one of the compound bodies^ drawn of its full fize. A B is a block 

of woodj and about as much in breadth as it is reprefented in height, through a hole 

in which the wood rod C C pafles, and is fixed therein. 

D B reprefents a plate of lead about three-eighths of an inch thick, one on each 
fide, fcrewcd on by way of giving it a competent weight, d^ e f g reprefents the 
edge of a fpringing plate of brais, rendered elaftic by hard hammering ; it is about 
five-eighths of an inch in breadth, and about one^twentieth of an inch thick. It is 
fixed down upon the wooden block at its end £/ B by means of a bridge plate, whofe 
end is (hewn h f, and b fere wed down on each fido of the fpring plate by fcrews, which 
being relaxed the fpring can be taken out at pleafure, and adjufted to its proper 
fituatlon. A: / is a light j^hin flip of a plate, whofe under edge is cut into teeth like a 
fine faw or ratchet, and is attached to the fpring by a pin at Ar, which pafTes through 
it, and alfo through a fmall ftud rivetted into the back part of the fpring, and upon 
which pin, as a centra, it is freely moveable, m n fhews a fmall plate or ftud feen 
edgeways raifed upon the bridge plate, through an hole in which ftud the ratchet 
pafles ; and the lower part of the hole is cut to a cooth fhaped properly to catch the 
teeth of the ratchet, and retain it togethv with the fpring at any degree to which it 
may be fudcfcnly bent j and for this intent it is kept bearing gently downward, by 
means of a wire fpring o p q^ which is in reality double, the bearing part at o being 
femi-circular \ from which branching oflF on each the rod C C, pafles to p, and fixes 
at each end into the wood at q. However, to clear the ratchet, which is necefTarily 
in the middle as well as the rod, the latter is perforated $ and alfo the block is cut 
away, fo far as to fet the mainfpring at e free of all obstacles that would prevent its play 
from the point B. The part fg\& fhewn thicker than the reft, by being covered with 
thin kid leather tight fewed on, to prevent a cert^ jarring that othenvife takes place 
on the meeting of the fprings in coUifion. 

Let us now return to fig. i, the marks upon the arch M N are put on as follows; 
op is an arch of a circle from the centre /, and ^ r an arch of a circle from the 
centre Ar, interfccting each other at S. Now the middle line of the marks t, v, are 
at the fame diftance from the siiddle line at S that the centres A* / are i fo that when 

* • each 



UPON THE COLLISION OF BODIES. 103 

each body hangs in its own free poficion> without bearing againfl: the other> the rod 
e f will cover the mark at /, and the rod g h will cover the mark at v. From the 
point S upon the arches S p and S q refpectively, fet off* points at an equal and 
competent diftance from S each way, which will give the middle of the mark w and 
•r : and upoh the arch S p find the middle point between the mark v and »*, which let 
be jf I and on the other fide, in like manner, upon the arch S q find a middle point 
for the mark z \ then fet off* the diftance S v or S / from y each way, and from ;:: each 
' way; and fi^m thefe points, drawing lines to the refpeAive centres / and. A:, they will 
give the place and pofition of the marks a^ h^ and c, d \ and thus is the machine 
prepared for ufe. 

For Trials on elastic Bodies : • 

For this ufc take out the pins and ratchets from each refpeftively, and the fpringy 
being then at liberty, with* a fhort bit of ftick (fuppofe the fame fizc as the rods) 
turn afide the rod g h with the right hand,' carrying the body D upwards till the ftick 
is upon the mark w^ as fuppofe at O ; th jre -hold it, and withnhe left fet the body C 
perfcftly at reft i in which cafe the rod e f will be over the mark t ; then fuddenly 
withdraw the ftick, in the direction that the rod g h is to follow it, and the Ipring of 
the body D, impigning upon that of the body C, they will be both bent, and alfo 
reftored i and the body C will fly ofl^ and mount till its rod' ef covers the mark x j 
the rod of the ftriking body D remaining at reft upon its proper mark of reft v, till 
the body C returns, when the body D will fly oflT in the fame manners the two 
bodies thus rebounding a number of times, lofing a part of their vibration each time ; 
but fo nearly is the theory of elaftic bodies fulfilled hereby, that the fingle advan- 
tage of originally pufhing the rod g h beyond the mark w^ by the thicknefs of the 
ftick, or its own thickneis, is fufficient to carry the rod of the quiefcent body C com- 
pletely to its mark x. 

There are feveral other experiments which may be iflade with this apparatus, }/i con- 
fimnation of the doArine of the collifipn of elaftic bodies ; which being univerlally 
agreed upon, and well known, it is needlefs further to dwell upon here j but reipefting 
the application to non-elaftic foft bodies, it 4s far more difficult to come at a fitnefs of 
materials for this kind of experiment, than it is for thofe fuppofed perfedly elafticity. 
The conclufions;^ however, may be attsuned with equal certainty. 



For 



I 



t 



104 NEW FUNDAMENTAL EXTBRIMENTS 

Fqt Trials on Non^lastic soft Bodies : 

For this purpofe the ratchets miift be applied and put in ofder as before deicribed« 
and die fprings being both put tx> their point of reftj let thebod^ D1>e put to its mar]( 
tt^ in the fame manner as before defcribedi and the bodjr C to reft. The bodf D bciiy 
let go, and ftriking the body C at rctt, in confequence of the ftroke> the fprings being 
hooked up by the ratchets^ they both move from their refting maiks t, v, relpectirci/ • 
towards M : Now if they both moved together, and the rod e^ covered the mark e, 
and the rod g h covered the mark d at their utmoft limit> then they would tndy <rf)CJ ^ 
the laws of non-elaftic foft bodies ; becaufe their medium afcent would be to the mark J^ 
whi(^ is juft half the angle of afcent to the. mark ^^ but as in this piece of machinerjr, 
though the main or principal fprings are hooked up^ yet every part of them^ and all 
the materials of which they are compofed, and to which they are attached^ have a 
degree^ or more properly fpeaking, a certwi compais of elasticity^ which, as fuch, ia 
perfeAj and no motion is loft thereby. 

We muft not, therefore, expect the two compound bodies after the ftroke to ftjck 
together without ieparating, as would be the cafe with bodies truly non-elaftic and fok % 
but that from the elafticity they are pofTefTed of, they will by rebounding be feparated i 
but that elafticity being perfect, can occafion no lofs of motion to the fum of the two 
bodies ; (o that if the body C afcends as much above its mark c as the body D falls (horc 
of its mark d^ then it will follow, that their medium afcent will ftill be to the mark z^ 
as it ought ta. have been, had they been truly non-elaftic foft bodies i and this, ia 
reality, is truly the cafe in the experiment, as nearly as it can be difcerned. 

After a few vibrations, by the rubbing of the fprings againft one another, they are 
ibon brought to reft ; and here they would always rest had they been truly and pro-* 
perly perfect non-elaftic foft bodies ; but here, as in the cafe of thefe bodies, by a 
change of the figure and fituatioo of the component parts, there is expended one half 
of the mechanical power of the firft mover, yet in this cafe the other half is not lost^ 
but suspended ready to be re-<xerted whenever it is fet at liberty ; and that it is really 
and bon/ijide one halfj and neither more nor Jefs appears from this uncontrovcrted fimpic 
principle, that the power of reftitution of a perfeA fpring is exa&ly equal to the power 
that bends it. And this may, in a certain degree, be Ihewn to be fa£t by experiment^ 
if there were any need of fuch a proof; for if, when the bodies are at reft after the laft 
experiment, the two rods are lalhcd together at the bottom with a bit of thread, and then 

» • the 



UPON tME COLOSION Ot^ 60l^ms. 1^ 

the fatchets unpinned and r^mdved i on cutting the thMad with i pair df feiflEPs thty 9i\\l 
each of them rebound^ C ttmards M and D tdwards N, add if th(?y rebounded t*efpec-i> 
tively CO xs and y, the mechanical pow^r cxeited Woijld be ihi (ahie i^ it was afcet^ 
the ftrokej when the mean of their two afe^nts was llp^fo tht mUMt Z ; blit herfc it is 
not to be eapeffccd/ becaufe not only \ki motion Ibft by the friftienn of the fatchiscs is tb 
be dedufledj becaufe it had the effect 6f real non-^lafiioity ; but alfd the elafticity that 
leparated them in the ftrokci which was loft in the vibrations that fuccecded ; neither of 
which hindered the mean afcent to be to ^ ; but yet^ under all thefe difadvantages in 
tht machine (if not tinreafonably ill made) the rod ey*will afc6nd to d, Md g h to ^ : 
and hence I infer, as a pofitive truths that in the coUifion of non-eiaftic (bft bodies^ oHc 
hnlf of the mechanic pcmer tesidittg in the striking Iddy i> tost in thtstlrCkt. 

Refpecting bodies unelaftic and perfccriy hard, wc muft iriftf, that flnce we art ilri- 
avoidably led to a concluiion concerning thttciy which contfkdicts What h efteeified a 
truth capable of the ftrictcft demonftrarion ; viz. that the Velocity of the cCnfrfc 6f 
gravity of no fyftem of bodies can be changed by any collifion betwixt one another^ 
ibmething muft be affumed that involves a contradiction. This perfectly holds^ ac- 
cording to all the eftablilhed rules^ both of perfecdy elaftic and perfccdy non-elaftic 
soft bodies s rules which muft fail in the perfedlly non-elaftic hard bodies, if their 
velocity after the ftroke is to the velocity of the ftriking body as one is to the fquare 
root of 2 s for then the centre of gravity of the two bodies will by the ftroke acquire a 
velocity greater than the centre of gravity the two bodies had t>efore the ftroke in that 
proportion^ which is proved thus. 

At the outfet of the ftriking body, the centre of gravity of the two bodies in our cafe 
will be cxacdy in the middle between the two; and when they meet it will have moved 
from their half diftance to their point of contact, fb the velocity of the centre of 
gravity before the bodies meet will be exacdy one half of the velocity of the ftriking 
body y and, therefore, if the velocity of the ftriking body is 2, the velocity of the 
centre of gravity of both will be one. After the ftroke, as both bodies are fuppofed 
to move in contact, the velocity of the centre of gravity will be the fame as that of the 
bodies; and as their velocity is proved to be the fquare root of 2, the velocity of their 
centre of gravity will be increafed from i • to the fquare root of 2 i that is, from i . to 
1.414, tec. 

The fair inference from thefe contradictory conclufions therefore is, that an unelaftic 
hard body (perfecdy fo). is a repugnant idea, and contains in itfclf* a contradicrion j for, 

P - to 



106 FUNDAMENTAL EXPERIMENtS, 8cc. 

to make it agree with the fair conclufions that may be drawn oti each Gde, from clear 
premifes/we (hall be obliged to define its properties thus : that in the ftroke of unekftic 
hard bodies they cannot possibly lose any mechanic power in the ftroke j becaufe no 
other impreflion is made than the communication of motions and yet they 7nust lose a 
quantity of mechanic power in the ftroke; becaufe, if they do not, their common cen- 
tre of gravity, as above fliewn, will acquire an increase of velocity by their ftroke 
upon each other. 

In alike manner the idea of ^ perpetual motion perhaps, at firft light, may not 
appear to involve a contradiction in terms; but we (hall be obliged to confefs that it 
does, when, on examining its requifites for execution, we find we (hall want bodies 
having the following properties ; that when they are made to ascend againft gravitation 
their abfolutc weight fhall be less; and when they descend by graviution (through an 
equal fpace) their abfolute weight (haU be greater; which, according to all we know of 
nature, is a repugnant or contradictory idea. 



A DESCRIPTION 



A DESCRIPTION OF A NEW TACKLE, &c. 107 



A DESCRIPTION of a new Tackle or Combination of PuUics, by Mr. 

John Smeaton. 

Philosophical Transactions, Vol. XLVII. 

Read June 11, npHE axis in peritrochio, and the tackle of pullies, are the only 
1752. A mechanic powers, which can, with convenience, be applied to the 
moving of large weights, when the height, to which they are intended to be raifed, is 
confiderable. The excellence of the former is, its working with little fridtion ^ that of 
the latter, its being eafily moved from place to place, and applied e.r tempore^ as 
occafion requires; but when the weights are very large they are ufed in conjundion. 

The prefcnt methods of arranging pullies in their blocks may be reduced to two *. 
The firft confifts in placing them one by the fide of another, upon the fame pin j the 
other in placing them direftly under one another, upon feparate pins. But in each of 
thcfe methods an inconvenience arifes, if above three pullies arc framed in one block. 
For, according to the firft method, if above three pullies are placed by the fide of 
one another, as the laft part of the rope by which the draught is made (or, as it is 
commonly called, the fall of the tackle) muft neceflarily be upon the outfide pulley or 
Ihievc i the difference of the friftion of the pulley will produce {q great a tendency to 
pull the block awry, that as much will be loft by the rubbing of the fhieves againft 
the block, on account of its obliquity, as will be got by increafing the number of 
pullies. 

The fecond method is free from this objcSion j but, as the lengiTi of the two blocks, 
taken together, muft be equal to the fum of the diameters of the pullies, befidcs the 
ipaces between for the ropes, and the neccflfary appendages of the framing ; if there arc 
more than three pullies in each block, they will run out into fuch an inconvenient 
length, as to dedu6t very confidcrably from the height, to which the weight might 
otherwife have been raifed : fo that, upon thofe accounts, no very great purchafe can 
be made by the common fimple tackles of pullies alone. 



• This is to be understood of sin^ple tackles or purchases by pullies, where one rope line or fall is 
^reeved round and common to all. 

In 



^08 A DESCRrPTlON OF A NEW TACKLE 

In order, therefore, to increafc their power on board a fhip, a purchafe is com- 
^lonly fnadc ufe of for loading £in4 vnloading of gopd^j called a runner and tackle .% 
by this method the power of any fimple tackle is doubled by the runner, and is very 
commodious there, as the mafts afford a fufiicient height; but as the runner 
block, upon which the whole weight depends, muft be fixed at more than double the 
height to which the body is intended to be railed it is feldom ufed afbore. 

Sometimes a fecond tackle is fixed upon the fall of the firftj but here it is obvious, 
that whatever be the power of the fecond tackle, the height to which the weight 
might othcrwife have been raifcd by the firft, will be lefs in the fame proportion as 
, the purchafe is increafed by the fecond ; unlefi it is fhifced, which lofes time. 

Again, very frequently the fall of the firfl tackle is applied to a capflan or windhfs, 
which increafcs the purchafe very commpdioufly without the inconveniencies laft- 
mentloned ; but then the machine is rendered more cumbcrfome, and^ confcquenUj, 
lefs fit for a nrioveable apparatus. 

Thofe impediments I have avoided, by dombining the two methods of managing 
puUics firft defcribed. The puUks in this new combination are placed in each block 
In two tiers j feveral being upon the fame pin, as in the firft method, and every one 
having another under it, as in the fecond -, as ^Ifo that, when the tackle is in ufe, the 
two tiers, that are the remptcft from one another, are fo much larger in diameter than 
thole that are neareft, as to allow the lines of the former to go over the lines pf tbc 
latter without rubbing. 

From this conflruftion arifes a new method of reeving the line : for here, let. the 
number of flaieves'be what rt will, the fall of the tackle will always be upon the 
middle fhieve, or on that next the middle, according as the number of pullies on each 
. pin is odd of even. 

To do this, the line is fixed to fome convenient part of the upper block, and 
brought round the middfc Ihicve of the larger tier of the under block, or the fhieve 
neareft to the middle if the humber is even, from thence round one of the fame Ibrt, 
ncvt t;p the centre one, of the upper block -, and fo on till the line comes to the 
butfide fhieve, where the laft line of the larger tier falls upon the firfl fhieve of the 
fmaller, and being reeved round thofe, till it comes to the oppofite fides the liue 
from the laft fhieve of the fmaller tier, again rifcs to the firft of the larger, whence it 

is 



OR COMBINATION OF FULUES. 109 

it cottdii£ted round the fcnsuiider of tfaf larger tiers till it cods on the middle lliieve 
of the upper block ; on the larger tier, or the fhieve neareft to the middle, if the 
number is even, as will appear more plain, by infpcdtion of figure 6, Plate I. 

In thb method all the lines or parts are clear of one another, and the friftion 
being nnore equally divided, the blocks act kept paralleL 

The model in brafs which I have the honor to (hew the Society, and from which I 
made the draught, confifts of 20 Ihievcs, five on each pin. With this model, which may 
eafily be carried in the pocket, I have raifed fix hundred weight. But with a tackle* 
of this fort, properly executed in large, one man will eafily raife a ton, and a greatec 
number of men a greater weig^ in proportion *• 

I have tried feveral numbers of fhieves as far as 36 5 but 20 feems to be the largeft 
number that will anfwcr well in praftice. 

By this tackle aU moderate weights (that is, from fix hundred weight to twa or three 
tons) can be raifed to any moderate height, without being compounded widi any other 
purchafe, and without any lofs of height more than the length of the two blocks,, 
which is common to all purchafcs with pullies whatever ; and without requiring more 
room than the fpace ncceflTary for the afccnt of the body : this tackle is eafily moved 
from place to place, and where neceflary, can be applied with equal advantage in. 
compound purchafes, in the fame manner as any other fimple tackle.. 

Large weights can alfo be raifed by bringing the fall of the tackle to a capft'an or 
windlafs, and weights three times heavier than can be raifed intjfic common.way, may be 
raifed by this method, becaufe the fize of the largeft rope being given, that can be ufed 
as a tackle fall, 20 of thofe rop"es will bear more than three times the weight that fix. 
will bears and laftly, the weight being given, the tackle fall may be Icfs in the pro- 
portion of 20 to tf, which will render the whole more flexible, and as the block pins 
can be confiderably lefs,. the friftion will be left alfo, and the tackle more eafily over 
baufed. 



♦ A large tackle of 20 was tried on board one of his majesty's ships; and by the help thereof, tbougb' 
it was with a new rope, one man raised one of the ship-guns and carriage, that together weighed 27 huiiT 
drcd weight ; there being a person, as usual, to hold oh, or prcvcat the rope from slipping bacJu. 

Avery 



110 A DESCRIPTION OF A NEW TACKLE, tec. 

A very commodious tackle of 12 may be executed in wood, in the fanie manaer 
that common blocks are made *• 

I ftiould not have troubled the Royal Society with lan account of this contrivance, 
did it not fccm promifing of fomc utility, in a variety of purpofcs -, particularly for 
merchants, feamcn, builders, engineers, &c. I therefore entirely fubmit it to the 
cenfure of that honorable body, 

J. SMEATON. 

P. S. In conftrufting in wood a tackle of 20 for 3 tons, the larger tier of 
(hieves (hould not be lefs than 10 inches ; the running line needs not be more than 2 
inches in circumference, and the pins, if iron, not exceeding five-eighths, if ebony, 
three-fourths of an inch in tbicknefs. 



* All the principal purchases used in building Edystonc Light-hovse^ with stone, are of this kind, and 
^hich are subject to np material inc/onvcnicnce, but, on the contrary, for wet and dry, -and rough Uiage, 
wooden pins, and holes both turned true and smooth, seem preferable to Mr. Hall, the same hand as 
jalao executed a large tackle of 20 in wood vith success. 



A DISCOURSE 



A DISCOURSE.* CONCERNING, &c. Ill 



A' DISCOURSE concerning the Menstrual Parallax, arising from the mutual 
Gravitation of the Earth and Moon, its. Influence on the Observation of tlie 
Sun and Planets^ with a Method of observing it, by J, Smeaton, F. R. S. 

Read May 12, XT is dcmonftratcd by Sir Isaac Newton, in the Principiay that it is 
1708. X ^^j ji^g earth's centre, but the cojnmon centre of gravity of the earth 
and nnoon, that di^fcribes the ecliptic $ and that the earth and moon revolve in limilar 
cUipfes> about their common centre of gravity. 

Thc'famc great author has alfo inveftigatedi from the different rile of the tides, wHenp 
the moon is in conjunction or oppofite to the fun, to thofe which happen when the moon 
is in her quadratures -,. that the quantity of the matter in the earth is to that in the moon>, 
as 39, 78 to li from whence, and the known diftance of the earth and moon, it would 
fbllowj that the common centre of gravity of the two bodies falls without the furfacc of 
the earth, by one half of its femi-diameter, that is, that the centre of the earth defcribca 
an epicycle round the common centre of gravity once a month, whofe diameter is three, 
femi-diamcters of 'the earth. 

Dr. GkEGORY, in his aftronomy^ has laid hold of this circumftance, in order to prove 
the relative gravity of the earth and moon, by obfervation^ which is the fubject of 
his fixtieth propofidbn of the fourth book ; in which be has demonftrated, that if ^. 
obferver on the earth makes a correct obfervation on the fun's place, when the moon 
is in one quadrature, it will differ from a like obfcrvationj taken in the oppofite quadra- 
ture (according to a mean ellipnc nrotion) by an angle which the diameter of this 
epicycle will fubtend at the fun. The fame learned author has alfo fhewn, in the 
fcholium to the fame propofition, that this quantity, or parallax, will be twice greater 
to Mars in oppofitioii, and three umcs greater to Venus, in her inferior conjunction 
with the fun. 

The difference thus produced in. the apparent place of the fun, and of all the primary 
planets, being governed' by the moon, and having its period the fame, may perhaps 
not be unaptly called mciisirtial parallax. 

Now, if^ with Sir Isaac Newton » the relative gravities of the earth and moon are 
taken between the proportion of 39 and 40 to one, the menftrual parallax of the fun 

Willi 



lia A DISCOURSE CONCE^INING 

will come out 1 3^^ upon the radius of the earth's epicycle, and will affect the folar ob- 
fcrvations at the oppofite quadratures, by double that quantity, viz. 26^^ in like rornmer^ 
the mean diftance from the earth of Mars in oppofition, being to the fun's mean diftance 
as I to 2.1 ; and the leaft diftance of Mars from the earth to the fun's mean diftance> as 
I to 2|, the menftrual parallax of Mars will affect the obfervation upon hirtt in that 
fituation, by ^f/' and ^f\ refpcctively. 

The mean diftance of Venus from the earth, in her inferior conjunction, being to 
that of the fun as 3 J to i nearly, and not very variable, on account of the orbit of 
Venus being almoft circular 5 the mendrual parallax would affect the place of Venus in 
that fituation, by a quantity not lefs than 92'^ \ and in aU other fituations in proportion 
to her diftance i which alfo holds with refpcct to all the reft of the planets. 

Thefe difturbing quantities are by no means to be difpenfcd with in the nice and cri- 
tical ftatc that aftronomical obfervations and calculations have arrived at, in coniequence 
of the difcovcries of Dr. Bradley, who may be faid to have given a bafis to aftronomy i 
however, could we rely upon the datd^ on which Sir Isaac's invcftigation of tlK relative 
gravity of the earth and moon is founded, we fhould have nothing to do but to apply an 
equation to the particular cafes, according to the diameter of the epicycle, as deduced 
from the relative gravity ; but whoever confidcrs the great obftructions that the water 
of the fea meets with in its motion, to obey the influence of the moon \ the great dif-. 
fkulty in afcertaining the true height of the tides, from the many difturbing caufes in- 
tervening J and the many uncertainties, and the want of coincidence that have attended^ 
and muft attend fuch obfervations ; muft confcfs that this matter does not fcem capable 
of fuch a determination from that quarter as the prefent ftate of aftronomy requires* 

Accordingly, fince the timeof Dr. Gregory, thofe great aftronomers Dr. Bradley, 
De la Caille, and others, have applied themfclvcs to determine the quantity of the 
menftrual parallax, from folar obfervations s biit though thefe have given caufe to 
fuppofe that the relative gravity of the earth and moon are not above ^ of the quantity 
deduced from the tides \ yet, as the obfervation of thefe fmall anglers principally depends 
upon the obfervation of the fun's right afcenfion (^which, depending on the meafure of 
time, is lefs capable of exact obfervation, than if depending on divided inftrumems) ; 
the deductions thence drawn feem ftill wanting of that certainty which the fubjcct 
demands j and if to this we add, from a deduction of Mr. Maskelyne, that the re- 
lative gravity of the earth and moon is as 76 to i , derived from the effect that the moon 

produces 



THE MENSTRUAT. PARALLAX, 113 

produces in die nutation.of the earth's axis ; the relative gravity, and, confequentlyj the 
parallaxes thereon depending, will be reduced to one half of thofe rcfuking from Sir 
Isaac's determinadon. 

It is true, that the quantity of effect of the menilrual parallaxes will not be greats if 
computed upon Mr* Maskelyne's induction^ for as much as that the common 
■centre of gravity will be coniiderably within the earth's furfaces yec, even in that cafe, 
the* fun's tranlit over the meridian, when the moon is in one quadrature, will differ 
nearly one fecond of time from that obferved from the oppofite quadrature ; and 
though De t a Cailxe and Mayer have formed equations depending on the moon, to 
be applied to the equation of time; yet, if we are at an uncertainty, whether the 
maximum is one fecond, two thirds of a fecond, or half a fecond of dme, each way, we 
are ftillunder a material difficulty; for though thefe differences are fo fmall, that it is 
not eafy to determine them exacdy from folar obfervatioQs ; yet, as they are capable of 
creadng a fenfible difference in thefe obfervations, they will, (b long as they remain un-* 
determined, prevent that folidity and firmnefs to the folar obfervations^ which is the 
more neceflary as they are the foundation of all the reft ; but with refpect to thofe 
planets, that in their periods come nearer to us than we to the fun> the obfervations upon 
them will be effected by a greater uncertainty. 

The determination of the menftrual parallax ts of ftill more importance, as it is a 
neceflary confideration In the determination of the fun's parallax ; and this, whether 
deduced from Mars or Venus, as I fliall prefendy fhew more particularly ; buf at firft I 
tnuft ftate the quantity of the menftrual parallax, according to the beft data yet known, 
by a contrary ptocefs ; and, taking the mean quantity of the fun's parallax according to 
the determination of Mr. Short, at 8^^ 8, and the relative gravities of the earth and 
moon, according to Mr. Maskelyne, as 76 to i, and the mean diftance of their 
centres equal to 60^ femi-diameters, we ftiall then have the diftance of the earth's centre 
from the centre of gravity, at ^ of the earth's fcmi-diamctcr, (that is, \- of that femi- 
diameter within the earth's furface), and the menftrual parallax equal to ^V of the fun's 
parallax ; confequently about 7^^ ; and the double menftrual parallax, or vacillation, 
arifing from the whole diameter of the epicycle 14^^; the mean menftrual parallax of 
Mars in oppofirion 29'''^; the greateft 38^^^; and that of Venus 49'^; from hence it 
follows, that, were a perfon to attempt the fun's parallax, by the diurnal nnotion of the 
earth, applied as a bafis to Mars in oppoiition, as has been formerly tried ; and ihould 
the moon be at new or full at the fame time^ the change of place of the earth's centre, 
in its own epicycle^ would amount to an angle feen from Mars of 1^^ 3 nearly ; that is, 

G in 



114 A DISCOURSE CONCERNING 

in cafe the interval between the obfervations were eight hours, .and Mttiat bk 'iMMi 
diftance, this change would in the fame time amount to i^^ 7 acfltrijr. In like mimRer» if 
a tranfit of Venus happen near the new or full moon (as will be the ctfenext yciir)i c^ 
time of the tranfit will be effected by a change of place« fuch as the earth's centre will 
defcribe in its epicycle during the tincie of the whole* tianiitt if the b<yhnijng aod end 
are obferved in the fame place, or during the^diflfertoce i>f abiblute.timet'atiiiihkhtte 
tranfit appears to begin or end to different ebfenrers in diftant neridians* Thus, ^wiuan 
the lame obfcrver fees the beginning and end in tha iame piaae, die cafe . defeiibcd iif 
that obfcrver, from the earth's diurnal mo tion, moft 1m corrected by tbe^iace deicrifaed 
by the earth's centre, in the circumference of ita^picyck, during that ticic; whiciii if 
it be fuppofed of feven hours, will amount to an^ angle i^^^, feen from Vmmi; bm^ 
where the beginning or end is feeffbfdiBbreoc obfenrers in diftaat meridians, ..as die dtf^ 
ference of abfolute time can hardly amount co<above fifteen minutes^ thexkange of-^aoe 
of the earth's centre will for diat dme be but fmalli bowewr, at the tate befoflftsnoiH 
doned, it will for fifteen minoces affect the parallactic angle icen from Voous fay:al9Mlt 
«i47 of a fecond ) and the parallax of die fun, by about Vvv psrt of the whole i ikmtAh 
proportional part will remain the £une, whecber diocdiftance of meridians bc*£iah:ja 
produce a grcficer or Ids diSfercnce of ahfahne dmt shan fifteen minutes *• 

• 

From what has been faid, I fuppofc it will appear, that the efiects of the menflrual 
parallax are worthy of oonfideration, andt^t nodiingiias been yet executed^ wktnthy 
it has received a dcterminadon fuflicientlyaccurate s for, in regard to obferrations upaos 
the fun, the whole quantity's too linatt so be minutely obfenred in right afcenfions and 
with refpect to the application to Mars and Venus^ iias nooAcen as yet fi> cridcally Km , 
duccd to computation, as to render their parallaxes (though in tkeoifdtves much greater) 
deducible with equal cercunty as that of the Am. 

What I have now to propofe, is a method of oMerving die nl^ftrual parallaxes of 
Mars and Venus, without laying an undue ftrels upon the theory of their motions. 

The firfl opportunity of making an obicnration for this purpofe, will be at the next 
oppofinon of Mars, which, according to the nautical almanack, will happen the 25th of 



* If tn error of ^^^ part of the whole may ^MrStypoMd in Ibe •bienraiioo for deicrmining the swi's 
parallax by the transit of Venus, a neglect of the neaitrttal. parallan may make itv^vpsxt jof.ihe 
whole* 

October 



THE MENSTRUAL PARALLAX. lU 

dcxxyhtt MXt, in die morning; I will therefore endeavour to illuftrate this mdtter by 
taking that as an cxampl^. 

The diftancc of Mars from the earth will then be fomewhat Icfs than the mean diftance, 
that bj as i tod%2; and, cckiiequendy, his double menftrual parallax, according to 
Mr. Maskelynb, will be nearer 31^^ in the point of oppoficion. Now, as the moon 
t^iB be at fall not abore twelve hours preceding that oppofition, the moon will be nearif 
in the moUt &?ourable fituation for the purpofe. 

For this end, let an accurate obfervation be made upon the place of Mars at the 
following timest viz. firft, near the time of the new moon, preceding Mars*s oppolidon, 
or more properly at the neareft opportunity, to the time of the moon's oppofition to 
Mars, which will happen in the night, between the 12th and 13th of October ; fccondly, 
let the place of Mars be obferved when the moon is neareft her quartile with Mars ; 
t^t is, between the 19th and 20th of the fame month ; thirdly, let an obfervation bo 
made on Mars when the moon is in conjunctbn with Mars, the neareft ^ his oppofition 
with the fun, that is, between the 25th and 26th of October ; fourthly, let Mars be again 
obferved when the moon has moved on to her quartile with Mars, viz. between the 
31ft of October and ift of November; and fifthly and laftly, fct the place of Mars be 
obferved when the moon has again got to her oppofition with Mars, which happens 
between the 7 th and 8th of November. 

Now it is manifeft, that when the moon is in conjunction or oppofition to Mars^ the 
centre of the earth, the centre of Mars, and the common centre of gravity of the earth 
and Mars, will be nearly in a right line, and, confequently, that an obferver will then fee 
Mars, in tbefame place in the heavens, as if the common centre of gravity were the 
iame as the centre of the earth s therefore, the place of Mars will then be unaffected by 
a menftrual parallax s and fuch will he the firft« third, and fifth, of the obfcrvatlons above 
propounded. 

It is equally evident^ that when the moon is in quartile with Mars, and moving 
towards a conjunction, an obferver, at the earth's centre, will fee Mars more backward 
in the ecliptic, than if feen from the common centre of gravity, by 1 5^^! ; and that, 
when the moon is in her oppofite quartile with Mars, and moving from her conjunc-- 
fion, an obferver at the earth's centre wiU fee Mars advanced in his orbit moi^ 
forward by 15^'^, than if feen from the common centre of gravity i and the one obferva- 
tion 



•^ 
f 



y 



1J6 A DISCOURSE CONCERNING 



» • 



tion checked with die other, will, according to a mean elliptic motion^ diflfcr by- the 
quantity of 3 1^^ and fuch will be the fccond and fourth pbfcrvations above pro- 
pounded. 

Now^ from the firft^ third, and fifth oblervadons, three pomts of Mars' orbit will be 
given ; which, by the help of the theory of Mars's motion in an elliptic orbit, whoie* 
aphelion, eccentricity, and nodes, are known fufficiently near for this purpofe, the inter-^ 
mediate places of Mars may be inferred with the requifite degree of accuracy ; and par<* 
ticularly, as the two intermediate obiervations, viz. the iecond and fourth, will be nearly 
at equal intervals of time between the three others : from hence it follows that the dif- 
ference between the inferred or computed places, at the quartiks, and the obferved 
places at thofe times will be the meoftrual parallax required. 

It is to be noted, that die times above fpecified are the moft favourable for the ob^ 
icrvation ; and could thofe be made uninterruptedly from weather, there would be the 
lefs cccafion for any other ; but as much as poffible to prevent difappointment of this 
kind, it will be right to begin the obiervations a month preceding, making the proper 
obfervations, at the conjunctions, quartiles, and oppofitions of the moon with Mars^ 
which will be the means of fupplying fuch obiervations as may happen to prove abortive 
before the oppofition of Mars, and alio, in caie any of the obfervadons to be made after 
that cppoiition ihall prove deficient^ the obfervadons may be carried on a month or 
competent xxmc afterwaids. 

« 

As a further fecurity againit diiappomtmentSt as well as check, it will alio be ad^ 
vifable to make proper obfervadons the night preceding, and fubfequent to thofe in 
which the quardles, conjunction, &c. happen j for, as the quanddes will not differ con- 
fiderably from thofe obtained on the days fpecified, with proper allowances they may be' 
brought in fupport and confirm adon of the former. 

In like manner, when Venus is moving towards her inferior conjunction with the fun, 
as will happen next year, the fame obfervadons may be made with refpect to her, and 
continued for a necefTary time to get obiervations of the place of Venus ; viz« the firft, 
when the moon is in conjunction or oppoiition with Venus : a (econd^ when the moon is 
in her quartile with Venus ; a third, in conjunction or oppofition i a fourth, when the 
moon is in her oppofite quartik to the formers and a fifth, ag^ in conjunction or op- 
pofition : 



THE MENSTRUAL PARALLAX. 1 1 7 

poGtion t the fkme oppertxmi^ will alfo offer when Venus is moving from her inferior 
conjunction with the fon, and becomes a morning ftar. 

In regard to the obfervation of Venus^ it is remarked by aftronomers^ that (he is to 
be feen with a good tranfit telcfcope, when (he is within a few degrees of the fun $ but 
as Ihe is three times nearer the earth, than the fun*s mean diftance, when her elonga- 
tion is 25^ in the inferior part of her orbit, it is plain, that the neceffary obfervations 
may be eafily made when her menftrual parallax will be at a medium, three dmes greater 
^an die fun's s and, confequendy, amtfundng for the whole diflference 42^^ 

To avoid embarraflinent in defcription, I have hitherto fuppofcd that all the ob- 
lervarions are made in the meridian ; in which cafe the right afcenfions will be the fame 
as they would appear from the centre of the earth, and, confequendy, the planet's longi- 
tudes thence deduced nearly the fame ^ but 'tis eafy to fee, that if the quardle obfcrva- 
dons are made when the planets are confiderably to the eaft or weft of the meridian, and 
fo chofen^ that the place of the obferver be further diftant from the common centre of 
gravity, than the centre of the earth is from that centre, that the cafe of the obferva* 
dons will be confiderably enlarged. Thus, in our latitude, fuppofing that the quartilc 
obfervadons are made four hours before and four hours after the planet pafles the meri- 
dian, this will produce an enlargement of the bafis by one of the^ardi's femi-diameters ; 
and as the whole bafe or diameter of the epicycle comes out, according to Mr. Masi' 
RELYNB, no more than i. 6 of the earth's femi-diameters, the bafe will, according to 
this method, come out 2. 6 ; and, confequendy, at the next oppofidon, the menftrual 
parallax of Mars will be thereby enlarged to 50^, the greatcft to 6a^^, and that of 
Venus at a mean to 74^1^. 

V Itmuft however be acknowledged, that no kind of obfervations of the places of 
the planets are of equal validity with thofe taken with the bcft inftruments in the 
meridian j thofe taken with micrometers perhaps not excepted ; for, however accurately 
finall diftances can be meafured with the micrometer of Mr. Dolland, yet, as thcfe 
meafures can hardly be reduced to the ecliptic, without having the difference of de- 
clinadon or right afccnfion from other means, (except two ftars making fomcwhat 
near a right angle with the planet, fliould appear within the field of view at once) ; 
and as in all thefe cafes the reAification of the places of the ftars themfclves ultimately 
depends on meridian obfervations, we may perhaps be allowed to fay, that in the 
moft favorable cafes of the micrometer, the determinations thence to be drawn are 

not 



118 A DISCOURSE CONCERNINCi 

not fuperior to meridian obfervacionsj and in lefs favorable cafes muft be inferior ^ 
however, as the micrometer obfcrvations out of the meridian give an opportunity of 
repetition as often as we pleafe, and the obfervations for the redlification of the ftars 
concerned^ can be repeated in the meridian as often as we pleafe alfoj ic mud: be 
equally allowed, that when thefe kind of obfervations are taken, not too near the 
horizon, when proper ftars offer for this purpofe^.and the whole Ikiifully managed^ 
thefe kind of obfervations fall but little ihort of thofe taken immediately in the 
meridian. I cannot therefore hefitate to recommend, that the quartile obfervations b^ 
taken out of the meridian, as well as in it in the iirft place, by Dolland's micrometer^ 
if ftars offer in proper pofitions, and if not, fecondly, by taking differences of right 
afcenlion and declination between the planet and the ftars, by the common micrometer, 
in cafe proper ftars offer themfelves for this purpofe i but as it frequently happens^ 
that no proper ftars offer themfelves to micrometers of either kind, and this is ftili 
more likely to happen in the obfervarions of Venus, which will be chiefly in the day 
light, I beg leave to offer (what to me is) a new method of obfervation out of the 
meridian; and which, though I efteem it not equal to micrometer obfervations of 
either kind, I apprehend will fall fo litde fhort thereof, and prove fo much fuperior 
to any other method now in praAice in thefe cafes, that I hope I fhall, on this 
occafion, be excufed in giving a particular defcription thereof; but, as it is a general 
method of obferving out of the meridian, I ftiall referve it by way of appendbt. 

In the next obfervation of Mars, it has been ftated that) in the meridian obferva- 
tions alone, the menftrual parallax, according to the fmalleft eftimation, may be ex- 
pelled to amount to 3 1^^ in longitude, which, turned into right afcenfion, will make 
about 2^^ of time : now, if it may be allowed, that a well prafbifed obferver can take 
the time of a tranfit to one quarter part of a fecond, over a fingle wire, if he has three 
wires, or more, as ufual, the mean of the three fliould be within -^ part of a fecond ^ 
cr within ^'^ P^^ ^^ ^^^ whole quantity in queftioo i it is, however, a matter of chance^ 
whether the mean of three may or may not be within one-third part of the whole ; 
and, as equal errors may be committed in the obfervations of the tranfits of the ftars, 
wherewith the right afcenfions of the planets in queftion are compared, which it is an 
equal chance, whether they tend to correfl or increafe the errors committed in the 
former, yet, if, as has already been propofed, the obfervations are continued for two 
or three months, inftead of one, and obfervations, taken the preceding day and fub- 
fcqucnt to the days of conjunction, quartile, and oppofition i and this, as well out 
of the meridian as in ir, we can hardly doubt, but that, if the weather ffiould favor, fo 
many checks would be formed, that, from the next oppofition of Mars alone, the 

affair 



THJE MENSTRUAL PARALLAX. 



119 



affair may be brought within a twenty-fourth part x>{ the whole ; md, if to this be 
added thcf;fb#ce of fuch decerminationft ^s may be drawn fropi obfcrvadons on VenUs« 
before and after her tranfit over the fun next year» it can hardly be doubted^ but that 
thofe three will bring us within a fingle fecond of a degree^ fubtended from the 
nearcft planets .apd thcfe conclufions will be further ftrengthened by future obferva- 
tions» as two y^^rs will fcarcely pals without afibrding one or more opportunities of 
tfiis kind. 

As I meant not to embarrafs myfelf with exaft computations, I have conftantly 
fiippoied the diftance of the cotprnpn centre of gravity from the centre of the earth, 
to he a fixed .quantity, whereas it will vary in the fame proportion as the moon's 
diftance varies ; but as this and many other minude will properly enter the computa- 
tion, when the obfervations are made, I mult beg leave to refer them to the learned 
to -this (cience. 

J. SMEATON. 

Avsthorpe^ April 17^ 



DESCRIFnONf 



IW MODE OF OBSERVING STARS, &c. 

DESCRIPTION of a new Method of observing the Heavenly BodieSi. out 

of the Meridian, by J. Smeaton, F. R. S. 

Read May i6, rTlHE inftrumcnt I propofc for this purpofc, is a tranfit telcicope, 
1708. J^ mounted on a vertical axis j for example^ fuch a one as is defcrit>ed 
in the introdufbion to the Hiftoire Celefte, of Mr. Le Monnier, being one of the 
inftruments n^adc by Mr. Grahatn, for the academicians, who went to meafure a degree 
at the polar circle; this, or any other inftrument upon equivalent principles, will 
fuffice^ that is capable of fuch adjuftments as to be made correftly to defcribe an 
almicanther and azimuth circle, and capable of being retained in any given pofidon 1 
the ufe will appear by the following example. 

Make choice of any fixed ftar, which, according to the diurnal modon, precedes the 
heavenly body to be obferved b;|^ a few minutes, more or lefs, as it may happen i let 
the inftrument be fet to an azimuth, fomewhat preceding the fixed ftar ; and carefully 
obferve the rime of the ftar's tranfit crofs the verrical wire of the telefcope ; then wait 
till the heavenly body comes to the fame azimuth ; and, when arrived within the field of 
view, keep gendy turning the fcrew that alters the elevation of the telefcope, fo as to 
follow the heavenly body in alritude, keeping it interfefted by the horizontal wire of 
the telefcope, till the body paflcs the middle vertical wire, and carefiilly note the time 
of its pafiage ; there leave the telefcope fixed as to altitude, and releafing the horizontal 
motion, turn it round on its verrical axis, till you meet with fome ftar, that in a little 
time after you will, by rifing or falling, come to the fame almicanther^ and, on its 
arrival, carefully note the time of its pafiage a crofs the horizontal hair of the tele* 
fcope. 

Now, from the right afcenfions and declinations of the two fl:ars being previoufly 
known, or afterwards determined from meridian obfervations, the azimuth of the 
firft Itar, and the altitude of the laft, at the time of their refpeftive pafiages, may be 
determined by computation, which will giv6 the altitude and azimuth of the heavenly 
body, for (he time of the middle obfcrvation, when it paflcd the interfection of the 
two wires. 

The fame end may alfo be obtained by taking the obfervations in an inverted order 1 
that is, by choofing a ftar at fuch an altitude, that the heavenly body Hull, in a com-- 

pettiit 



OUT OF THE MERIDIAN. 121 

petcnt time afterwards^ arrive at the fame altitude, &c. butj as in thefe latitudes the 
alteration of azimuth is, eipecially in tliofe parts that are in the neighbourhood of the 
zodiack, quicker than that of the aldtude, I apprehend it to be eafier to follow the 
flower motion with the fcrew, fo as to preferve the interfedlion^ than the quicker, and 
therefore in general to be preferred i but where it happens otherwife^ or the liars lie 
more conveniendy, the inverfe method may be purfued. 

It is true, that fome degree of dexterity andpraAice may be requifite in the obftrvcr, 
in managing the fct fcrew, fo as to keep the objeft interfered by the wire ; but if 
fine fmooth fcrews, fuch as are ufed for micrometers to aflronomical quadrants, are 
adapted to the inftrument, as well that commanding the horizontal motion as the ver- 
tical, I apprehend the management will be perfeftly eafy and familiar to an obferver, 
otherwife well praftrfed. 

- • * ■ 

It is eafy to fee, that thofe ftars are to be preferred that are neareft the heavenly 
body to be obferved; and that cater is paribus, thofe in fuch pofitions, as rife or 
fall flowly, are beft for determining their aldtude ; and thofe that alter their azimuth 
flowly, are beft for determining the azimuth. To avoid intricacy in dcfcriptton, I have 
fuppofed only two wires, interfcfking each other at a right angle, in the focu$ of tbe 
telefcope : but for the fake of gctdng a medium in fuch parts of the obfervation as 
depend on time, it will be proper to have not only three perpendicular wires, parallel 
ID each other as common, but alfo three horizontal wires ; the proportional dtftances 
of which being previoufly determined by obfervadon, the oblique motions may, (in 
parti not near the pole) be conCdered as right lines. 

This method is the more valuable, as it is entirely free from the knowledge of re- 
fraAions ; for, fmce the computation gives the real altitude from the trme given, in- 
dependent of refra£^ion3, and fiuce the heavenly body is equally affeAed by refraftion, 
at the fame altitude, the computed altitude of the flar will give the real altitude of 
the heavenly body cleared of refradlion, which never enters the queftion s and, fince 
fuch flars may be chofen as will render the time intercepted ihort, there is the Icfs 
chance of a change of refraAion, during the time, between the middle and 1^ ob* 
fervations and therefore this method will be particularly ufcful in obfervadons near 
the horizon. 

Austhorpe, April 17, J. SMEATON. 

1768. 

N. B, Obfervationa of this kind may be made upon the planets in the day light, 
by making ufe of the fun for the firfl obfervation infteod of a flar ; and waidng 
afterwards for the appearance of the ftars. 

R OBSERVATION 



122 OBSERVATION OF A SOLAR, ECLIPSE. 

OBSERVATIOI^ of a Solar Eclipse, the 4th. pf June, 1769, at the 
Observatory at Austhorpe, near Leeds, in the County of York, by 
J. Smeaton, F. R. S. 



Read November i6, 1769. 



h. 



// 



Beginning by mean time, A. M. - - -633 * 

Middle - - - - - - 7 26 38 

End - - - - - -8 20 16 

Total duration - - - - -14715 

Digits eclipfcd - - - - -6460 

N. B. The beginning and end of the eclipfe were obferved by an excellent 3^ feet 
treble object glals telcfcope, conftructed by Dolland, with the fmalleft magnifier, 
which enlarged the diameter fomewhat above 80 times. As there is no defect in 
quantity of light from the fun, the object glafs was contracted by an aperture to aj 
inches, and the object was perfecdy fharp and diftinct* 

The quandty was taken by a parallel wire micrometer, upon an equatorial appara- 
tus, which rendered it very commodious for the purpofe ; by which the part of the 
fun's diameter, remaining uneclipied, mcafured at right angles to a line joining the 
horns, was 889, fuch parts as the fun's diameter, taken the fame day at i j- hour 
in the afternoon, meafured between two parallels of declinadon, 2041. 

The latitude I have not yet got fo correcdy as I expected to do ; but I do not at 
prcfent know, whether it exceeds or falls fhort of 53* 48^ The fuppofcd longitude 
is 6^ of time weft of Greenwich j this is deduced from its pofition with Wakefield, 
whofe longitude is fet down in *< Mafkelyne's Bririfli Mariner's Guide," as determined 
from an obfervation of the tranfit of Venus of 1761. 

The exact knowledge at what point of the fun's circumference to look for the 
beginning (which was communicated to me by Mr. Maskelyne), I found of great ufc, 
iofomuch that, I believe, I faw the firft difcemable impreffion; I have, however, 
allowed 2^^ for the time clapfed between the firft perception, and the being fure it was 
ibe approach of the moon that afiected that part of the fun's limb, and which latter 

only 



OBSERVATION OF A SOLAR ECLIPSE. 



123 



only could be noted by the clock. The firft approach did not, however, affect the fun's 
circumference by any thing like a penumbra or (hade, but began by fome afperities 
of the moon's limb, feeming to thurfl: themfelves into that of the fun ; and which 
appeared before any continued part of the fun's circumference was cut off, or, perhaps, 
it might be occafioned by the firft approach of the moon's limb, difturbing the little 
protuberances upon the fun's circumference, occafioned by the undulation of the air, 
and which, when rendered exceedingly diftinct, appeared almoft like the teeth of a 
fine faw. This whole appearance, to a telefcope lefs diftinct, would probably look 
like a penumbra or fhadow. 

Some time before the great fpot was immerged, there appeared two parts of the 
moon's circumference more protuberent than the reft, near the right hand horn, which 
fo remarkably interiuptcd the regulation of the curve, that it was taken notice of by 
all about me, and which, doubtlefs, was occafioned by two mountains upon the 
moon's furface, remarkably higher than the reft, and I doubt but the fame thing will 
have occurred to other obfervers. 

N. B. Mr. Smeaton was prevented, by clouds, from obferving the entrance of 
Venus upon the fun the evening before. 



■ • J ■. 



ACCOUNT 



► • ■ ■■ 



124 ACCOUNT OF AN OBSERVATION 



ACCOUNT of an Observation of the right Ascension and Declination of 
Mercury out of the Meridian, near his greatest Elongation, Septembcft 
178(5, made by Mr. John Smeaton, F, R. S, with an equatorial Mi- 
crometer, of his own Invention and Workmanship ; accompanied witii an 
Investigation of a Method of allowing for Refraction in such Kind of 
Observations. 



Read at the Royal Society, June 7th, ijiy. 

liyT DE LA Lahbe having announced to ibme of my aftrooomical friends the utility 
-*-^-"- • of accurate obfervations of Mercury, at his two elongations the lad year, in 
Auguft and September ; I tried to get obfervations of that planet in crofling the meridian, 
for fome days before and after the greateft elongation in Auguft i and though the ftace of 
the atmofphere about that time was not very favourable to the purpoie, yet there was one 
day that I thought unexceptionable, but could not perceive the lead appearance of 
Mercury ; at which I was the rather furprifed, as I had formerly feen that planet in the 
like fituation with the fame inftrument, with perfect perfpicuity ♦ : and as I did not hear 
of any one elfe having fucceeded in this obfervat^jMi, I thought it might be very pof- 
fible for the fame difappointment again to happen, with refpect to the approaching elong- 
ation in September. I judged, therefore, that it might be of fome utility to aftronomy, 
if, by any means, a good obfcrvation of Mercury could be got; and alio, that it would 
be a proper fubject whereon to make trial of an inftrument for fuch purpofes, the idea 
of which I had conceived, and begun to conftruct, above forty years before 1 but which^ 



* The instrument mentioned is a transit, made by myself in the year I768 ; at which time ftchromatic 
object-glasses not having been, so far as I knew, applied to astronomical instruments by others, but 
baling found the good effects thereof for other purposes, I resolved to use a double achromatic object- 
glass, made by Mr. Doiland ; which being of equal aperture with the »mple object-glass, then in the 
transit of the Royal Observatory, this telescope I therefore esteemed to be of nearly equal validity, as to 
quantity of light, with that at Greenwich, but reduced to the more commodious length of three feet six 
inches. 

from 



WITH AN EQUATORIAL MICROMETER- 125 

tmm various avocations* I did not perfect to my fatisfaction till the year 1770 *: (ince 
which time it has lain by* in hopes that fomeching might happen, by which a full and 
effectual trial might be made thereof. 

This inftrumcnt was originally intended as an improvement of the common wire 
micrometer, for the purpofcs of taking differences of right afccnfion and declination, in 
a more commodious and effectual manner than could be done in the method then prac- 
dfed of ufing that inftrument f i and at the fame time more effectually to anfwer the 
purpoie of .Graham's astronomical sector^ which was contrived by him (as Dr. 
Smith informs us) to fupply the deficiencies of the micrometer then in ufe j:. 

The moft tieteffary and fundamental improvements leemed to be'j firft, that of render- 
ing the micrometer tclefcope manageable upon an equatorial motion ; and, iecondly, the 
toatri vance of a fland of fuch folidity and ftedfaftnefs that the telelcope might prefervc 
the pofition in which it was placed, for a length of rinie, forit occurred to me, that if 
the tclefcope coidd be maintained at reft, or in a degree of ilabiiity fuperior to that of 
the agronomical feftor, ttien the neceffity of taking in a greater compafs in declination 
than could be commodioufly given to the field of a tclefcope would be the lefs necef* 
£iry : for, inftead of confining the objefb to a comparifon with a ftar not diflS^ring 
more than a few minutes of dme> or at moft a quarter of an hour in right afcenfion^ 



* Some observations made tliercwith, after it \ras eompleted, I transmitted to my friend Mr. Aubbht-; 
/ tbe consistency of wliich induced kim to procure a similar instrument to be made for cometafytaii such 
iind of observations as cannot be commodiously made in the meridian. Of this instrument th^ Rev, 
Mr. WoLLiiBJOM has made honorahle mention in Phil. Trans. VoL LXXV. for 1765, p. 348. 

•| The common wiye micrometer, as used by Dr.,BKADLST, and described from a paper in tbo- 
Doctor's hand-writing, is given by Dr. Maskbltne in tlie Philosophical Transictions, Vol. LXU. for the 
year 1772 1 and in addition to which I must bog leave to observe, that the telescopes then in use for tha 
micrometer were from ten to fiJ'tcen feet long, made with wooden tubes^ supported at each end upon two. 
wooden supports, by which the telescope could be managed in altitude and asimnth ; but not to folloif a 
celestial object in its proper motion on one centime ; which apparstss, I belieTe, is stiU xemainrag in tba 
Royal Observalocy. 

t This instrument is diescribed i& Smith's Opiks, Vol. II. p. 350^; and the original one,, made by 
Mr. Graham, was, at his death, placed in the Royal Obaenratory, and it mounted: upona thne-legged 
•Uod of wood. 



126 ACCOUNT OF AN OBSERVATION 

thofc comparifons could be extended to an hour or two, or even on occafion to three 
or four hours; there being fcarccly any part of the heavens fo devoid of ftars, of a 
fuitable magnitude for thefe obfervations, but that a proper one may be found within 
that compafs in right afcenfion, provided there is allowed the difference of a degree, 
either north or fouth of the objeft, in declination *. 

Confidering, however, that the approaching elongation would be in the ^morning i 
and that the beft chance of feeing Mercury with this inftrument would be fonfc time 
in the twilight, between Mercury's rifing and the rifing of the fun j yet, on fuppo-. 
fition of catching the planet in his paflage over the wires, there would be no chance 
of feeing any ftar pafs over the field, wherewith to compare him, till the following 
evening, which, being at lead fourteen hours, the certain pofition of the tclefcope for 
fo great a length of time was almost more than I could reafonably hope for. To 
judge how far I might form an expectation, by way of a previous trial, I compared 
Saturn with y CapricQ|^i f, and found the return of the (lar to the fame place two 
evenings afterwards, both in right afcenfion and declination, was fo near, that I con- 
cluded I might very well expect a good obfervation of Mercury, in cafe I could get a 
fight of him, though the (lars wherewith he was to be compared lay at the diftance of 
the following evening at the fooneft. 



• The field of the telescope of Mr. Aubert's instrument is two degrees; but that of the original, 
wherewith this observation was made, is 1^ 17^: to gain which, the eye-glass being immoveable (;ind 
achromatic to prevent the indistinctness that would otherwise have taken place near the border) thcmagni* 
fying power was obliged to be considerably reduced, in respect of what has been usual for micrometers, 
that is, so as not to exceed 20 times ;. in conLcquence, there is, therefore, no need for so long a telescope, 
this being but 34j inches focal length of object-glass ; but being a double achromatic, made by the late 
Mr. JoHK DoLLAND, it is capable of as great an aperture as could be given to the simple object-glasses 
of twelve or fifteen feet telescopes, that were then generally given to micrometers ; but the pencil uf li<Tht 
being greatest in this, it is attended with this advantage, that the small stars can be seen very distinct and 
in great al^undance, like the modem night-glasses: and there is in reality no need of great magnifying 
powers for the present purpose ; for the place of the wire being viewed by an eye-glass^ of about 1} inches 
focus, its place may be distinguished to less than a 2300th part of an inch, which, on the radius uf 34f 
inches, is scarce 2'^i of a degree ; and which, as I apprehend, is nearer the truth than can reasonably be 
expected from instruments out of the meridian. 

t According to this observation li preceded y Vf the 2d of September, at 9 h. 15' P. M. mean time by 
30' 9'^7 MT, and with greater declination south than y by 41' 23 ^ 

The 



f 



WITH AN EQUATORIAL MICROMETER. . 127 

The mlcrpmetcr is furnifticd wUh five horary wires, denominated in their order a, 

•A, B, C, P, (B being the middle horary wire) and the two declination wires arc 

denominated A and B, each moveable by a fcparate and independent micromctcr- 

. fcrew, from the outfide of the field to the centre, and a little beyond it i fo that each 

... .-<.■. . ' 

wire can be moved into the place of the other when at or near the centre ♦. 



The morning of the ajd of September, about a quarter pad five o^clock, the >air 
being clear and perfccdy ferene, it being then about an hour after Mercury's rifing, 
and near three-quarters of an hour before the rifing of the fun, I very readily found 
Mercury with the telefcope, and when found could eafily fee him with an opera glafs ; s 
and Mercury being then in a date of very little alteration of declination, I adjufted 
one of the declination wires to his apparent run, by making him traverfe the w/iole 
field. The obfcrvations were then taken as in the firft table ; and in the evening I 
was lucky enough to get thofe of A Ced and o Tauri, intending to repeat the whole 
the next morning and evening. The next morning proved cloudy, and fo continued,^ 
that I faw the planet no more -, but in the evening of the 26th, I found the ftars 
come again fo near the fame declination, that I was encouraged to continue the ob- 
fervation to fee what change would happen. It then came on bad rainy weather till 
the 30th, when I again repeated the obfcrvation, and found the ftars to come fo near 
in declination, that I was fully fatisfied of the ftability of the inftrument, fo far at 
leaft as could regard twenty-four hours : but as I was then appointed to go a journey, 
and could have no other ufe for the inftrument, I locked the door of the Obfervatory, 
leaving the inftrument in its pofition, that I might fee what change would happen by 
the time of my return; and was quite aftonifhcd to find, on the 13th of October, that 
it had remained in a manner unmoved ; for it had fufFered no more apparent altera- 
tion than what might occur by the errors of obfcrving, and alterations of the clocks 
and tranfit. 



* In Dr. Bradley's Paper it is said, that before the late alterations, both the declination wires were 
made moveable ; and that it was an improvement to make one of them fixed, and one only moveable. 
But however they might be immediately preceding the Doctor's time, I believe the original micrometers 
by Mr. Town IKY wore with one fixed and one moveable declination wire, as I have seen one in this form 
among the remaining apparatus of Mr. Abrah\m Sharpe. In an instrument, however, fitted up for 
the purposes of the equatorial micrometer, I believe it will be found most convenient to have both tho»e 
wires moveable; as by this mrans they not only are enabled to slide into each other's place ^ but every part 
of the frame of the instrument remains fixed during the whole of the observation, the two slides carrying 
these two wires excepted. 

It 



ISS 



ACCOUNT OF AN OBSERVATIOK 



It tnuft however be remarked, that, befldes Aat in the conftruction of die fnftru- 
menti every thing was contrived that appeared likely to give it firmnefi \ it was refted 
updii the frustum of an hexagonal pyramid of ftone, in the founding whereof, great 
care was taken as to its foiidity ; and was detached from the door for fupporting the 
obfcrvcr. 

This Obfcrvatory at Aufthorpe I efteem in the ladtude of $i^* 4/ 5V' N. and 
^ 50'^ of time W. from Greenwich. 



TABLE 



WITH AH EQUATORIAL Mf CROMETER 

TABLE I. 




Obfervations of Mercury at his ^liofiga(ion, Sbpt. 1786, with an EtIQSrorial 



Micrometer. 



■ 








. . 


• 


, 




Day, Object, and 


a _ 


Time 


Time 


Reduced • 


•Mean 


Parts of 


Micror 






as taken by 


reduced to 


to jLiie middle 


of 


the mi- 


meter 


wires. 




S 


the clock 


min. &L sec. 


wire 


the wires 


croin. 


reduc. 


Sept. 23. 


AM. 


M. q. bea. 


/ // 


/ // 


/ // 


Rev. Pts. 


• 

Rev. Pts. • 


Merc. -to wire a 


5 


24 a 5 


24 47.5 


26 34.8 






1 
1 


A 


— 


25 3 14| 


25 52.3 


26 34.8 


. 




1 

1 


Middle wire B 


— 


25 2 Si 


26 34.7 


26 34.7 


26 34.7 


B 28.85 


SO.74 t 

1 


C 


_i_ 


27 1 6 


27 18 


26 34.7 


fN. B. The 


telescope's centre • 


P 


— 


?8 1 15 


28 22.5 


26 34.6 


< was pointed to horary circle ' 
1 Vl.34iDecl. N.7*»48'. 




PM. 








\* • 


1 


X Ceti to B 


9 


15 1.27 


15 28.5., 


15 i^.5 .. 


15 28.4 




• 


C 


— > 


16 23 


16 11.5 


15 28.^ 








T%uri to B 


• 


40 1 25 


, 40 27.5 ! 


40 27.5 


40 27.4 


B8. 39 


N.I 9.72 


C 


— 


41 21 


41 10.5 


4d 27.3 








Sept. 26. 






























X Cell to a 


9 


2 9 13 


2 3(5.5 


4 23.5 


■ 


■ J 


• 


A 




3 2 23 


3 41.5 


4 23.9 


4 23.8 


B 16.97 


N 11.14 


C 


— 


5 Ui 


... 5 '7.3^ 


4 24.1 








Tauri to A 


-.• 


28 2 21 


28 40.5 


29 22.9 








B 


— 


29 1 16 


29 23 


29 23 


29 23 


B8.47 


N 19.64 


Sept. 30. 






























X Ceti to a 


8 


47 3J 


47 1.8 


48 48.8 








A 


..« 


48 13 


48 6.5 


48 48.9 




■ 


• 


B 


.— i 


48 3 8 


48 49 


48 49 


48 49 


B 16.97 


N 11.14 


C 


— 


49 2 4i 


' 49 32.3 


48 49.1 


• 






Tauri to A 


9 


13 11 


13 5.5 


13 47.9 








B 


•^ 


13 3 6 


13 48 


13 48 


13 48.1 


£8.48 


N 1963" 


C 


— 


14 2 3 


14 31.5 


13 48.3 








a Orionis to a 


11 


41 3 12 


41 51 


43 38 








A 


— 


42 3 20i 


42 53.3 


43 37.7 








B 


— 


43 2 17 


43 38.5 


43 38.5 


43 37.9 


A 15.07 


s 15.77 


C 


— 


44 1 12 


44 21 


43 37.8 




• 




D 


.. 


45 1 20J 


45 23 


43 37.7 








Oct. 13. 
X Ceti to A 










- 






7 


58 3 


58 45 


59 27.4 






• 


B 


— 


59 1 25} 


59 27.7 


59 27.7 


59 27.5 


B 16.97 


N 11.14 


C 


8 


21i 


59 10.7 


59 275 








Tauri to C 


— 


25 20 


25 10 


24 26.8 


24 26.8 


£8.50 


N 19.61 


a Orionis to a 


10 


52 2 Ok 


52 30.2 


54 17.2 








A 


— 


53 2 9 


53 34.5 


54 16.9 








B 


— 


54 1 4£ 


54 17.2 


54 17.2 


54 17.1 


^15.07 


S 15.77 


C 


— 


55 0} 


55 0.2 


54 \7 








D 


— 


56 10 


56 5 


54 17.4 








1 


8 


3 


4 


5 


6 


7 


8 



TABLE 



. t 



laa 



ACCOUNT Olf AN OBSERVATION OF MERCURY 



TABLE n. 



For reducing the horary Wires of the Equatorial Micrometer to that of the Middle, 

when taken in mean Solar Time. 



mm 



§J 



The ift wire precedes the middlcj add 
ad 

3d, or m\jddlc wire — — 
4th is fubfequentto the middle, fubtra^b 

5th -—--—--—-——— 



mm^ 



a 
A 
B 
C 
D 



Equatorial 
Objeft- 



0*s run 



/ // 
I 46.2 



I 42.1 



t 42.9 
I 46.8 



-y: s run 



/ // 
I 46 

I 42 



I 42.8 
I 46.6 



Declination 
7^48'. 



O's run 



/ // 
I 47-3 

I 42-5 



X 43-3 
I 47-9 



-v< *s run 



/ // 

I 47 

I 4^.4 



I 43-a 
I 47.6 



TABLE 



/ 



WITH AN EQUATORIAL MICROMETER. 



in 



TABLE III. 

Containing the Obfcrvadons of Table I. reduced Co as to flicw the correct Differences 
of right Afcenfion and Declination between Mercury and the Stars wherewith he was, 
compared. 



17S6. 
Dale uiid oUjcct. 


Hour. 


PaKBge 

hor. nire 

by journ. 
clock. 


Correclion 

to reduce 

the clock 

to mean 

lime. 


Correct mean 
time of the 
observation. 


Parts of 
Intervals of micromr- 
meaii time of ler from 
ditferent ob- the telc- 

servationj. scope's 
ccDtrc. 


Pts. of mirr. 

rcduced=: 

declin. from 

the iclescope'i! 

centre. 


Sept. 23. 
e to Ihc mid. wire 


AM 
5 


26 34.7 


— 3 59.8 


h. / // 
5 2'2 34.9 




Rev. Pt5. 
S 0.7* 


S 1 S 


X Ci-ti to mill, wire 
Tauri to the aaine 


PM 
9 
9 


15 CS.4 
40 '27.* 


— 4 O.I 

— 4 O.I 


9 U 28.3 
9 36 !J7.3 


h. , „ 
J 5 4S 53.4 
24 59 


N 19-72 


N 30 26 


Sept. 2fi. 
h Cell lo mid. wire 
D Tauri to iho same 


9 
9 


4 33.8 
29 23 


— 4 43.2 

— 4 43.2 


8 .^9 40.6 

9 24 39.8 


24 sg,2 


Nil 14 
N 19.64 


N 17 11 
N 30 18 


Sept. 30. 
K Ceti to mid. wire 
o Tauri to the Mme 
aOrion.lo the same 


8 
9 
11 


48 49 
13 48.1 
43 37.9 


— 4 50.9 

— 4 5o.y 

— 4 50.8 


« 43 58.1 
9 8 57.2 
H 38 47.1 


24 59.1 
2 29 49.9 


N 11.14 
N 19.63 

s 15.77 


N 17 11 
N 30 17 
S 20 20 


Oct. 13. 
X Ceti to mid. wire 

Tauri 10 the same 
a Orion, to the same 


7 

. 8 
10 


59 27-5 
■2-t 26". 8 
54 17.1 


-6 36.4 
— 6 36.4 
-6S7 


7 32 51.3 
S 17 50 
10 47 40.1 


24 58.7 
2 29 50.1 


Nll.14 
N 19.61 

s 15.77 


N 17 11 
N 30 15 

S 20 20 


1 


2 


3 


4 


5 


6 


7 


8 



I 



133 



ACCOUNT OF AN OBSERVATION OF MERCURY 









e 
o 






tr^ 






C 






o 






^ 






< 






<•-» 






*r: 






bO 


c 




h* 


^ 




•.s 


2 






O 




s 


U4 




V 


o 




E 


JS 




o 


«^ 




C 


«n 




u 


M 




^ 






3 


s 




p 


u 




1 


Ji 




cr 


E 




M 


§. 




<^ 


O 




•S 


CO 




^ 


^ 


• 
> 


1 




1 


^ 


^s 




s 


o 


o 


1> 


vt: 




-s 


,j? 




u-l 






o 


C« 




CO 


Q 




5 


c 




t> 


0^ 




*•» 


5 




%4^ 






o 


C 




c 


c 




o 


5 






•g 




ti 


6 
• v4 




• v^ 






Q 






o 


Q 




•s 


nd 




^g 


9 




01 






c 






o 






•c 






c« 






> 







^ o 

CO *^ 

O 



6 o 
2 ^ 



P 4.4 



S? 7<t3 



«n 



■3:7- 



e o 

2 '^ 

«J en 



•0 NO 



CO 



s 






o « 



«ii J-s 



o o 



^8^ 



o 

w • * 

o *» 



o «n 

-^ O 



5 o o 

c 

S » 

O J< 

5 ^^ 



O c< 

^ o 
SIS 



t 



M CO 

•s 



C4 

w 0\ 



§•§ S-s 



§1 



•3 D 

o 

CO 



« o 



X 



8 ' 



CO 



O CO 
C4 



c4 

O 00 






o 

c 



5 ^ 

»S CO 



s 



c 



c 

2 c 
^ 2 






•c 
H 



o *^ 

c 



1 1 
1 1 
1 1 



i I 
1 1 



1 1 



i 1 I 



I I 



e 
o a 

fkSQ 



I 



E 




•o 




Vm 




O 




TJ 




C 




o 




u 




Oi 




c« 




Vfcrt 




O 




CO 








li« 




c« 




Oi 




•^ 




S 








ii 




n3 




TJ 




S 




u 




1/ 




^ 


• 


C 


^ 




i> 


V 


no 


•s 


«l 


.s 


o 


1 


«0 

c 


t 


o 


&• 




X 


^2* 


«> 






o 


CO 










•o 


g 


(S 


f»i^ 


y 


s 




"^ 


M 




«» 


4^ 




righ 


C 


V 


v| 


JC3 


C 


H 


"u 




1> 


eq 




lai 


H 



WITH AN EQUATORIAL MICROMETER. 153 



Ei'planation of the less obvious Parts of the Tables of the Observation of 

Mercury near his Elongation, Sept. 1786. 

The third column of Table I. contains the tinncs of obfervation as they were taken 
down from the \\z\{'(tconA journeyman clock, in minutes, quarters, and beats, ac- 
cording to the following method ; which was, by taking up the beat when the fecond 
hand came to 15, 30, 45, or 60, and then counting 30 beats repeatedly till the arrival of 
the objeft at the middle of the wire it was approaching i after its arrival, the beats (or 
interval between two beats) being retained in memory, and the eye caft upon the dial* 
plate, it was eafily fcen whether it was fo many beats more than the quarter, the half^ 
three-quarters, or the whole minute, and was fet down accordingly. Thofe reduced to 
minutes, feconds, and tenths of feconds, by allowing .3 for the quarter fecond, .5 the 
half, and .7 for the three-quarters of a fecond, are contained in the fourth column. 
The reduction of the fourth column to the fifth was by means of the auxiliary Table II. ; 
and Mercury being then nearly ftationary refpefting the fun, the fun's run was ufcd for 
the planet inftcad of diat of a ftar. The mean of each fet of obfervations of the fifth 
column are carried into the fixth. 

The feventh column contains the parts of the micrometer as they were read ofi^; to 
render which intefligiWe,. it is to be noted, that the declination wire A travels from the 
upper fide of the field of view of the telefcopc towards the centre, and fomewhat 
beyond it; and upon it are taken all the objects that pafs the field of view on the upper 
fide, anfwcrable (by inverfion of the objedl) to the fouthern half of the field : and in. 
like manner thofe that pafs the field of view on the lower half are taken upon the wire 
By and fot the lame reafon denote a declination north. The fcale of ttie microtneters of 
each wire begins from a point aflumed fomewhat without the field, and the number 
increafes from thence towards the centre of the field, and continues beyond it; the in- 
tegral parts are the turns of the fcrew, and the centefimal the di vifions of the index plate, 
being divided into- too parts. The point of the fcale, anfwerable to the centre of the 
field of view.> having been found by obfervations on each fcale refpectivcly i when the 
wire A (Australis) ftands at 30.84, it is in the centre of the field ; and when the wire 
B (BQreaUs)\s at 28.11, it alfo cuts the fame centre. Hence the parts of the micro- 
meter being refpectivcly taken from thofe two numbers (which may therefore be called 
constant mittibers) the ivmainder will be the diftance of each refpedlivc wire from the 
centre in parts of the micrometer. Thus, in the obfervation of Tatiri upon the 23d, . 

the 



134 ACCOUNT OF AN OBSERVATION OF MERCURY 

the parts are B 8,39 ; this taken from 28. 1 1, leaves N 19.72, which are placed in col. 8. 
as the.diftance, in parts of the micrometer, that Tauri paffcd north of the centre of the 
field of view, or axis of the telcfcopc. 

In like manner, in the pbfervation of Mercury on the 23d, the parts are B 28.85; 
but this being greater than the conftant number 28.11, the excefs will be .74 parts; 
which being the parts reaching beyond the centre, they will be fo much soulh of it, and 
are fct down therefore in col. 8. S 0.74 : and in this manner the declinations of the reft 
are made out, from their refpeftive numbers of parts of the micrometer, and fet down 
in col. 8. 

The numbers of the fixth column of Table I. are transferred to the third column of 
Table III. ; and the declinations fet down in parts of the micrometer, Table I. col. 8> 
are transferred to col. 7. of Table III. 

Col. 4« of this table, contains the correftions of the times deduced- from the journey- 
man clock (as per col. 3.) to reduce it to mean time ; which corre£tions are made out 
from the general account of the goings of the tranfit clock, corrected by tranfits of the 
fun, taken the 22d, 23d, 27th, and 30th of September, and the 12th, 13th, and 14th 
of Oftober ^. The journeyman clock was regularly compared at nights and mornings 
with the tranfit clock ; and generally immediately after the obfcrvation. The meridian 
and rotative obfcrvatorics in which the clock refpectively were, are at the diftancc of 
^3 yards E. and .W. ; the comparifons were made by a feconds ftop watch f . 

1 

The numbers of the fourth column being properly applied to thofe of the third pro- 
duce the fifth ; and which, with the fixth column, will be fulEciently explained by their 
titles. The parts of the micrometer in the feventh column, being reduced into minutes 
^d feconds, are contained in col. 8. and refpectively fhew the minutes and feconds at 
which each object pafled to the north or fouth of the centre of the telefcope. The 
ralue of the parts of the micrometer were obtained by previous obfervations, from 



• The transit clock was made by Hihdlet, and has a pendulum rod of iedar wood. 

t The journeyman clock was generally set to the transit clock on Sunday mornings ; and when from 
home the former was suffered to go down. The journeyman wiU generally agree with the transit clock 
^ 2^ in S4 l^ours; but during the period of these observationsy went remarkably well. 

whence 



/ 



WITH AN EQUATORIAL MICROMETER. 135 

whence the following rule was deduced : the numbers of turns and centefimal parts 
being confidered as integral, and divided by 1.08, the quotient will be the number of 
feconds. Thus, in the obfervation of Tauri upon the 23d, the parts 1972, divided 
by 1.08, g^ves 1826'^ = 30^ 26^'; and the parts of Mercury .74, divided by 1.08 = 
68'' = 1' 8''. Now the telefcope being fixed to one point of the heavens during the 
whole period of thefe obfervations, without any motion of any of the parts, the fcrews 
commanding the declination wires A and B excepted, we are enabled to judge of its 
fteadinefs to this point by the following remarks. If it varied in declination, this would 
be fliewn by the paflagc of the fame ftar at a different diftance from the centre of the 
telefcope at different revolutions 5 and if it varied in right afcenfion, it would be (hewn 
by its not pafling the horary wires at the due time, according to the acceleration of the' 
ffars upon the mean time of the fun. Both the right afcenfion and declination may be 
varied by differences of refraftion of the air at the fame altitude ; and the right afcen- 
fion is further liable to he apparently varied, by the errors of the tranfit inftrument, 
the tranfit clock, the transferring of its time to the journeyman clock, the intermediate 
errors of the fame, and of the obfervation itfclf ; and as there paffed an interval of 
almofl: i6 hours betwixt the paffage of Mercury over the field of view of the telcfcop« 
and that of A Ceti, which was the neareft ftar wherewith a comparlfon could be made, 
it will be a fatisfaftion to fee, as before intimated, what variations arofc in ftill greater 
intervals of time. 

Ih right afcenfion. . 

Thus X'Ceti upon Sqpt. 23, passed the horary wires at - • • 

and ~— — — 26, ■ - • . 

X Ceti therefore came sooner in three ddys by - 
but ' ought to accelerate on mean time ' - 

■ therefore c^me after three days exactly to the time 



Again* o. Tauri upon Sept. 23, passed the horary wires at 
and- 26, . -—--------—-----—— 



o Tauri therefore came sooner after three days by 
— ^— ought to accelerate on mean time 



therefore came too late in three daysliy. 



- 


9 11 2d.3 
8 59 40.5 


• 


11 A^ir 

11 4,7.7 


a 




• 


9 36 27.3 

9 24 39.S 


m 


U47.5 
11 47.7 


m ■ 


.2 



Ih 



186 



ACCOUNT OF AN OBSERVATION OF MERCURY 



la declination. 



Tauri upon Sept. S3, pasted north of telescope's centre 
: 26, 



therefore passed less north, or more south, than before by 



/ 


// 


so 


26 


80 


18 


8 



In like manner every comparifbn that Table III. affords is particularly fet down in 
Table IV. which^ containing thirteen comparifons in right afcenfion and ten in declina- 
tion^ the greateft deviation in right afcenfion is i'/.2^ and ii'^ of a degree in decli- 
nation. This fuppofes every error before mentioned to refide in the inftn]ment> and 
every other inft rumen t and obfervation, which were concerned in the refult, to be 
per&A i which^ from the fmallnefs of the total errors, feems to indicate a degree of 
fteadinefs in the inltrument unexperienced or unnoticed before. 

Deduction of the Position of Mercury from the preceding Observations as set 

down in Table III. 

In right afcenfion from column 5. 



• Tauri followed X Ceti Sept. 25. 

26. 

30. 

• — ■ . Oct. 13. 



at a mean of the four 



u Orionis followed o Taari Sept. 30. 
Oct. 13, 



— at a mean 



Now Mercury preceded a Ceti Sept. -23, 
A Ceti preceded o Tauri by mean of four - 
o Tauri preceded a Ononis by mean of two 

Mercury therefore preceded a Ononis by • 



2\ 


59 


24 


59^2 


24 


59.1 


24 


58.7 


24 


59 


h. / 


It 


2 29 49.9 


2 29 50.1 


2 29 50 


15 48 


53.4 


24 


^9 


2 29 50 


18 43 


42.4 



In 



WITH AN EQUATORIAL MICROMETER. 137 



In declination from column 8. 



# M 



Sept. fS. A. M. Mercury passed the middle horary wire, louth of its centre • 19 

Same evening o Tauri passed the middle horary wire, north of it - • -30 26 



Tbereforc Mercury passed the middle horary ivire more south than o Tauri by ^ 31 34 

But Sept. 26, A Ccti passed north of centre 

/■ Tauri 

30, H Ct ti ' 

*■ Tauri ■ 



Oct. l3,ACeti 
■ ■ - ' ■ o Tauri 



9 

17 
30 


1 ' 7 

,8 j D'ff- " 


n 

7 


17 
SO 


;;]-" 


6 


17 
SO 


"1 IS 

153 


« 



From the fmallnefi of the above differences wc may infer, that very little uncer- 
tiMty in declinadon had attended the paflage of o Tauri upon Sept. 23. 

Upon Sept 30, o Tauri passed north - 30 177 
a Ononis south • 24 ^20^ ^""" ^ ^' 



Upon Oct. 13> o Tauri passed north • 30 15 

' I a Ononis *— • southr - 24 20 ^ ^* ^* 



] 



• Orionis then at a neaii passed more south than o lliuri - - • - 54 36 



Mercury therefore on the 23d passed with more north declination that a Orionis • 23 2 



Investigation of the Effects of Refraction. 

The preceding deduflions and remarks flsew the confiftency of the obfervations 
with themfclves i yet, from the pofition of the telefcope, it being only elevated 1 1*|* 
above the horizon *j it is neceflfary to examine how far the deductions above fpecified 
were capable of being affected by refraction. And in this refpect it will appear, that 



**Thil will readily ba deduced by inspection of the celestial globe* 

T if 



1;1S ACCOUNT OF AN OBSERVATION OF MERCURY 

if it be fuppofed, tlicre is no difference in the quantity of refraction of fuch objects 
as appear within the limits of tlie Held of view of this inftrument (which is i'' 17'), 
then their relative poficions to ccxh other will not be affected thereby : for if in 
ng. I. Plate IX. we fuppofv^ the circle VHRO to reprefcnt the boundary of the 
field of ^'irw, MO b ing an horizrntal and VR a vertical line, each paffing through 
the centre of the field at L ; and if PLP denotes a part of a parallel of declination, 
then BLX perpendicular thereto, will be a part of an horary circle, both pafling 
through the fame centre. Now let d -/c be the apparent path of a ftar^ fuppofing it 
unaffected by refraction till it comes to the vertical line at-5<, and there to be lifted 
up by refraction in the faid vertical to L. Let e 4. denote another ftar, alfo unaffected 
by refraction, to pafs alorg the different parallel of declination e 4- till it comes to -f ; 
then, if it be fuppofed that the two ftars are both fituated in the fame horary circle, 
if at ihe point + refracti m takes place, and by hypothefis this is lifted up equally 
with the other, in rhe perpendicular + /, then the line +•: being drawn through the 
places of the two iiars, will be cotemporary and parallel to LX ; and the figure / + v'L 
being evidently a rhomboides, the two ftars, fo altered by refraction, will arrive 
together at the horary circle LX at the fame time, and with the fame difference of 
declination, as if no refraction had taken place. It is therefore only the cHjftrcncc 
of refraction which takes place in objects at different heights in the same field, that 
can alter their relative fituations : however, it appears neceffary to examine what this 
may amount to. 

Let the letters in fig. 2, denote the fame things as before ; to which we will add, 
that r/. A, B, C, D, denote the parallel horary wires of the micrometer, and A Ay 
Bn^ the declination wires, denoted ^ and ii in the tables: now from the celeftial 
globe we fliall alfo readily obtain the horary angle VLI = 54''^=Lic. Let now aa 
object pafs along the wire A A from the horizontal line at d to the vertical line at ^ j 
in this it will pafs through a difference of refraction, according as it gets more and 
more elevated above the horizontal line HO ; and let the elevation LA be half a 
degree or 30 minutes : then, according to Dr. Bradley's. Table of Refraction *, the 
difference of refraction betwixt the 78th and 79th degrees of zenith diftancc is 
22f'.6y half of which ii'^S, may be efteemed the difference of refraction for a dif- 
ference of half a degree of altitude at 78*^ zenith diftance, or of iT*^ altitude : the 



>««■ 



* kscrtcd ill Dr. Mask£LT2I£'$ Obscrvationiy Vol. I»p* lj5«« 



object, 







Q) 







« "^ 



WITH AN EQUATdlAL MICROMETER. ViJ 

object, therefore, in pafling from the horizontal line at cl to the vertical line at b 
paflci through every difference of refraction from o" co ii'^8; and the qucftion is^ 
how murh it is at a medium, chat is, when it arrives at the middle wire at the point 
C f From this pomt let fall the perpendicular ce. Now, the proporcirjn of the fides 
of the triaiTgle dMj being given from conftruction, they may be taken off by a fcale 
viz. 

Suppofe Li=i74 

and affumiftg the fide LA=30 
the other fides by proportion as above V dbzz^i.6 

vfVA be LdLzi^i.j 

The triangles L6c and dee are fimilar to dbL,-, therefore fay, as ^4=51.6 : rfL= 
41.7 :: /-/y=:jo : Lct=24j and as 0=30 : Lc=24:: rfL=4i.7 : dc^23'5i ^"d again, 
as dbzzS^'6 • dc^i^.S •• ^^=30 : ce=ig.S : but this will affect the dcciinaiion, only in 
proportion of the line ej drawn parallel to LX i and it will affect the right afcenfi jn ac- 
cording to the line fc: but the triangle ccf being fimilar to the original one dbL, we ihall 
have dbzz^\.6 : L6=30 :: 0^=19.5 'fi=-\ 1.3 f)r the line affeftingthc right afcenfion 5 
and alfo, as^/A=5i.6 : ^/L=4i.7 :: ct=i9.5 : c/ = i5.8 for the line affcdling the de- 
clination. But the effect of difference of refraftion upon the line L6=3o' being only 
ii'.S, the xelpcctive effects of the lines^i; and ^'will be in proportion j tluL is, 

as 30 : 1 1.3 :: 1 1.8 : 4.4 for the effect in right afcenfion, 

and as 30 : 15.8 :: 11.8 : 6.2 declination; 

but, as it has been determined, that when the line L6 is 30 minutes, the line LC, or the 
-correfponding declination, will tc only 24 minutes i the cfFefts of rcfraflion above 
ftated will be therefore due to 24'. 

Correction for the Position of theJVires. 

"The above corrections take place on fuppofition that the fcveral wires of the micro- 
meter were flrictly parallel to the rcfpcctive parts of the circles of declination, and 
:horary circles in the heavens -, but in the practical ufe of this inftrumcnt it is f > id 
more convenient, on account of a ready and certain adjuflmenr, to place one of the 

wires 



** 



140 ACCOUNT OF AN OBSERVATION OF MERCURY 

wires A A or BB parallel to the apparent track of the ftar wherewith the planetary 
body is to be compared : in confequence, when the ftar ->c, fig. i. is lifted up to L, it 
will not ftrictly purftie the line LP ; but being Icfs and lefs lifted up as it mounts higher, 
it will apparently fall more and more below the line LP as it afcends above the line HO, 
and will therefore take a courfe, fuppofe Lp. The wire PLP being therefore adjufted 
to agree with php ; by conftruction of the inftrument, the wire BLX will aflbme the 
pofition yLv perpendicular to />Lp. The ftar, therefore, that ran along the parallel 
c+ before it fuffcred refradion, and at + was fuppofed to be lifted up to /, there not meet- 
ing LX will take the courfe /y, nearly parallel to Lp, and have fome diftance, as h, to 
travel before it arrives at the new-placed wire "Lx ; and it is now proper to examine 
what this quantity may be. 

Through the point z draw the line r zos parallel to HO, and cutting the vertical RLV 
in (?, and let Lo be aflumed=3o'; then, fince the angle XLv is fuppofed to be minute, 
the gross proportions of the fides of the triangles 'Lyz and Ly/ m^y be, for this pur- 
pofc, fuppofed the fame *, and the fame as LAc, dbL^ fig. a. to which the triangle Lso, 
fig. I. will alfo be fimilar; as likewife the triangle yzo^ and alfo the little triangle zlv : 
but making the fide Iv of the triangle zlv equal to the effedt of refraftion in pcrpendicu- 
lar= 1 1" .8 i then, to find the fide Izj the diftance run from firft to the laft fuppofed place 
of the wire, we need only fay, as L6=30 : ^A— 51.6 :: /vzrii".8 : lz'=.id' .^i ^i^^d this 
will be -its value when the declination Lc, fig. 2. is 24 ; but then the declination L/ or 
Lar, fig. I. being greater than the perpendicular fide Lo (affumed 30') in the proportion 
of L^: : Lo, fay; by fimilariry of triangles converfcly, as ^L=4i.7 : ^^=51.6 :: /-o= 
30' : Z^— 38' .2 } but as the correction before ftaced of 20" .3 is an angular error, taking 
place in proportion to the diftance from the centre, or the declination; for the declina- 
tion given of 24 fay, as 38.2 : 24' :: 20*^ .3 : 13 j to which, adding 4*. 4, we ftiall have 
1 7" .4 for the whole error in right afcenfion, fuppofing it in the equator, but muft be 
again increafed in the proportion in which a ftar having declination is Qower than a ftar in 
the equator j that is, it muft be increafed in the proportion of any of the numbers in 



* I Am aware, that the supposition of the sides of the triangles hyz and hyl being the same cannot be 
strictly so; nor can ibcy have the same proportions; nor arc any of the lines concerned right linqs, that 
are supposed such ; but assumptions near the truth are allowable for the correctioki of an error in the 
greatest portf that if uncorrected would scarcely amount to a gras error, 

the 



WITH AN EQUATORIAL MICRONfETER. 141 

the fourth column of Table II. tb the fimilar ones in col. 6. of the fame table ; that isi 
as i' 46" : 1' 47" or as 106 : 107, :: 17" .4 : 17*6*. 

As all thcfc errors, arifing from difference of refraction, are in proportion of the 
diftancc of the object from the centre of the telefcope, they will take plkce in propor* 
tion to the difference of declination of the two objects to be compared, whether thejr 
have paffed the field on the fame or on different fides of the centre. Now the difference 
of declination of Mercury and « Orionis being only 23' 2", and the quantities being made 
out for 24' fay (rejecting the 2 fcconds), as 24' : 23' :: 17*. 4 : 16^^.7, which turned 
into time in the run of the liar will be i^'.i in right afcenfion. 

Say again, as 24' : 23' :: 6" ,2 : 6", the correction in declination. From the near 
equality of the lines L/'and Lar, it is evident, that no correction of declination is ne- 
ceffary on account of the inclination of the wires, the whole difference falling in right 
afcenfion. As therefore Mercury paffed with 23' 2" more north dtftrlination than u 
Orionis, and paffed through a part of the medium that lifted him up lefs ; it therefore 
gave him lefs north declination than it did to «, and therefore apparently diminilhed the 
real difference j hence 6" muft be added to the apparent difference 23' 2", making it 
23' i", difference of declination : and as Mercury was lifted up lefs than a^ he would 
not fo foon come to the middle wire by i'' .i as he fiiould have done, he therefore came 
too late by i" .1, which muft be fubtracted from the time of Mercury •s paffage the 2d 
of September, which will increafe the time in which he preceded u Orionis ; that is» 
1 8 h. 43' 42^.4 increaied by i.i will become 18 h. 43' 43" -5 difference of right 
afcenfion. 

I have been the more particular in the inveftigation of this obfcrvation, ftrft of all to 
afcertain the degree of dependance that may be formed on an inftrument of the kind ; 
and, fccondly, to infer fuch eafy and fimple rules, that other fimilar obfervations may 
be the more eafily reduced. Being therefore fatisfied of the (lability of the inftrument 1 
if we had concluded the obfervation with that of Mercury in the morning, and of 
Tauri in the evening of the 23d, then the rcfult from Table III. fliould have been 

Mercury passed the vrires at • • - - • 

And Tauri passed at • - - - • • 

Difference of right ascension • • ' • - • 



17 22 34.9 
9 36 87.3 


15 13 52.4 



• My friend Dr. Masvilyks observes, that in strictness each star ought to have its own proper re- 
ductioD, on account of difercnct ot declinationi which iucxtrans casts wiU amount to a sensible quantify. 

which 



'_«. ■;_!_ • 



142 ACCOUNT OF AN OBSERVATION OF MEkCURY 

which is the very fame as was before deduced from the mean of the whole : 

And if to Mercury's declination south of telescope's centre - • ^18 

\Vc add o Taun's north ■ > - - - 30 26 



"We shall have for the difference of declination - - - - 31 34 



the fame as before determined. Our obfcrvation would, therefore, in this cafe fimply 
have been, that Mercury preceded o Tauri in right afccnfion I5h. 13' 52''^4 meantime,^ 
and paflfed the wire with more fomh declination than© Tauri by 31^ 24f^. 

After this, Tauri would have required to be compared with fome well rectified ftar 
by meridian inftruments ; but in the prefent cafe a Orionis, one of Dr. Maskeylne's 
Catalogue of 34 principal ftars happened to lie fufficiently near the fame parallel of de- 
clination, to admit of Tauri to be compared therewith by the fame inftrument, while 
pointed to the fame place of the heavens. The operations which were fubfequeor^ 
therefore, mull be confidered as intended to fave thpfe of a meridian inftrument. 

Now, had our obfervation concluded with the above, then the correction would have 
taken place upon the difference of declination of Tauri with Mercury, inftead of the 
ultimate one with tf Orionis j but it muft be obfervcd, that whatever quantity of cor« 
reftion the difference of declination would occafion, it would be compenfated in tkc 
difference of refradbion of Tauri and « Orionis, when they came to be obferved on the 
meridian ; however, in the prefent cafe it happens to be more commodious, as both caa 
be done under one. 

Preparatory then to the laying down the fimple rule for the correction of refraction, 
it is proper to premife, that it is evident, the lines, fig. 2 L6, Lc, ce, ej\ being in con- 
tinued proportion Tub will be to^'in triplicate proportion of L6 to Lcj and that Lc 
will be to cj in duplicate proportion of L.b : he. The difference of declination, there- 
fore, due to 30' difference of elevation will be as hb to Lc fimplyi but the effect of 
difference of refraction in declination will be lefs than the difference of declination in the 
proportion of L^* : Lc*; and that the effect of difference of refraction in right afcenfion 
will be lefs than the difference of refraction in declination in the proportion of Lb : cb 
fimply- 

Now it has been remarked, that the -elevation of the telefcope'^s centre above the 
horizon, and the horary angle VLP, will always be readily given near enough for the 
{pui2>ofe:by thef;16be» A tciangle^iveaLA^ can therefore be conftructed, and the fide 

Lb 



WITH AN EQUATORIAL MICROMETER. 143 

Li being made 3c/ (or any convenient aliquot part of a degree) the other fides will be 
found by proportion: fay then, as in the prcfent cafe, db=^i.6 : rfL=:4i.7 :: Li= 
30 : Lc=24, for the difference of declination corrcfponding to half a degree of altitude : 
fay then, as 51.6* : 41.7*, that is, as 2663 : 1739 : ; 24 : 15. 7=:^/! But without 
troubling ourfelves with high numbers, if we take the proportion, 51.6 to 41.7 by the 
flide-rulc twice, we fhall arrive at 15.7, near enough for the value of the line ef: fay 
theii> as luhzz^Q 2 e/" 15.7 :: ii^^S : 6". 2 for the refraction in declination: and as 
dL=4i.J : Li • 30 : : 6",2 : 4".4 for the refraction in right afcenfion, according to the 
true poficion of the wires: and for the correction of right afcenfion in the pofitionof 
the wires, fay. 

Fig, 2. Fig. 1 . 



^> ^ ^ -> ^ 



As L&nSO : £/^=5l.6' : : /i = 1 i".8 : /z=20".3 ; 
tnd again, (fL=4l.7 • dOzz5l.6 : : l.o=30' : L:=:38'.2. 

Take now L//> fig. i.=Lc, fig. 2.=24', aiid draw the line ///A-, fig. i, parallel to 
the linc/z^, and then fay, as Li=38',2 : LA (or Li)=24' ; : /c=r2o".3 : ///=I3'', which 
+4".4=i7''.4 for the whole error in right afcenfion, with a declination or diftancc 
from the centre of 24''} but as the errors both of right afcenfion and declination arc 
in proportion to diftance from the centre, as the difference of the planet and flar is 
only 23^ fay, as 24' : 23': : i7".4 : i6^7=zi".i tim^i^ and for the declination, fay 
again, as 24' : 23' : : S^^.i : &' declination *. 



Reduction of Mercury^s Comparison xvith u Orhnis to right Ascension and 

Declination. 

We have laid it down, that the 23d Sept. 1786, A. M^ at 5 h. 22' 34^9 mean 
time. Mercury preceded a Ononis 18 h. 43' 4>3"«S> and had then z more northern 
declination by 23' 8". 

According to Dr. Maskelyne's Catalogue of 34 fl:ars, the right afcenfion of « 
Ononis reduced to the time when he was obfervcd is 850 54' 12". 



* If the comparison had been with Tauri, then we must have said, 

Av24 : Z\\ : : 17.5 : 23=:'l.5 of time, 
anJ 2*^ : 31| : : 6.2 : S. 1 correction for declination. 
IT. B. All these and the above proportioQS will be commodiously wrought with the slide-rule. 

•'<:' ^' ^ - Now, 






144 ACCOUNT OF AN OBSERVATION OF MERCURY, fee. 

N0W9 as the whole circle of the fphere makes a revolution in the time thaf « Orionis 
makes one turn, which is 

23 S^ 4*< then from this deduct 
18 43 43-5 



5 12 20.6 remsdns for the time that « Orionis preceded^Mercurjr in right afcen* 



fion J but if « ran the whole rotation=:36o*^ in 23 h. 56' 4".!, what portion of it will 
be run in 5 h. 12' 2o".6=:i8740".6 ? 
But 24h.=:86^400 fecondsj and 360:1:1,296^000 feconds: 

Time. Time. Of degrees. Of degrees. 

Say then, as 86400^ : WJAXTA : : I296OOO" : 281109^= • - 78 5 9 

But, according to Dr. Maskbltnk's select Catalogue, th« right as« 

cension of m Orionis for Sept. 30, 1786, was (which add) • 85 54 12 

The right ascension of Mercury at the time of observation was therefore l63 59 2 1 

According to Dr. Maskbltvp/s select Catalogue a Orionis had decli- / // o 

nation north, corrected for precession - - - • 7 21 8.8 

The sum of aberration and nutation from Connoissance des Temps - + 8.4 

The correct declination north of a Orionis - . • 

To which* add that Mercury passed more north • 

Mercury's declination therefore was • » • • 

The Result. 

1785, Sept. 23, A. M. \ , C right ascension • - l53 59 21 

*t 5 h. 22' 35'' M. T. J ^^^^^^*^ I declination north - 7 44 M 



-7 


21 
23 


17.2 
8 


-7 


44 25.2 



DESCRIPTION 



DESCRIPTION OF AN IMPROVEMENT, &c. 14^ 



DESCRIITION of an Improvement in the Application of the Quadrant of 
Altitude to a Celestial Globe, for the Resolution of Problems dependant on 
Azimuth and Altitude, by Mr. John Smeaton, F. R. S. 

Read at the Royal Society, November aorfi, lySS, 

T>ERHAPS there are few inftruments that better fulfil their defign in general, or 
-■- more naturally reprefent the movements they are intended to explain and illuftrate, 
than the terreftrial and celeftial globe, which are alfo applied to refolve fome of the 
problems of the fphere, which they moft readily do. I believe, however, that whoever 
applies to them for the laft mentioned purpofe, will find them more defective in fome 
refpeccs than they are in others« 

The difficulty that has occurred in fixing a femicircle, fo as to have a centre in the 
zenith and nadir points of the globe, at the fame time that the meridian is left at 
liberty to raiie the pole to its defired elevation, I fuppofe, has induced the globe-makers 
to be contented with the strip of diin flexible brafs, called the quadrant of altitude i 
and it is well known how imperfecdy it performs its offioe. 

The improvement I have attempted, is in tfie application of a quadrant of altitude^ 
of a more folid conftruction ; which being affixed to a brafs focket of fome length, andi 
this ground, and made to turn upon an upright fteel fpindle, fixed in the zenith, fteadily 
directs the quadrant^ or rather arc^ of attitude to its true azimuth^ without being at 
Uberty to deviate from a vertical circle to the right hand or left : by which means die 
azimuth and altitude are given with the fame exaftnefs as the meafure of any other of 
the great circles. 

With refpcct to the horary circle, as the common application fcems very convenient 
on account of the ready adjuflment of iu index to anfwer the culmination of any of the 
heavenly bodies ; and as 1 find that a circle of four inches diameter is capable of an 
adtual and very diftinguiOiable division into 720 parts, anfwerable to two minutes of 
tirtie each, which may ferve a globe of the largeft fize ; it feems that it Ihould rather 
be improved than omitted s and, if inilead of a pointer^ an index stroke is ufed iii the 
fame plane with that of the divifions, the fingle minutes, and even half minutes, may 
.be readily diftbguifhed. 

U This 



146 DESCRIPTION OF AN IMPROVEMENT 

This globe, though mounted merely as a model for experiment, and only nine inches in 
diameter, appears capable of bringing out the folution to a quarter of a degree ; which, 
I apprehend, may be efteemed fufficient not only as a check upon numerical computa- 
tion, but to come near enough to find ftars in the day-time in the field of telefcopes, 
which, having no equatorial motion, are only capable of direction in altitude and 
azimuth ; but from globes of a larger fize, we may expect to come proportionably 
nearer. 

Explanation of the Figures^ Plate X. 

The figures i. and 2. being different views of the fame things, AB reprefents a line, 
in common to both, in the fiirface of the horizon, which here is of brafs. 

CD, CD, are vertical lines, fuppofcd to pafs through the centre of the globe in 
each figure i and 

EFG, EFG, are portions of great circles of the globe. 

Fig. 1. fuppofes the fpeftator looking at the apparatus of the globe from the fouth 
point of the horizon; therefore the circular arch EFG, in this pofition> will be a part 
of the prime vert icaly and the fmall paralellogram HI is fuppofedio be ^section o{ tlic 
brafs meridian, according to that vertical plane. 

Fig. 2. is a view of the fame parts, the fpeftator being fuppofed to look at them 
from the weft point of the horizon j and in this pofition HI is fuppofed to be a portion 
of the brass meridian. This being fixed in mind, in what follows the fame letters 
denote the fame parts in both figures. — KLM denotes a piece of brafs, or brafs carriage, 
made to fit upon the vertical pan of the meridian, and capable of Aiding 5** on each fide 
of that point, foas adjuft to it, and to fix faft there, by means of the finger fcrew N*. 
This piece of brafs carries the steel spindle PQ which is firmly focketed into it at K, 
according to the dotted lines 7', r. The axis of this fpindle is therefore capable of 
being fet upright Upon the zenith pointy and to maintain that pofition with a fufficient 



• The holes represented in ihe portion of the brass meridian (MI, fi^, 2.) arc screw holes at five degrees 
distance, iti this quarter of the circle, into any of which the finger screw N is to be put, as occasion may 
require ; tbe slit allowing suthcicutly for adjustmeiu. 

degree 



148 DESCRIPTION OF AN IMPROVEMENT, &c. 

. confining it in any other refpect. — ^What I have found to anfwer this purpoie is re 
prefenctd, fig. 3. The crutch-like piece of wood ABC is (hewn as feen looking right 
down upon it. The circle DE is the horizontal fedlion of the fouth pillar of the 
globe. The ftrong wire pin FG> that goes through tlie two arms of the crutch and 
pillar, ferves as an axis upon which its other extremity at B is at free liberty to life 
up and down, but without (hake upon the pin j and the whole being iplit with a fine 
faw, from B to H, the notch BK lays hold of the underfide of the brafs meridian, 
and by tightening the finger fcrew LM, it firmly clips it, and retains it in any given 
pofition. And that it may be under no confinement cross-wayst the hole in the 
pillar is opened on both fides, as (hewn in the fcdlion, to give it liberty of accommoda- 
tion ; the pin being faft in the two ends of the crutch, and turning gendy in the pillar ; 
the whole being fiender and compliane, except in point of length. 

N. B. Thofe that would ufc the globe to the beft advantage to folve problems, 
(hould be careful to get 2l just declination, as alfo a distinct point to mark it; and 
as the circles and divifions upon the furface of the globe icfclf, are not always fuffi* 
ciently to be depended on for this purpofe, I have found the following expedient fully 
to anfwer. Choofe any plain white part of the globe's furface, anfwerable to the 
declination given, and with the point of a needle or protracting pin, by the help of 
the divifions of the brafs meridian, mark a fine point upon the blank furface of the 
globe, and upon this point make a dot with ink, with the fmali point of a pen, 
which rub* off with the finger, and it will leave a fine black fpeck behind. This dot 
being brought to the meridian, rectify the horary index to it, and it will accurately 
reprefent the centre of the celeftial body whofe inveftigation is wanted 



A . DESCRIPTION 



Tii:: ;. 
PUBu: 




ASTOT^ 


'. LIINOX 
OLi^D Alios 



Thilos. Trans. Vrl.yiLvm.TikS.SM.. a flatcji.p/wc i49. 




A DESqRIPTION OF A NEW PYROMETER. 149 

V 

A DESCRIPTION of a ucw Pyrometer, with a Table of Experiments 






made therewith, by J. Smeatok, F. R, S, 



See Plate XL 

A S it may tend to illuftrate the following account, it may not be improper to make 
-^^ mention of the properties, that a complete inftrument, for meafuring the cxpan- 
fiions that metalline bodies are fubject to by heat and cold, ought to be endowed with. 

And, firft, fince the quantities of thofe expanfions mull be proport' )nable to the 
length of the bar to be meaiured ; the longer che bar, the more fenfible the expanfion : 
And therefore fuch a conftrudlion is heft, as (aeteris paribus) wil* admit of the 
loogefl; bar. 

Secondly, That the fcale, whereupon thofe minute alterations are to be meafured,. 
ought to be, at lead, fo large, that the fmalleft change in the length of the bar, which, 
the inftrument is capable of being with certainty afiected with,, ought to be perceivable 
thereon. 

Thirdly, As the fame change, with relpect to the pofition of the index and Icale, wilP 
enfue, upon the fuppofition, that the materials, compoflng the inftrument icfelf,. are ex* 
panded in a certain degree, and the bar applied to be meafured remains unchanged in its 
length i as if the bftrument were fuppofed to fuSer no expanfion, and the bar to be 
meafured. were fuppofed to expand in the former degree : It is therefore neceflary, that> 
in the making ufc of an inftrument of this kind, the materials, of which- thofe parts arc 
compofed, upon which the meafure depends, ajid which may be called the bafis thereof 
fhould be fubject to no expanfion or contraction during fuch trials or that the expanfion: 
or.contracdon thereof (hould be capable of being known,, and accounted for.. 

Fourthfy, That as all bodies grow ftill longer by the application of a> greater degree 
of heat ; to compare the expanfions of difierent bodies, we ought to have fbme method: 
of headng them in the fame degree, notwithftanding their difFerence of texture, fpecific 
gravity, &c . 

Fifthly, The ieveral parts, upon which the meafurements depend, ought to be fuifi- 
ciently large, to be themfelves actually meafured i that not only the proportions of in* 
creafe of length in dif&rcnt metals, by the fame degrees of heat, may be known i but 

alfo' 



150 A DESCRIPTION OF A NEW PYROMETER. 

alfo the quantities of thofe expanfions> in real meafurcs : Or, in other words, the pro- 
portion?, that their increafe of length, between certain degrees of heat, bear to the 
Icngtii of the bodies : By which means, we arc enabled to afcertain the changes that 
bodies undergo in their dimenfions by the application of any given degrees of heat. 

With refpcct to the firft property, this inftrument is capable of receiving a bar two 
feet four inches long, and might be made capable of receiving bars of a much greater 
length, of feme kinds of materials, but not of others j on account of the flexibility 
brought upon tJieni by a degree of heat not greater than boiling water. 

• 

The meafures taken by this inftrument are determined by the contact of a piece of 
metal with the point of a micrometer-fcrew. The obfervation is the beft judged of by 
the hearing, rather than that of the fight or feeling. By this method I have found it 
very practicable, to repeat the fame meafurement feveral times, without differing from 
itfelf above one twenty- thou Pandth part of an inch. This principle of determining mea- 
fures by contact is not wholly new ; but has been employed on feveral occafions, as I 
am informed, by the late Mr. Graham : But the prefent manner of applying thereof^ I 
believe, is fo ; and the degree of fenfibility arifing therefrom exceeds any thing I have 
met with. As the method will eafily appear by the draught, I fliall avoid a farther 
defcription of it in this place 







As no fubftance has hitherto been dlfcovered in nature, that is perfccdy free from 
cxpanfion by heat, I chofc to conftruft this inftrument in fuch a manner, that the bar> 
which makes the bafis of the inftrument, fhall in each experiment fuffer the fame degree 
of heat, -as the bar to be meafurcd : Of confequencc, the meafures taken by the micro- 
meter are the differences of their cxpanfion. The cxpanfion then of the bafis between 
two given degrees of heat being once found, the abfolute expanfion of any other body, 
by adding or fubtrafting the difference to or from the cxpanfion of the bafis, according 
as the body to be meafured expands more or lefs than the bafis, will alfb be deter- 
mined. 



• I have lately seen an instrument at Mr. Short's, inado by the Ute Mr. Graham, for measuring the 
minute altoralions, in length, of nidal bars ; which were determined by advancing the pf)int of a micror 
melcr-screw, till it sensibly stopped against the end of the bar to be measured. 'I'his screw being small, 
fcud very li^^hlly hung, was capable of agreement within the 3 or iOOOth part of an inch. 

When 



A DESCRIPTION OF A NEW PYROMETER. 151 

When the inftrument js made ufe of^ it is immei^ed» together with the bar to be 
iheafuredj in a ciftern of "water ; which water, by means of lamps applied underneath, 
is made to receive any intended degree of heat, not greater than that of boiling, and 
thereby communicates the fame degree of heat to the inftrument, the bar, and to a mer- 
curial thermometer immerged therein, for the purpofe of afcertaining that degree. 
That this may be truly the cafe, the water (hould be frequently ftirrcd, that there may 
be no difference of heat in the difierent parts of the water : This being done, the height 
of the quickfilver appearing ftationary, the contadl with the fcrew of the micrometer 
al(b remaining the fame, for a fpace of time, it is to be fuppofed, that the heat of the 
three bodies will be the fame, as the heat of the water, however different they may 
be in fpecific gravity, &c. The whole difficulty is now reduced to this problem,, 
viz. 

To find the absolute expamion of the basis betzveen any fuo given degrees oj 
heaty not greater than that of beiling water. 

For this purpofe, let there be prepared a bar of ftrait-grained white deal, or cedar ^ 
which> it is well known, are much lefs expanfible by heat than any metal hitherto dif- 
covered : Let the i)ar be adapted to the inftrument in like manner as the other bars in^ 
tended to be meafured j but that the foftnefs of the wood may not hinder the juftnefs of 
its bearings, let its ends be guarded with a bit of brafs let into the wood at the points of 
contact, to prevent, as much as may be, the moifture or fteam of the water from affect- 
ing the wood 5 let it. fif ft be well varnilhed, and then, being wrapped round with coarfe 
flax from end to end j ■ this will, in a great meafure, imbibe the vapour, before it arrives 
at the wood. Let the ciftern alfo be fo contrived, that the inftrument being fupported 
at a proper height therein, the bar to be meafured may, upon occafion, be above the 
cover> while the bafis remains in the water : Thus will the cover alfo be a defence 
againft the moifture. Let the water in the ciftern be now brought to its lower degree 
of heat (fuppofe at or near the freezing point), the bafls having continued long enough 
in the water to receive the fame degree of heat> and the wooden bar having been pre- 
vioufly kept in an adjacent room> not fubject to fudden alterations of temperature by 
fire, or other caufes ^ let the bar be applied to the inftrument, and the degrees of the 
micrometer and the thjermometer read off, and fct down : Let the wooden bar be thea 
reftored to its former place, till the water is heated to the greater degree intended (ftip- 
pofe at or near that of boiling wat^r) i the lid being now (hut down, and the chinks 
flopped with coarlie flax, to prevent the iffuing of tiie fteam as much as poffible, let the 
wooden bar be again brought forth applied to tlie inftrument, and the degrees of the 

micrometer 



■ • 



152 A DESCRIPTION OF A NEW t^YROMETER. 

micrometer and thermometer read off, as before : The difi^rence of degrees of the 
micrometer, correfponding to the difference of degrees of the iherrtiometer, will exprefa 
the expanfion of the bafls between thofe degrees of heat ; diat is, vtpon the fuppofition 
that the wooden bar was of the fame lengthy at the time bf uking die fecond meafore^ 
as at the fir(t : Indeed a meafure can hardly be taketi without atiy lofs of time, as the 
whole of the inftrument, when the hot meafure is to be taken, is confiderably hotter 
than the wooden bar j and, in cafe of boiling water, the fleam being very repellant and 
active, the bar is liable to be fcnfibty affected in its length, before the ttieafure can be 
taken, both by heat and moidure, which both tend to expand the bar : But as the quan^ 
tity is fmall, and capable of being nearly afcertained, a wooden bar, thus applied, will 
anfwer the fame end as if it was unalterable by heat or dioifture. 

In order, therefore, to know the quantity of this alteration, let the time elapled bc^ 
tween the fird approach of the bar to the inftrument, and the taking 6f the meafdre, 
be obfcrvcd by a fccond-watch, or otherwife j after another equal internal of tiitae, let ft 
fecond meafure be taken; and after a third interval, a third; and a fourth; the three 
differences of thefc fcjMr meafures will be found niarly to tally with three terms of a 
geometrical progrefSon, from which the preceding term may be known, and n^IU bt 
the correction ; which, if applied to the meafure firil taken, reduces it to what it Would 
have been if the wooden bar had not expanded durmg the taking thereof. 

From a few obfervadons of this kind^ carefully repeated, the expanGon of the bafia 
may be fetded ; and this oece done^ the aaaking experiments itpon "Other bars will be* 
come very eafy and compendious* 



■ X 



The bafis of this inftrument (as well as otber parts thereof) is t>ra& I chc(e this 
fubftance rather than any other whofe expanfion was gKater or lefs, becaufe I found* 
from ibme grofs experiments previoully made, that the expanfion <ff brafs was nearly a 
medium between thofe bodies, which differ moft in their expanfion : A confideHabk 
convenience arifes from thiscircumllance; becaufe as the measures, taken in codtimon 
experiments, are their difference from brafs, the dependance vipon the thermo^ter will 
. be lefs^ as thefe differences are lefs. This precaution I have found the more licceflary, 
.as. the greateil errors that ei^erimeots m^e wkh this inftrument are fubjcot to, 'ieem to 
be phiefly owing to the thermometer, though that which I ufed Wai well graduated, and 
good in other refpects ^ but this muft necefiartty happen| as the icale and fbnfibiligr of 

tile 



A DESCRIPTION OF A NEW PYROMETEJ?'. 153 

<th< micrometer, when Aofc metals were tried which differ moft from the bafis, were 
greater than that of the thermometer. 

The bar of brafs which compofes the bafis is an inch broad by half an inch thick, and 
ftands edgeways upwards j one end is continued of the fame piece at right angles, to the 
height of three inches and an half, and makes a firm Aipport for the end of the bar to 
be experimented ; and the other end acts upon the middle of a lever of the fecond kind, 
whofe fulcrum is in the bafis -, therefore the motion of the extremity of the lever is 
double.the difference between the expanfion of the bar, and the bafis. This upper part 
of the lever rifts above the lid of the ciftern, fo that it and the micrometer- fcrew are at 
all times clear of the water. The top of the lever is furnifhed with an appendage which 
I call the Jeeler ; it is the extremity of this piece which comes in contact with the mi- 
crometer- fcrew. The conftruftion and application hereof will better appear from the 
draught than from many words. It hence appears, that, having the length of the lever 
from its fulcrum to the point of fufpeniion of the feeler, the diftance between the ful- 
crum and the point of contact with the bar, the inches and parts that correfpond to a 
certain number of threads of the micrometer, and the number of divifions in the cir- 
cumference of the index-plate ; the fraction of an inch exprcflcd by one divifion of the 
plate may be deduced : Thofe meafures are as follows. 

Inches. 

From the fulcrum of the lever to the fe<ler - - 5-875 

From the fulcrum to the plate of contact - - ^-895 

Length of 70 threads of the (crew - - - 2.455 

Divifions in the circumference of the index-plate 100. ^ 

Hence the value of one divifion will be the Trrrr P^rt of an inch : But if the fcrew h^ 
altered ^ of one of theffe divifions, wh^n the contact between the fcrew and feglcr is well 
adjufted, the difierence of contact (if I may fo call it) will be very perceivable to the 
flighted obferver j and, confequcntly, ttVt P^^t of an inch is perceivable in this inftru- 
ment 



There is one thing ftill remains to .be fpoken of, and that is, the verification of the ml^ 
crometer-fcrew, which is' the only part of this inftrument that requires exactnefs in the '* 
execution i and how difficult thefe are to make, perfectly good, is weU known to every ' 
/ perfon of experience in thefc matters r xhat is, that the threads ef the fcrew itiay rtot 

. X only 






• 



■ 



164 A ^DESCRIPTION OF A NEW PYROMETER, 

only be equidiftant^ in (lificrent places, but that the threads (hall be equally inclined tm 
the axis in every part of the circumference. 

As nearly the fame part of the {crew is made ufe ' of in thefe experiments, the latter 
circumftance is what principally ficeds^ enquiry. For this purpofe, let a thin flip c( 
fteel^ or other metal, be prepared, whofe thicknefs is about {- of the diftance of the 
threads : Let the edges of this thin plate be cut int& fuch a fliape, as exactly to fit into 
the fixed notch in which one end of the bar is laid : Let a fcrew pais through the 
ftandard'of brals, on which that notch is fupported, in fuch a manner, .that th& end of 
the bar to be meafured that is fartheft from the lever, may take its bearing agamfl: the 
point (or rather the fmall hemifpherical end) of this fcrew : Let one of the brafs bars^ 
ufed in the other experiments, be applied to the inftrument;, aqd a meafure taken ^ then 
let the thin plate be put in between the end of the bar and the point of the fcrew laft 
. mentioned, and again take the meafure ; but firfl obTerve, that the plate is put down to 
the notch, fo that the fame place of the plate may always agree with the point of the 
fcrew, and, confequently, no error may arife from a difitrent thicknefs in diSereift 
places of the plate : Obferve alfo, that the whole comes to a true bearing ; then ad- 
vance the fame fcrew till the micrometer-fcrew is pu(hlcd backward |. of a revolution ; 
again repeat the meafure with and mthout the thin plate ; again advance^the former 
fcrew, lb as to make that of the micrometer recede another quarter of a turn, and re-« 
peat the meafures with and without the thin .plate. Thb method being purfued as &t 
as neceflary, it is evident, that, dje thifcknefs of the plate being always the fame, if the 
difierence of meafures, taken with and without it, are not always the fame in the dif- 
ferent parts of a revolution of the micrometer-fcrew, that this ferew is not equiangidar;' 
but from thl differences of the meafures correfponding to the thicknefs of the fame 
plate, in the different parts of a revoludon, the errors thereof (nay be nearly afligned. 
iFor greater certunty in this examination, lefl the heat of the obfcrver's body fhould 
aficd th^ bar or inflrument during the obfervation, let the whole be immerged in 
the ciftem of water, which ought to ftand a fufficient time before the obfervation » 
begun, to acquire the fame temper as the sur, which alfo ought to be in a fittled 
ftatf . 

' • In this manner I examined fuch threads of this fcrew as were made xife of in the fol- 
lowing experiments, but did not find any material errors. 

• 

The refuk of the experiments made with this inftrument agrees very well with the 
proportions of expanlion of icvcral mctab g^ven by Mr. EUicott i wh^h were deduced 

t* fiX)IA 



, k DESCRIPTION OF A NEW PYROMETER. i65 

fh>m his pyrometer publifhed in die Philosophical Transactions : And> confidering 
the vfcry different conllruction of \he two inftrumcnts, they abundantly tend to confirm 
each other. , • 



• r 

References to the Figures. 

m ■ 

m 

Fig« I. reprefcnts the inftrument independent of the^ciftern in which it is ufcd. 
A B G D> b the main bar or bads of the inftrument. 

£ F> is the bar to be meafured^ lying in two notches ; one fixecf ta the upright ftandard 
A B, the other to the. principal lever H I. The end E of the ))ar £ F> bears againft 
the point of * , 

m 

m 

G, a fcrew of uie in examinmg the micxometer^crew. 

■ • 

The other end of the bar F bears againft a fmall fpfier^cally protuberant bit of hard 
* xftetal fixed at the lame height as G^ in die principal 4eyer H I. 

K> b all arbor iaxtd in the'.bafis^ which reoeives at each end the pomts of tbe fcrews 
HLj upon which the lever ii L turnsy^d ferve as a fulcrum thereto. , 

0> b a (lender fpring^ to keep' die kver in a bearing ftatfe agiunft the bar ; and 

P> is a check> to- {MVenc^ tte kver firom falliiig forwgu^ when the bar b triten out; 

N> is the feeler^ fbmethii\g in the Ihape of- a T, fufpended, an^ irioveable up and doiAi 
upon the 'points o^die ferews I Mf which^ as well as LH^ are ib a^uftedi^as to lejtve 
the itiotiidiii fiiee^ but without lhake» 

Q R^ b the handle of the feeler> moveable iq)on a loolf jcHnt at R ^ £> that^ laying hold 
of it at Q, the fcekr is moved up and down without being aficcted by the irregular 
preflure of the hand» 



^•. 



/•■. 



4 



The extremity S of the feeler is aUb furnifhed with a bit of prottsbehuit hard metali to^ 

render its conuct with the pomt of the micrometer-fcrew mora^rfect* 

* ^ 

. I, b 



• • 






156 A DESCRIPTION OF A NEW PYROMETEIL 

■ • • • • 

I, is the micrometer- fcrew j V, is the divided mdex-plate, and W, t knob for the 
handle. * 

The micrometcr-fcrew paflfes through two folid fcrewcd holes at D and Y. 

The piece Y Z is made a little fpringy," and endeavours to pull the fcrew backwards 
from the hole at D i of confequence keeps the micrometer-fcrew conftantly bearing 
againft: its threads the fame way, and thereby renders the motion thereof perfectly 
ftcady and gende. • 

Xj is the index, having divifions upon it, anfwering to the turns of the (crew. 
This piece points out the divifions of the plate, as the face of the plate points out 
the divifors upon the index. 

When the inftrument is ufed> lay hold, of the knob at -Q with one hand, and, 
moving the feeler up and down, with the other move forward the fcrew I, till its point 
comes in contact with the feeler; then will the plate and index V and X (hew the turns, 
and parts. 

Fig. 2. reprefents the inftrument immerged in its ciftern of water, ready for ufe. 

AB, is the ciftern; C, the cover; which, when the inftrument .fig. i. is ralfedupon 
blocks, goes on between the bar E F and the bafis B C. 

■ 

D, a handle to take ofi^ the cover when hot ; E, the mercurial thermometer ; F» the 
cock to let out the water. 

G H, a hollow piece of tin, which fupports feven fpirit lamps, which zre nufed higher 
or lower by the fcrews I and K, in order to give the water in the ciftern a proper de- 
gree of heat 



f ■ 



A. TABLE 



A DESCRIPTION OF A NEW PYROMETER. 157 



A TABLE of Experiments, 

By rthich the Numbers in Tab. L Col. 6. N^ i, a, and 4, were determined. 

Experiment i. The time elapfcd between approaching die bar to the inftrumcnt 
and taking the firft meafure, was half a minute : Therefore the intervals between taking 
the fuccftding meafures was half a minute alfo. The firft mcafure was 208; the fc- 
cond 214^; the third 216^^ ; the fourth 217^. The differences of thefe are 6^, 2, and 
I i which pretty well tallies with the three laft terms of the following geometrical pro • 
greflion whofe common divifor is 2.8; viz. 17.7 : 6.3 :: 2.25 : .8 ; therefore, as the 
meafures increafcd from the firft, the firft meafure being diminiflied by the firft term, 
viz. 208 — 17.7 = 190.3, will be the true meafure of the bar at the firft inftant of its 
application, before it was expanded by the heat and moifture about the inftrument. 

Exp. 2. The firft nieafure was 221 J; the fecond, 227; third, 230^-5 fourth, 
232|i whofe differences are 5I, 3 J, and 2^5 agreeing with the three laft terms of the 
following progreflion, whofe common divifor is 1.6 ^ viz. 9.2 : 5.8 : : 3.6 : 2.2 j . there- 
fore 221.25 — 9.2 2I2.I5, 

Exp. 3. The firft meafure taken was 401 ; ind at that degree of heat the wooden 
bar did not fenfibly alter during two minutes. 

Exp. 4. The firft meafure .taken was 275^; fecond, 278^; third, 28o|i'and the 
fourth, 282^: The differences are, 3, 2J, i^j agreeing with the three laft terms of 
the following progreffion, whofe common divifor is 1.43 5 viz. 4.4 : J.i : : 2.15 : 1.5^ 
■ therefore 275.5 —4.4 = 271. i, which is the firft meafure corrected. 

Hence, as appears by Tab. L N^ i, 2, 3, and 4, Column 9. thefe experiments being 
- ' properly reduced, agree within one divifion of the micrometer -, and the expanfion of 
the bafis, at a medium, is 287^ parts thereof; correfponding to 'i66* of Farenhcit's 
thermometer. 



table; 



•» 






160 . 



A DESCRIPTIOI^ OF A NEW PYROiyiEtER. 



t. 



TABLE II. 

A Table 9f Expapsions of Metals, 

Shewing, how much a foot in length "of each, grows longer by an increafc of heat coN 
rcfpoading to 180 degrees of Farenheit's thermometer, or to the difference between 
freezing and boiling water, cxpreffcd in fuch parts whereof the unit is equal to the 
io,oooth part of an inch. 



1 White glafs barometer-tube. 

2 Martial regulus of antimofiy. 

3 Bliftercd ftecl. 

4 Hard ftecl. 

5 Iroa^ 

6 Bifmuth. 

^ "Copper hammered. 

8 Copper 8 parts, mixed with tin i. . 

9 Caft brafs. 

10 Brafs 16 parts, with dn i. 

1 1 Brafs wire, 

I i Specuhim metal. 

I J Spelter folder, viz. brafs 2 parts, zink i. 

14 Fine pewter. 

15 "Grain tin. 

16 Soft folder, viz. lead 2, tin i. 

17 Zink 8 parts, with tin i, a little hammered. 
18. Lead. 

19 jZihk or fpelter. 

ao Zink hammered half an inch per foo^ 



i I • 



> 100 

- 204 

- 218 
225 

- 229 

- 23a 

- 43* 

- 247 

- 274 

-' 498 

- 301 

- 3^3 

- 344 

- 353 

- 373 



P. S. It IS now feveral years fince I firft obferved the very confiderable expanfion of 
thfi femi-metallic fubftance called zink, spelter^ or tootanag ; and propofed it as 
more fit for iht purpofe of making coqipound pendulums^ and metalline thermome- 



ters, 



A DESCRIPTION OF A NEW PYROMETER. • 161 

ters» than bra(s ; as its expanfion fccmed confiderably greater, and its condftence, 
when gently hammered, not much inferior. With the fame view I have made trial 
of fevcral other metallic compofitions, befides what is above fet down ; but they 
all proved much inferior to zink in expanfion^ and mofl: of them in condftence. 

It feems, that metals obferve a quite different proportion of expanfion in a fluid, to 
what they do in a folid date : for regulus of antimony feemed to (brink in fixings 
after being melted^ confiderably more than zink. 



DESCRIPTION 



\ 






\ 



102 



DESCRIPTION OF A NEW HYGROMETER. l^:^*'^;- 



\'v • 



t . ■ 



DESCRIPTION of a new Hygrometer, by Mr. John Smeaton, R R 




■ r 



Read March 21, 1771. 

HAVING fomc years ago attempted to make an accurate and fcnfible hygrometer, 
by means of a hempen cord, of a very confidcrable length, I quickly found, 
that, thougJi it was more than fufficiently fufceptiblc of every change in the humidity 
of tlie atmofphere, yet the cord was, upon the whole, in a continual (late of lengthen- 
ing. Though this change was tlic greateft at firft, yet it did not a})pear probable that 
any given time would bring it to a certainty -, and furthermore, it feemed, that, as the 
cord grew more determinate in mean length, the alteration by certain differences of 
moiflurc grew lefs. Now as, ccnfidering wood, paper, catgut, &c. there did not ap- 
pear to be a likelihood of finding any fubftance fufficiently fenfiblc of differences of 
moiflure, that would be unalterable under the fame degrees thereof; this led me ta 
confidcr of aconftruction which would readily admit of an adjuftment j fothat> though 
the cord whereby the inftrumrm is actuated may be variable in itfclf, both as to abfo- 
lutc length under given degrees of moiflure, yet that, on fuppofition of a material de- 
parture from its original fcale, it might be readily reflored thereto, and in confequence> 
that any number of hygrometers, fimilarly con(lructed> might, like thermometers, be 
capable of fpeaking the fame language. 

The two points of heat, the more readily determinable in a thermometer^ arc points 
of freezing and boiling water. In like manner, to conflruct hygrometers which fhall be 
capable of agreement, it is necefTary to eflablifh two different degrees of a moiflure 
which fliall be as fixed in themfelves, and to which we can as readily and as often have 
rccourfe to as pofliblc. One point is given by making the fubflance perfecdy wet> 
which fcems fufficiently determinable ; the other, that of perfect dry, but which I da 
not apprehend to be attainable wkh the fame precifion. A rcadinefs to imbibe wet, fa 
that the fubflance may be foon and fully faturated, and alfo a facility of parting with its 
moiflure on being expofed to the fire to dry, at the fame time that neither immerfioa 
in water, nor a moderate expofition to the warmth of the fire, fhall injure its texture> 
are properties requifite to the firfl mover of fuch an hygrometer, that in a manner ex- 
clude all fubflanccs that I am acquainted with> befides hempen and flaxen threads or 
cords, and what are compounded thereo£ 



Upon 



THET^EV? ■'■"y 
PUBUCUB-^.-•' i 



I 



\ 



DESCRIPTION OF A NEW HYGROMETER. 163 

Upon thefc ideas, in the year 1758, I^conftructed two hygrometers, as near alike as 
poflTible, in order that I might have the means of examining their agreement or dif* 
agreement on fimilar or diffimilar treatment. The interval or fcale between dry and 
wet, I divided into 100 equal parts, which I call the degrees of this hygrometer. The 
point of denotes perfect dry ; and the numbers increafe with the degrees of moifture 
to 1 OQ, which denotes perfect wet. 

On comparing them for fome time, when hung up near together in a pallage or flair- 
* cafe, where they would be very little affected with fire, and where they would be expofed to 
a^ free an air as poflible in the infide of the houfe, I found that they generally were 
within one degree, and very rarely differed two degrees 5 but, as thefe comparifons ne- 
, ceflarily took up fome time, and were frequently interrupted by long avocations from 
home, it was fome years before I could form a tolerable judgment upon them. One 
thing I fbon obferved, not altogether to my liking, which was, that the flaxen cords, 
which I made ule of, feemed to make fo much refiftance to the entry of fmall degrees 
of moifture, (fuch as is commonly experienced within doors in the Gtuation above men- 
tioned) that all the changes were comprifed within the firft 30 degrees of the fcale 1 
but yet, on expofing them to the warm (team of a wafh-hou(e,. the index quickly 
mounted to 100. I was therefore defirous of impregnating the cords with fome thing 
of a faline nature, which fhould difpofe them more forcibly to attract moifture, in 
order that the index might, with the ordinary changes of moifture in the atmofphere, 
travel over a greater part of the fcale of 100: how to do this in a regular and fixed 
quantity, was the fubject of many experiments, and feveral years interrupted inquiry. 
At laft, I tried the one hereafter defcribed, which feemed to anfwer my intention in a 
great meafure ; and though, upon the whole, it does not appear likely that this inftru* 
ment will ever be made capable of fo accurate an agreement as mercurial thermometers 
are made to be, yet if we can reduce all the difagreements of an hygrometer within 
.rc^th part of the whole (bale, it will probably be of ufe in fome philofophical inquiries^ 
in lieu of inftruments which have not been as yet reduced to any common fcale 
at all. 

Description of the Hygrometer. 

**^ Plate XII. 

'^^■:; Fig. I and a, ABC, is an orthographic delineation of the whole inftrument, feen in 

■"IStmt in its true proportion. D E is that of the profile, or the inftrument fctn edge- 

mf%. F Gf in both, reprefents a flaxen cord, about 35 inches long, fufpended by a 

coming peg Fj and attached to a loop of brafs wire at A, which goes down into the 

box 



164 DESCRIPTION OF A NEW HYGROMETER* 

box cover H, which defends the index, &c. from injury, and by a glafs cxpofcs the 
fcalc to view. 

Fig. 3 (hews the inftrument to a larger Icale, the upright part being (hortencd, and 
the box cover removed j in which the fame letters reprefcnt the fame parts as in the 
preceding figures : G I are two loops or long links of brafs wire, which lay hold of the 
index K L, moveable upon a fmall ftud or centre K. The cord F G is kept mo- 
derately ftrained by a weight M, of about half a pound avoirdupoife. 

It is obvious, that as the cord lengthens and Ihortens, the extreme end of the index 
rifcs and falls, and fucceffively paflcs over. 

N Q; the fcale, difpofcd in the arch of a circle, and containing lOO equal divi- 
fions. This fcale is attached to the brafs Aiding ruler Q P, which moves upon the 
directing piece R R, fixed by fcrews to the board, which makes the frame or bafc of 
the whole ; and the fcale and ruler N Q P is retained in any place, "nearer to or £urther 
from the centre K, as may be required by the fcrew S. 

Fig. 4 reprefcnts, in profile, the Aiding piece, and ftud I, (fig- 3} which traverfcs 
upon that part of the index next the centre K, and which can, by the two fcrews of 
the ftud, be retained upon any part of the index that is made parallel,, and which is 
done for 3 or 4 inches from the centre for that purpofe. The ftud is filed to the edges,, 
like the fulcrum of a fcalc beam, one being formed on the underfide, the other upon 
the upper, and as near as may be to one another. An hook, formed at the lower end 
of the wire loops G I, retains the index by the lowermoft edge of the ftud, while the 
weight M hangs by a fmall hook upon the upper edge ; by thefc means the index is 
kept fteady, and the cords ftrained by the weight, with very litde friction or burthen 
upon the central ftud K. 

Fig. 5 is a parallelogram of brafs plate, to keep out duft, which is attached to the 
upper edge of the box cover H, and ferves to fliut the part of the box cover necef- 
farily cut away, to give leave for the wire G I to traverfe with the Aiding ftud (fig. 4) 
nearer to, or further from, the centre of the index K, and where in (fig. 5) ^/ is a hole, 
about -yth of an inch diameter, for the wire GI to pafs through, in the rifing and falling 
of the mdex, freely without touching ; A is a Ait of a lefler fize, fufficient to pafs the 
wire, and admit the cover to come ofi^ without deranging the cord or index -, c c are 

two 



V. 



t)ESeRIPTION OF A NEW HYGROMETER. 



165 



two fmall fcrcws applied to two flits, by which the plate flides lengthways, in order to 
adapt the hole a to the wire G I, at any place of the ftud I upon the index K L. 



Remarks on the preceding Construction^ 

I ft. In this conftruction the index K L, being 12 inches long, 4 inches from the 
Extreme end, is filed fo narrow in the direction by which it is feen by the eye, that any 
part of thcfe four inches, lying over the divifions of the fcale, becomes an index 
thereto. The fcale itfdf flides 4 inches, fo as to be brought under any part of the 
4 inches of the index, attenuated as before mentioned^ 

2dly. The pofition of the directing piece R R is fb determined, as to be parallel to 
a right line drawn through the point upon the fcale, and the centre K of the index 5 
confequently, as the attenuated part of the index forms a part of a radius, or right line 
from the (ame centre, it follows, that whenever the index points to upon the fcale, 
though the fcale is moved nearer to or further from the centre of the index, yet it pro- 
duces no change in the place to which the index points. 

3dly. When the divided arch of the fcale is at 10 inches from the centre (that is, at 
its mean diftance), then the centre of ihe arch and the centre of the index are coinci- 
dent. At other diftances, the extremes of which are 8 or 1 2 inches, the centre of the 
divifions and centre of the index pointing thereto, not being coincident, the indc;x 
cannot move over fpaces geometrically proportionable to one another in all fituations of 
the fcale ; yet, the whole fcale not exceeding 30 degrees of a circle, it will be found on 
computation that the error can never be fo great as -rWth part of the fcale, or i degree 
of the hygrometer; which in this inftrument being confidered as an indivifible, die 
mechanical error will not be fenfiblc 



Choice and Preparation of the Cord. , 

The cord here made ufe of is of flax, and betwixt ^Vthv and -jVth part of an inch in 
diameter, which can readily be afcertained by meafuring- a nurpber of turns made 
round a pencil or fmall flick. It is a fort of cord ufcd in London fpr making nets, 
and is of that particular kind called by net-makers Jfllaxcn three threads laid. I do not 
imagine that the fabric of the cord ^ of t^e tnoft fp^tcjfi^ co^fequencei but yet I 

fuppofe. 



.f* 



166 DESCRIPTION OF A NEW HYGROMETER. 

fuppofe, when cords can be had of fimilar fabric, and nearly of the fame fize, that 
fome fmall fcouces of variations will be avoided. In general, I look upon it chat cords, 
the more they are twifted, the more they vary by different degrees of moifture, and the 
lefs we are certain of their abfolute length; therefore thofe moderately twifted^ I fup- 
pofe, are likely to anfwer bcft. 

A competent quantity of this cord was boiled in one pound avoirdupoife of water^ in 
which was put two pennyweights troy of common fait ; the whole was reduced by boil* 
fng to fix ounces avoirdupoife, which was done in about half an hour* As this aicer* 
tains a given (Irengch of brine on taking out the cord, it may be fuppofed that everf 
fibre of the cord is equally impregnated with fait. The cord J>eing dried, it will be 
proper to ftretch it, which may be done fo as to prevent it from untwifting, by tying 
three or four yards to two nails, againft a wall, in an horizontal pofition, and hanging a 
weight of a pound or two to the middle, fo as to make it form an obftufe angle. This 
done for a week or more in a room, will lay the fibres of the cord clo(e together, and 
prevent its ftretching fo faft, after being applied to the inftrument, as it otherwise 
would be apt to do. 

I have mentioned the fizes and principal dimenfions that I have ufed, as the inftru* 
ments may as well be fimilarly conftructed as otherwife ; but I do not apprehend It to 
be very material to agree in any thing but the ftrength of the brine on taking the cord 
out of it. If the cord is adapted to the inftrument fome days before its firft adjuft- 
ment^ I apprehend it will be the more fettled. 



Adjustment of the Hygrometer. 

The box cover being taken off, to prevent its being fpoiled by fire* and choofing ^ 
day naturally dry^ fet the inftrument nearly upright, about a yard from a moderate fire» 
fo that the cord may become dry and the inftrument warm, but not fo near as would 
fpoil the fineft linen by too much heat^ and yet fully evaporate the moifture ; there let 
the inftrument ftay till the index has got as low as it will go, now and then ftroking the 
cord betwixt the thumb and finger downwards, in order to lay the fibres thereof dole 
together, and thereby caufing it to lengthen as much as poflible. When the index has 
thus become ftationary, which will generally happen in about an hour (more or lefs as 
the air is naturally more or kis dry)^ by means of the peg at top, raife or deprefs the 

index 



DESCRIPTION OF A NEW HYGROMETER. 167 

index till it lays over point ; this done> remove the inftrument from the fire » and 
having ready fome warm water in a tea-cup, take a middling camei's-hair pencil^ and 
dipping it in the water, gendy anoint the cord till it will drink up no morCi and till the 
index becomes ftationary, and water will no more have effect upon it, which will gene- 
rally happen in about an hour. If in this ftate the index lays over the degree marked 
100, all is right: if not, flack the fcrew S, and Aide the fcale nearer to or further 
from the centre, till the point 100 comes under the index, and then the inftru- 
ment is adjufted for ufe ; but, if the compafs of the Aide is not fufficient to 
effect thisj. as may probably happen on the firft adjuftment, flack the proper 
Icrews^ and move the Aiding ftud I nearer to or further from the centre of 
the indexj according as the angle formed by die index^ between points of wet 
and dry,^ happcneth to be too fmall. or too large for the fcale; die quantity can 
be eafily judged of, fo as the next time to come within the compafs of the Aide of the 
fcale> the quantity of flide being 4d. of the length of the index^ and confequently its 
compafs of adjuftment ^d of the whole variable quantity.. Now^ as Aiding the ftud I 
will vary the pofinon of the index relpccting the point of a, this movement is only to 
be confidered as a rough or preparatory adjuftment, to bring it within the compafs of 
the flide of the fcale, which will not often happen to be neceflfary after the firft time ; 
but in this cafe the adjuftment muft be repeated in the fame manner^ by drying and 
wetting as before defcribed. 

It is to be remarked, that, as the cord is fuppofed to be impregnated in a given de* 
grce with common fait, and this not liable to evaporate, care muft be taken in wetting 
that no drops of wet be fulFercd to fall from the cord : for, by the obfcrvancc hereof, 
the original quantity i& preferved in the cord. 

Observations made upon Two original Hygrometers. 

Thefe hygrometers were firft adjufted, after the impregnation of the cords with com- 
mon fait, in February, 1770 ; they were kept together ia a ftair-cafe till the fUmmer 
following ; they were frequcndy obfcrvcd, and rarely found to differ more than one de- 
gree. In fummer, one of them remaining in the former place,, the other was removed 
into a paflage through a building, which, having no doors, and the mftrument being 
hung fo that neither rain nor the direct rays of the fun could fall upon it, thereby it be- 
came expofed to the winds, and the free paflage of the open air. In thefe fituations 
the two hygrometers not only differed very grcady in quantity, but even frequendy 
were moving different ways. They were thus continued till January, 177 1^ in which 

(pace 



168 DESCRIPTION OF A NEW HTGROMETER. 

fpacc of time I obfcrvedi that the moft ordinary place of the index was between t c* 
and 25" in the open air ; that at 40* the atmofphcre felt Very fenfibly moift, but yet ic 
was frequently above 6o% and more than once at 70% or very near. I have therefore 
marked the point of dry ; ad" the mean, 40* moift, 70* very moift, icx>* wet. I do 
not, however, mean thofe words (thofe of dry and wet excepted) with any other in- 
tent, than that of general direction, in like manner as thofe upon the barometer, leav- 
ing the relative degree of moifture to be judged of by the fcale. 

In the month of January laft, I reftored the expofed hygrometer to its former place 
in the (lair-cafe, when both inftruments were again compared together, and they rarely 
differed more than i% and never fo much as 2*. After this, they were both re- 
moved together to the out paflage j and there they agreed nearly in the fame manner, 
the utmoft difference not exceeding 2*. After fome trial here, one was rc-adjufled, 
leaving the other hanging in its place; on reftoring the new adjufted inftrument to the 
other, they now differed about5% the new adjufted one (landing fo much higher. The day 
following the other was re-adju(led alfo, and afterwards reftored to its place with the 
former, which had' been left in the out pa(rage ; and after re-adjuftment they both 
agreed to i*. This being obferved for fomc days, one of them was uken down, in 
order to be packed up for London; this I have now the honour of exhibiting to the 
Royal Society ; and I beg to leave in the Society's houfe, that in cafe any one fbould 
be defirous of having an inftrument made on the fame plan, they may have recourfe 
thereto. 

It appears from the foregoing obfervations, that, in the compa(s of eleven months, 
the cords had ftretched the value of 5**: and I alfo obferved th t they both had con- 
tracted their compafs about 10**. I would therefore recommend, that an hygrometer 
Ihould, from its firft adjuftment, be re-adjufted at the end of three months, and again 
at the end of fix months from the firft ; after that, at the interval of about fix months, 
to the end of two years from the beginning ; and after that, I apprehend that once 
a year will fufficc j the beft time of adjuftment being in the dry and warm weather of 
July or Aiiguft : and by thefe means,. I apprehend the inftrument will be always kept 
within 2^ of its proper point. 

Refpecting the fenfibility of this inftrument, it has that in a greater degree than 
its conftancy to its fcale can be depended upon, which was all that I intended j where 
greater degrees of fcoIibiUty are required, to make comparifons at fmall intervals of 

time. 



DESCRIPTION OF A NEW HYGROMETER. . 169 

timcj the beahl of a wild cat» and other conftructionsj may be ufed with adv«n.« 
tagcs this inftrument being confidered as a check upon them as to more diftant 
periods. 

General Conclusion, 

I am aware that an hygrometer, actuated by any principle of the kind here made 
ufe of, may not be a meafurer of the quantity of moifture, actually dilTolvcd in, and 
intimately mixed with the air ; but only indicates the difpofition of the air to part 
with, or precipiute the water contained in its fubftancc j or, on the contrary, to dif- 
folve and imbibe a greater, quantity: but, as it is by fcparating the effects of natural 
caufes that we are enabled to judge of thefe caufes, and from thence their effects 
when again compounded, every attempt to afcertain the operations of a fimple caufc 
will have its value in the fearch into nature : nor can we a priori determine the value 
of any new inftrumcnt j for, if it fhould lead to a fingle difcovery, or even to afcer- 
tain a fingle fact, this may again lead to others of great importance, of which we might 
have either none, or an imperfect idea before. For my own part, I have always 
looked on a thick fog, and the fwcating or condenfation of the water's vapours upon 
the walls in the infide of buildings, to be the greatefl: marks of a moift atmofphere : 
whereas I have not always found the hygrometer affected at thefe times in the higheft 
degree. On the contrary, at the clofe of a fine day, and the fall of the dew on 
the fudden approach of a froft, I have found the hygrometer more, affected by 
moifture than in fome of the preceding cafes, and ftill more by a falling dew in the 
time of an hard froft. I juft mention thefe matters as hints for the inquiry of others; 
not having had length of time, fince I brought the inftrument to anfwer my intention^ 
to make any abfolute conclufions, 

I am forry I have been obliged to take up fo much compafs, to defcribe and ex* 
plain a very fimple inftrument ; but as I meant at the fame time to give fome idea of 
what is to be expected from it, I thought it more excufeable to be prolix than not fuf- 
ficiently explicit, 

J. SMEATON. 

London, March 21, 1771* 

P. S. It is to be noted, that> after each r^-adjuflment, though the hygrometers would 
generally within a few hours come near their point, yet it was not till the next day 

that they could be depended on^ as haying come to their neareft agreement. 

■♦ 

Z PHILOSOPHICAL 



170 OBSERVATIONS ON THE GRADUATION 



OBSERVATIONS on the Graduation of Astronomical Instruments; witBt 
an Explanation of the Method invented by the late Mr. Henry Hindley^. 
of York, Clock-maker, to divide Circles into any given Number of Parts.. 
By Mr. John Smeaton, F. R. S. ; communicated by Henjly Caven^ 
9ISH, Esq.. F. R. S. and S. A«. 



Read November 17, 1785.. 



TTIERHAPS no part of the fcicnce of mechanics has been cultivated by die 
-■" ingenious with more afliduity, or more dcfcrvedly fo^ than the art of dividing, 
circles for the purpofes of aftronomy and navigation. It is faid that Tycho Brahk. 
and Hevelius laboured this part of their inftrumencs with their own hands; and 
though public rewards have at length, brought forth different methods of dividing, 
from our bcft artifts, which have been communicated, to the public j yet I truft it will 
be thought^ that if any thing relative to this bufmeft remains yet behind, that may- 
tend to furnifli the ingenious artifts, who arc cultivating this field, with any new or 
curious idea upon the fubje£b, it will be well worth communicating to this learned: 
Society : fince, if an hint, which is eflcntially different from any thing that (fo far as. 
I know) the public is in poffcffion of, be once ftartcd, and is purfued and worked! 
upon by ingenious men, it is not poffible to fay, to what valuable purpofes it may- 
be converted. 

This, perhaps, will better appear by taking a (hort review of the labours of odiers,, 
from the time of Ttcho Brahe and Hevelius (who did not ufe tclcfcopic fights) ta> 
the prcfent tame. 

The very learned, ingenious, and inventive Dr. Hook, in his Animadverfions on: 
the Macfiina Cosiest is of Hevelivs, publifhcd in the year 1.674, has given us anv 
elaborate defcription of a quadrant, whofe divifions were formed,, and afterwards read* 
off, by means of an endlcfe fcrcw, working upon the outcrmoft border of the limb, 
of a quadrant; which, he fays, does not at all depend upon the care and diligence 
of the instrument-makevy. in dividing^ graving, or numbering the divisions, for 

the 



OF ASTRONOMICAL INSTRUMENTS. 171 

the same screw makes it from end to end ; yet he has given us no account of any 
particular care or caution that he xifcd, in preventing the fame fcrcw from making 
larger or fmallcr paces, in confcquence of unequal rcfiftance, from a different hardnefs 
of the metal in liifierent parts of the limb j nor any method of correcting or checking 
the fame j nor of making a fcrcw, the angle of whole threads with the axis fhall be 
equal in every part of the circumference j therefore the whole of this bufinefs (in 
which accurate mechanists well know confifts the whole of the difficulty) he refers to 
the ingenious workman; and, in particular, to the then celebrated Mr. Tompiok, 
whom, he fays, he employed to make his inftrument, and who had thereby seen and 
experienced the difficulties that do occur therein : but were any ingenious workman 
now to purfue the directions of Dr. Hook, fo far as his communication thereof 
extends, we may conclude,, that he would make a very inaccurate piece of work, far 
inferior in performance to what the Doctor feems to expect from it*. But yet, I 
believe, it was the frst attempt to apply the endlefs fcrew and wheel, or arch, to 
the purpofe of forming divifions for aftronomical inftruments ; for, the Doctor fays 
himfcif, the perfection of this inftrument is the way of making the divifions ; that it 
e.tcels all the common ways of division : and in the table of contents it is intituled. 
An Explication of the new JVay of dividing. 

This method, however, of Dr. Hook's was not laid afide without a very foil and 
fufficient trial: for Mr. Flamsteeo, in the Prolegomena of the third volume of 
Historia Coslestisy informs us, that he contrived the fextant, wherewith his obferva- 
tions were chiefly made, from his entrance into the Royal Obfervatory in the year 
1676 to the year 1689. This fextant was firft made of wood, and afterwards of iron, 
with a brafs limb of two mches broad, by Mr. Tompion, at the expence of Sir 
Jonas Moore; the radius thereof was 6 feet pj inches; it was forniflied with an 
endlefs fcrew upon its limb of 17 threads in an inch, and with telefcopic fights f. Of 
this inftrument Mr. Flamsteed gives the figure at the latter end of his Prolegomena 
before-mentioned, fufiiciently large to fee the general defign ; the whole being mounted 
upon « ftrong polar ujeis of iron, of three inches diameter. 



• This Tvas indeed verified in an atteapt ipon the same plan by the Due 2>e Craulvss, published 
in a Memoir of the Royal Academy of Sciences at Paris^ for the year 1765. 

^ <f i-*-Qttalem nemo, ccelo ailhibens^— '^ Preface to Historia Calest priatod ia one yoL 1712. 

Though, 



172 



OBSERVATIONS ON THE GRADUATION 



Though^ in the full defcription of this inftrument^ Mr. Flamsteeh mentlonecf 
the limb's being furnifhcd wiUi diagotuiL divmotiSy diftinguiihiog the arch to lo 
feconds * > yet it is pretty clear^ that it had not theft originally upon it ;. but that the 
dependance was wholly upon the fcrew divifions, when it came out of Mr. Tompion's 
hands. This one may reafonably infer from the obfervations themfelves; for the 
firfi: obfervationj iet down as taken with this inftrument> being upoa the a^th of 
OcfiobeFj 1676, it was not till the luh of September, 1677, ^^^ ^^ column which 
contained the check angle by diagonal lines was filled up -, and there was alfo a 
ipacc of time, antecedent to that laft mentioned, wherein no obfervations are re* 
corded as taken with this inftrument, in which time the diagonal divifions might be 
put on; and this will be put beyond a doubt, as he fay^ exprefaly, that findings in* 
the year 1677, that the threads of the fcrew had wori> the border of the limb, he 
divided the Umb into degrees himfelf, and drew a fct of diagonal divifions f; and: 
then comparing the two fets of divifions together, he fometimes found them to difie'r 
a whole minute; wherefore, for correction thereof, he conftrxictcd a new table for 
converfion of the revolutions and parts of the fcrew into degrees, minutes, and: 
iecond3i and. which he applied in the obfervations taken, in 1678.?— HoweKcr^. not«^ 
withftanding this correction, in looking over the obfervations noted down as deduced 
each way, 1 frequently find a difference of half a minute ; not unfrequendy 40/^; but 
in> an obfervation of the moon,, of the 9th June, 1687, I find, a difference of SS^-X^^ 
which upon a radius of 6 feet 9 inches amouats to more than -^rh part of an inch. . 

In the year. 1689, Mr. Flamsteed completed his mural arc at Grsjutwich^;: 
and, in the Prolegomena before- mentioned,, he makes an ample acknowledgement oF' 
the particular aflUlance, care, and induftry, of Mr. Abraham. Sharp; whom> in. the 
month of Auguft, i688ji he brought. into the Obfervatory, . as his amanuensis; andi 
being, as Mr. FLAMS^TEEn tells us,, not only. a very flcilful mathemadcian>. but exr 
ceedingly expert in mechanical operations §, he was principally empjoyed in the coa« 
ftructton of the mural arc ; which in the compafs . of fourteen months he finifhed^. fa 



m^ 



* Pr6legomena HistOr. Coelest: vol. III. p. 104; 

t Ibid. p. 106.- ** Gndus in Ihnbo destribfii ac diagonales dixi..'- ' 

J Vol. I. of Hiit. CoelesC. p. 343. 

f ^ Qui mechanices per quam expertu^ pariter ac matheneos peritut^'^' Pxol^oUfnsL^ vol: UL 
p. 108. 

gready 



OF ASTRONOMICAL INSTRUMENTS. 173 

greatTy to the fatisfactton of Mn Flamsteed^ that he fpeaks of him in the bighcft 
fierm^ of praife •• ^ 

This celebrated inflrument^ of which he alio gives the figure at the end of the 
ProlegomefM,. was of the radius of 6 feet y^, inches; and in like manner as the 
&xtant was fumifhed both with, fcrew and diagonal dividons, all performed by the 
accurate hand of Mr. Sharp.. But yet, whoever compares the different parts of the 
table for converfions of the revolutions and parts of the fcreW belonging, to the mural 
arc into degrees, minutes,, and feconds f , with each other, at the fame diftance from 
the zenith, on different fides ; and with their halves, quarters, &c. will find as nouble 
a difagreement of the fcrew-work from the hand-divifions, as had appeared before 
in the work of Mr* Tompion: and hence we may conclude,, that the method of 
Dr. Hook, being executed by two fuch mafterly hands as Tompion and Sharp, 

and found, defective, is in reality not to be depended upon in nice matters. 

t 

From the account of Mr, Flamsteed it appears alfb, that Mr. Sharp obtained 
Ac zenith point of the inftrument, or line of collimation, by obfervation of the 
zenith' ftars, with the face of the inftrument on the eafl and on the weft fide of the 
wall %; and that having made the index ftrongcr (to prevent flexure) than that of the 
fcxtant, and thereby heavier, he contrived, by means of puUies and balancing weights, 
to relieve the hand that waa to move it from a great part of its gravity J.. 

I have been the more particular relating to Mr. Sharp, in the bufinefs of con- 
ftructing this mural arc ; not only bccaufc we may fuppofe it the firft good and valid 
inftrumrntof the Icindi but becaufe I look upon Mr. Sharp to have been the firft 
perfon that cut accurate and delicate divifions upon aftronomical inftruments; of 
which, independent, of Mr. Flamstbed's teftimony, there ftill remain confiderabk 
proofs : for, after leaving Mr. Flamsteed, and quitting the department above- 



^ *' Sharpeius servus mens fidelissimus, ac omnribus qaidem dotibus & facultatibus erat imbutut, 
'^ quae ipsum tarn sublili & difficili opcri obeundo idoneum redderent." Prolegom. ibid. 

And on finishing the instrument, he says, ** Gradus describuntur siVe numerantur et exsculpantur, 
*' artificiosa manuali opera dicti domini SiiiRFy qui limbum parti cus est, dfagonales duxit, totumque 
** organum absolvit et perfecit: adeo ut praestantissimi quivis artiticcs postquam illud conspcxerunt ct 

considerarunt, se exactius id pcragerc non potuisse, agnoverint/' Prolegom, p. 111. 

t Hist. CoeUst. vol. II. Appendix. 
X Prolegom. p. 109; 

mentioned. 



it 






174 OBSERVATIONS ON THE GRADUATION 

mentioned*, he retired into Yorkfliire, to tlic village of Little Horton, new 
Bradford, where he ended his days about the year 1743 ; and where I have fecn not 
only a large and very fine collection of mechanical tools (the principal ones being 
made with his own Tiands), but alfo a great variety of fcaies and inftruments fnade 
therewiih, both in wood and brafs, the diviiions whereof were fo exquifite, as would 
not difcredit the iirfl: artifts of the prefent times : afid I believe there is now rennaining 
a quadrant, of four or five feet radius, framed of wood, but the limb covered with a 
brafs plate ; the fubdivifions being done by diagonals, -^he lines of which are as 
finely cut as thofe upon the quadrants at Greenwich. The delicacy of Mr. Sharp's 
hand will indeed permanently appear from the copper-plates in a quarto book, pub- 
lilhed in the year 17 18, intituled. Geometry improved by A. Sharp, Philomath. 
whereof not only the geometrical lines upon the plates, but the whole of the engraving 
of letters and figures, were done by himfclf, as I was told by a perfon in the 'mathe- 
matical line, who very frequently attended Mr. Sharp in the latter part of his life. 
I therefore look upon Mr. Sharp as the firft perfon that brought the affair of hand 
di vifion to any degree of perfection. 

Some time about the cftablilhment of the mural arc at Greenwich, the celebrated 
Daniih Aftronomer Olaus Roemer began his domeftic Obfervatory, which he 
finilhcd in the year 171 5, as we are informed by his hiftorian Peter Horrebow, in 
the third volume of his works, in the tract, intituled. Basis Astronomitt^ pnUHhed 
in the year 1741. In this tract is the defcription of an inftrument. Table III. which 
not only anfwered the purpofe of the meridian arc j but, its telefcopc being mounted 
upon a long axis, became alfo in reality what we now call a Transit Instrument ; 
and which furnifhed, fo far as I have been able to learn, the firft idea thereof. One 
end of the axis of this inftrument being the centre of the meridian arc, and carrying 
its index, M. Roemer thereby avoided the errors arifing from the plane of the mural 
arc not being iaccurately a vertical plane ; and which Mr. Flamsteed endeavoured 
to check, by obferving the pafTage of known ftars nearly in the fame parallel of de* 
clinationi that is, pafling nearly over the fame part of the plane of the arc 5 by which 
he was enabled to correct or check the errors of the arc in right afcenfion. But it 
is the peculiar method in which Roemer divided his inftruments, that occafions him 
here to be introduced. 



♦ Mr. Sharp continued in strict correspondence with Mr. Flamsteed so long as he lived, as ap- 
peared by letters of Mr, Flamstsed's found after Mr. Sharp's death ; many of which I have seen. 

Though 






) 



M*f 



OP ASTRONOMICAL INSTRUMENTS. 175 

Though it IS a very (imple problem by which geometricians teach how to divide a 
given right line into any number of parts required ; yet it is ftill a much piorc fimplc 
thing to fet off upon a giyen right line, from a point given, any number of equal 
parts required, where the total length is not exactly limited i for this amounts to 
nothing more than afliiming a convenient opening of the compafles, and beginning 
at the point given, to fet off the opening of the compaffes as many times in fiiccef- 
fion, as there are equal pans required ; which procefs is as applicable to the arch of 
a circle as it is to a. right line*. Of this fimple principle Roemer endeavoured to 
avail himfelf.. 

For this purpofe M". Roemer took two ftiff, but very fine pointed, pieces of ftcel, 
and fixed them together, fo as to avoid, as much as poffible, every degree of fpring 
that would neceflarily attend long-legged compaffes, or even thofe of the (hortcft and 
fiiffcft kind when the points are brought near together. The diftance of the points 
Aat he chofe was about the tV or -sV of an inch. This, upon a radius of 2^ or three 
feet, would be about 10 minutes. With this opening, beginning at the point given, 
he fet off equal fpaces in fucccflion to the end of his arch, which was about 75^. 
Thofe were diftinguifhed upon the limb of the inftrument by very fiae points, which 
were referred to l)y a groffer divifion, the whole being properly numbered. The fub- 
divifion of thofe arches of ip minutes each was performed by a double microfcope, 
carried upon the arm or radius of the inftrument, the common focus being turniftied 
with parallel threads of fingle filk, whereof eleven being difpofed at ten equal in- 
tervals, comprehending together one ten-minute divifion, the diftance of the neareft 
threads became a very v»fible fpace, anfwcrable to one minute c^ch, and therefore 
capable of a much further fubdivifion by eftimation.. 

The divifions of this inftrument were therefore, properly fpealfing, not degrees and 
minutes j but yet, if exactly equal,, would ferve the purpofc as well, when their true 
value was found, which was done by comparifon with larger inftrurpcnts. 

Now, if it be confidered, that in going ftep by ftep of ten minutes each, through 
a fpace of 75 degrees, there will be a fucccflion of 450 divifions, dependant upon 
each other j if it be alfo confideral, that the leaft degree of extuberance in the furface 
of the metal, where each new point is fet down, or the leaft hard particle (wherewith 
all the bafc metals fcem to abound) will caufc a deviation in the firft impreffion of a 
taper ^ point, and thereby produce an inequality in the divifion; it is cyide;|t, that 
though this inequality may be very fraall, and even imperceptible between neighbour- . 



ing 



170 OBSERVATIONS ON THE GRADUATION 

ing divifions, yet among diftantoncs. It may and wfll arifc to fomcthtng confidcrabtes 
which, in the menfuration d( angles, yn\l have the fame ill tendency as in near ones. 
Now, as M. RoEMER has given us no means of checking the diftant divifions, in 
rcfpect of each other, it is very probable that no one has followed his fteps, in cafes 
where great accuracy was required, in a confiderable number of divifions. For in 
reality this method is likely to fall far fliort of Dr. Hook's; as Dr. Hook's divifions 
being cut in a fimilar fucccflive manner, by the rotation of the (harp edge of the 
threads of a fcrew againft the exterior edge of th^ limb of the inftrument, a very 
flight degree of preflure will bring a fine fcrew of thirty threads in an inch (which he 
prefcribes) to touch againft m arch whofc radius is four or five feet in more than 
one, two, three, or four threads at once ; fo that the threads fupporting one another, 
a fmali extuberance, or even a fmall hard particle in the metal, will be cut through 
or removed by the grinding or rather fawing motion of the fcrew ; and which, in 
regard to its contact, being in reality an edge, will be much more effectual (that is, 
more, firm) in its retention than a mere fimple point : and a repetition of the opera- 
tion, from the fupport of the threads to each other, will tend to mend the firfl: 
traces; whereas, in Roemer's way, a repetition will make them worfe; for, what- 
ever drove forward or 'backward the point on firft entering, will, from the flopmg of 
the point, be confirmed and increafed in driving it deeper. 

When Dr. Hal ley was chofen Aftronomer Royal (Mr. Flamsteed's inftruments 
being taken away by his executors), Mr. Graham undertook to make a new mural 
quadrant, about the year 1725; who, uniting all that appeared valuable in the dif- 
ferent methods of his prcdeceflbrs, executed it with a degree of contrivance, accuracy, 
and precifion, before unknown : and the divifion thereof he performed with his own 
hand. The model of this quadrant, for ftrength, eafy management, and convenience, 
lias been ever fince purfucd as the moft perfect. What I apprehend to be peculiar 
in it, was the application of the arch of 96^ ; not only as a check upon the arc of 
degrees and minutes, but as fuperior thereto, being derived from the more fimple 
principle of continual bisection. 

To make room for this, he has endrely rejected the fubdivifion by diagonals, and 
has adopted the method of the Vernier; but the fubdivifion of the vernier divifions 
he, as I apprehend for the firft time, meafured by the turns of the detached adjuft- 
ing fcrew, making it in fact a micrometer, by which the diftancc of the set of the 
inftrument was to be meafured from the perfect coincidence of one of the actual 
divifions of the limb with the next ftroke of the vernier i by which means the obfcrva- 

don 



/ 



OF ASTRONOMICAL INSTRUMENTS. 177 

uon could not only be read off with all the precifion that the diviiion of the inftru-- 
mcnt wai capable of, but the two fcts of divifions could be checked and compared 
with each other. Another thing that I apprehend to be peculiar in this inftrument^ 
was the more certain method of transferring and cutting the divifions, from the 
original divided points, by means of the beam-compass^ than could poffibly be done 
from 9. Jiducial edge, as had doubtlefs been condantly the practice in cutting 
diagonals; for, placing the (ieady point of the beam>-compafs in the tangent line to 
that part of the arc where each divifion was to be cut, the opening of the compafk 
being nearly the length of the tangent, the other point would cut the divifion in the 
direction of the radius nearly ; and though in reality an arch of a circle, yet the fmall 
p^rt of it in ufe would be fo nearly a right line, as perfectly to anfwer the fame 
endj all which advantages put together, it is probable induced Mr. Graham to 
Mject th^ diagpnals* 

Soon after the completion of this quadrant, Mr. Graham undertook to execute a 
zenith sector for the Rev. Dr. Bradley, which was fixed up at Wanl^ead, in 
Eflcx, in the year 1727. The very fimple conftrucdon that he adopted for this in- 
ftrument (the plumb line itfelf being the index) did not admit of the ufe of a vernier: 
he therefore contented himfelf with dividing the arch of the limb of this inftrument 
by primary points, as clofe as he thought necefi&ry, that is, by divifions of five 
mmutes each, and meafuring the dillance from the set of the infl:ryment to the next 
point of divifion by a micrometer fcrew, in the conftruction of which fcrew he uicd 
uncommon care and delicacy. I have mentioned this inftrument to introduce this, 
obfervation; that I think it highly probable, had Mr. Graham confiiructed the 
great quadrant after the zenith fcctor had been fully tried, he would have rejected 
not only the diagonals but the verniers alfo, as containing a fource of error within 
thcmfclves which may be avoided by a well- made fcrew *. 

It feem3 a1fb» that Mr. Graham, at the time he conftructed both the(e infirumenO^ 
^7R not aware how much error could arife from the unequal expanfions of different: 
metals by I^eat or cold : for in both the radius, or frame of the inftrument, was iron. 



^This has been found consentaneous to the experience of my friend Mr. Aubsrt, who, on my 
fugg^stion, has loog since laid aside the use of his vernier, measuring always by the micrometer screws 
the dist^i^e between tb^ set of the instrument, and the coincidence' of the first stroke of the vernier 
with the next primary divisiion of the limb. 

A a while 



178 OBSERVATIONS ON THE GRADUATION 

while the limbs were of brafs. They, however, remain in the Royal Obfcrvatoryt 
perfect models, in all other refpects, of every thing that is likely to be attained in their 
refpcctive deftinations, and monuments of the fuperjative abilities of chat great me- 
chv^nician Mr. Graham *. 

Mr. Graham lived till the year 1751 ; and during his time there were few in- 
ftrumcnts of confequence conftructed without his advice and opinion. They were for 
many years done by Mr. Sisson, to whom doubtlefs Mr. Graham would fully 
communicate his method of divifion ; and from this fchool arofc that very eminent 
and accurate artift Mr. BiRb, whofe delicate hand, joined with great care and 
affiduity, enabled him ftill further to promote this branch of divifion ; and which/ 
being carried by him to a great pitch of perfection, the Commiflioners of Longitude 
did themfclves the credit, by an handfome reward, to induce him to publifti to the- 
world his panicular method of dividing aftronomical inftruments; which being drawn 
up by himfelf, in the year 1767, this matter is fully fet forth to the public: I fhall 
therefore only take this opportunity of obferving, that there feems to be one article 
in which Mr. Bird's method may be ftill improved. 

I muft here obfcrve, that I apprehend no quadrant, that has ever undergone a 
fcvere examination, has been found to form a perfect arch of 90** ; nor is it at all 
neceflary it fhould : the perfect equality of the divifions throughout the whole is the 
firft and primary confideration ; as the proportion of error, when afcertained by^ 
proper obfervations, can be as eafily and readily applied, when the whole error of the 
rectangle is fifteen feconds, as when it is but fivc» 

In this view, from the radius taken, I would compute the chord of fixteen degrees 
only. If I had an excellent plain fcale, I would ufe ir; becaufe I fhould expect the 
deviation from the right angle to be lefs than if taken from a fcale of more moderate 
accuracy -, but if not, the equality of the divifions would not be affected, though 
taken from any common diagonal fcale. This chord, fo prepared, I would lay off 
five times in fuccefljon, fi-om the primary point of o given, which would complete 
eighty degrees j I would then bifect each of thofc arches of i6% as prcfcribed by 



• I iiave been informed, that Dr. Maskeltne has caused this objection to the sector to be rectified, 
since its removal to the Royal Observatory, by substituting an iron limb instead of that of brass, the 
points being made upon studs of gold. 



OF ASTRONOMICAL INSTRUMENTS. 179 

Mr. Bird, and laying off one of them beyond the 8oth, would give the 88th degree : 
proceeding then by bifection, till I came to an arch of two degrees, laying that off 
from the 88th degree, would give the point of ninety degrees. Proceeding ftill by 
bifeftion, till I had reduced the degrees into quarters = fifteen minutes each, I would 
there flop ; as from experience I know, that when divifions are over clofe, the accuracy 
of them, even by bifedion, cannot be fo well attained as where they are moderately 
large. If a fpace of t^ of an inch, which is a quarter of a degree, upon an eight 
feet radius, is thought too large an interval to draw the index over by the micrometer 
fcrew, this may be Ihortened by placing another line at the diftance of one-third of a 
divifion on each fide of the index line, in which cafe the fcrew will never have to 
move the index plate more than one-third of a divifion, or five minutes ; and the per- 
fect equality of thofe fide lines from the index line may be obtained, and adjufted to 
five minutes precifely, by putting each of the fide lines upon a litde plate, capable of 
adjuftment to its true diftance from the middle one, by an adjufting fcrew. 

The above hint is not confined to the chord of fixteen degrees, which prohibits the 
fubdlvifions going lower than fifteen minutes : for if it be required to have divifions 
equivalent to five minutes upon the limb itfelf, then I would compute the chord of 
21* lof only \ and laying it off four times from the primary point, the laft would 
mark out the divifion 85^ 20^ pointed out by Mr. Bird ; supplying the remainder 
to a quadrant, from the bifefted divifions as they arife, and not by the application of 
other computed chords. 

In my Introduftion to M. Roemer's Method of Divifion, I have (hewn, that 
divifions laid off in fucceffion, by the fame opening of the compaffcs, either in a 
right line, or in the arch of a circle, being in its idea geometrically true, and in 
itfelf the moft fimple of all proccffes, it has the faireft chance of being mechanically 
and praftically exadt, when cleared of the difturbing caufes. The objeftion therefore 
to his method is, the great number of repetitions, which depending upon each other 
in fucceffion (requiring no lefs than 540 to a quadrant, when fubdivided to ten 
minutes each), the fmallcft error in each, repeated 540 times, without any thing to 
check it by the way, may arife to a very fenfible and large amount : but in the method 
I have hinted, this objedlion will not lie j for, in the firft cafe, the affumcd opening is 
laid off but five rimes ; and in the latter cafe but four times ; nor does this repetition 
arife out of the nature of the thing ; for, if you like it better, you may, in the former 
cafe, at once compute the chord of 64** i and in the latter that of 85"* 20^, and then 

proceed 



180 OBSERVATIONS ON THE GRADUATION 

proceed wholly by bifcftion ; fupplying what is wanted to make up the qtiadrarit, from 
the bifeded divifions, as they arife. Mr. Bird prefchbes this method himfelfj for 
the divifion of Hadley's feftants and oftants. 

He, I fuppofc, was the firft, ^ho conceived the idea of laying off chords of 
arches, whofe fub-divifions (hould be come at by continual bifcdionj but why he 
mixed therewith divifions that were derived from a diflfcrent origin (as prefcribcd in 
his rtiethod of dividing) I do not cafily conceive. He fays, that after he had pro- 
ceeded by the bifeftions, from the arc of Ss** ao', the fcveral points of 30°, 6o% ^^""^ 
and 90", (all of which were laid down from the principlb of the chord of 60 being 
equal to radius), fell in without sensible inequality i and fo indeed they might; 
but yet it does not follow that they were c{|ually true in their places as if they had 
been (like the reft) laid down from the bifcftion from 85* io\ and therefore being the 
firft made, whatever error was In them, would be communicated to all connected witk 
them, or taking their departure from them. Every heterogeneous mixture fhould be 
avoided where equal divifions are required. It is not' the fame thing (as every good 
artift will fee) whether you twice take a meafure from a (cale as nearly the fame as 
you can, and lay them off fcparately ; or lay off two openings of the compafies, in 
fucceffion, unaltered i for though the fame opening, carefully taken off from tKe 
iamc fcale a fecond tinr>e> will doubtlefi fall into the points made by the firft„ without 
fenfible error 5 yet as the Doping fides of the conical cavities made by the firft point 
will condudt the points, themfclves to the centre, there may be aa error which, though 
infenfible to the fight> would have been avoided by the more simple process of 
laying off the opening twice, without ever altering the compafTcs^ 

The 96 arc was, I have no doubt, invented by Mr. GRAHAKr^^om hdving pereeived> 
in common with all preceding artifts, how very much more eafy a given line Was to^ 
bifeft, than to trifeft, or quinqucfefl j and therefore the 96 arc which proceeded by 
biie£lions only (or by laying off the lame identical openings, which, as ali-eady (hewn, 
is ftiU more fimple and unexceptionaUr) was wholly intended by him by wa]f of 
checking the divifion of the arc of 90, which required trifc£Hons and quinquefeftions. 
But experience foon fhewed the fuperk>r advantage of it fo ftrongly, that the ufe of 
the 90 arc is now wholly fet afide, where accuracy is required ; whereas the ingenuity 
of Mr. Bird having fliewn a way to produce the 90 arc by bifedlion, when this is. 
really purfucd quite through the piece, by rcjefting all divifions derived fi-om any 
odier origin^ die 90 arc will have nothing m it to prevent its being equally unexcep* 

dooaUe 



OF ASTRONOMICAL iKSTRUMfeNTS. 



18L 



tionable with die 96 arc; and confcquently if, mftcad of the 56 arc, another arc of 
90 was laid down (which being upon a different radius, its divifions will ftand totally 
unconnc(fted with the former), then thefc two arcs would in reality be a check upon 
each other ; for being of equal validity, the mean might be taken : and if (in lieu of 
vernier divifions) ftrokes at the diftance of any odd number, 357,9, '^» O'" I3» ^^ 
marked upon, and carried along with, the index plate ; thefc will produce a check 
Upon neighbouring divifions; and the angle may then be deduced from the medium of 
no Icfs than four readings. 



The laft works that have been made known to the public in the line of graduation 
(fo far as has come to my knowledge) are thofe of the very ingenious Mr. Ramsdek, 
which were publiflied, by order of the Board of Longitude, in the year 1777. 

From his own information, I learn, that in the year 1760, he turned his thottgbtt 
towards making an engine for dividing mathematical inftrumcnts; and this he did in 
confcquence of a reward offered by the Board of Longitude to Mr. Bird, for pub- 
tUhing his method of graduating quadrants; for as, (cveral years previous to tl>at 
period, he had taken great pains to accompliih himfclf in the art of hand-dividing, in 
which li^ie Mr. Bird had acquired his eminence, he conceived by this publication of 
Mr. BiRD*s he ftiould be reduced to die fame ftandard of performance with the reft 
•f the trade. He, therefore, partly to I'ave time, and that kind of wearinefs to an 
ingenious mind that ever muft attend the endlefs repetition of the fame thing from 
morning to night ; partly ftiU to preferve the pre-eminence he had then g.iined ; and 
partly to procure difpatch in the great increafe of demand for HADtEV's fextants and 
eftants, in confequencc of the fuccefsful application of the moon's motion to the 
purpofe of afceriaining the longitude at fea (which inftruments for this purpofe re- 
quired a degree of accuracy and certainty in the divifion, by no means neccflarjr 
thereto when applied 10 the fimple purpofe of obfcrving latitudes); I fay, for thefc 
eonfiderations, Mr. Ramsdkw determined to fct about ibmeching in the inftrumental 
way, that Ifeould be foHicicac eS*c£tually to anfwer ihefe purpofcs. 

Accordingly, confidering tKc nature of the endlefs (crew, he fet hlmfelf to work 
upon an engine whofc divided wheel or plate was of thirty inches diameter; and 
though the performance of this firft effay was inferior to his expectations and wiflies, 
yet, with it, he was able to divide cheodjiitts with 3 degree of prcclfion far fupcrior to 
any thing of the kind that had been exhibited to the public. 

Thia 



182 OBSERVATIONS ON THE GRADUATION 

This engine I myfclf faw in the fpring of the year 1768 ; and it appeared to tttc 
not only a very laudable attempt towards inftrumental divifions, but a very good 
model for the conftruction of an engine of the moft accurate kind for that purpofc. 
And he furthermore, at the fame time, (hewed me the model or pattern for cafting a 
wheel of a much larger fizc, which he propofed to make upon the fame plan, and 
with confiderable improvements. This being effected fome time in or about the year 
1774, its accuracy was proved by making a fextant, afterwards fubjccted to the 
examination of Mr. Bird ; who in confequence approved the method, not only as 
fully fufficient for the divifion of Hadley's fextants and octants for any purpofc what- 
foevcr, but in fact for dividing any inftrument whofc radius did not exceed that of 
the dividing wheel, which was forty-five inches in diameter : whereupon the Board of 
Longitude, ever ready to encourage all endeavours that tend to the certainty and per- 
fection of any thing fubfervient to the purpofe of finding the longitude at fca, very 
properly and ufefully refolved to confer an handfomc reward on Mr. Ramsden, for 
delivering a full explanation of his method of making the faid engine j which, in 
confequence, was publilhed by order of the Board of Longitude in the year already 
mentioned, viz. 1777 : the defigns whereof are fo full and explicit, that whoever 
could not underftand that defcription, fo as to enable him to make it^ would be unfit 
to undertake it on other accounts. 

From what I have faid upon the works of the different artifts that I have mentioned, 
it would feem that the art of graduation was brought to that degree of perfection, that 
nothing material can now be added thereto : and I fhould have been apt to have 
thought fo myfclf, if I had not happened, in the courfe of my life, to have had a 
communication made to me (under the feal of fccrecy) which fcems to promife yet 
further light and afTiftance in perfecting that important art ; and every impediment to 
the difcovery thereof being now removed, I (hall in the remainder of this efTay give 
the cleareft defcription thereof that I am able, with fuch elucidations and improve- 
ments as feem to be naturally pouited out by the method itfelf. 

In the autumn of the year 1741, I was firft introduced to the acquaintance of that 
then eminent artift, Mr. Henry Hindley, of York, clock-maker; — he immedi- 
ately entered with me into the greateft freedom of communication, which founded a 
friendfhip that lafted to his death, which did not happen till the year 1771, at the age 
of 70. On the firft interview, he (hewed me not j^nly his general fet of tools, but his 
engine^ at that time furnifhed with a dividing plate, with a great variety of numbers 
for cutting the teeth of clock wheels, &c. and alfo, for more nice and curious pur- 

pofcs. 



OF ASTRONOMICAL INSTRUMENTS. 183 

pofes, fumifticd with a wheel of about thirteen inches diameter, very ftout and ftrong, 
and cut into 360 teeth ; to which was applied an endlefs fcrew, adapted thereto. The 
threads of this fcrew were not formed upon a cylindric furface, but upon a folid whofc 
fides were terminated by arches of circles. The whole length contained fifteen threads j 
and as every thread (on the fide next the wheel) pointed towards the centre thereof, 
the whole fifteen were in contact together; and had been fo ground with the wheel, 
that, to my great aftonifhmcnt, I found the fcrew would turn round with the utmoft 
freedom, interlocked with the teeth of the wheel, and would draw the wheel round 
without any fhake or (ticking, or the leaft fenfation of inequality. 

How long this engine might have been made before this firft interview, I cilRfnot 
now exactly afccrtain: I believe not more than about a couple of years i but this I 
well remember, that he then (hewed me an inftrument intended for aftronomical pur- 
pofes, which muft have been produced from the engine, and which of itfclf muft 
have taken fomc time in making ♦* . . 

• 

I in reality thought myfclf much indebted to Mr. Hindley, for this communica- 
tion ; but though he (hewed me his engine, and told me, that the fcrew was cut by 



• This instrument was of the equatorial kind ; the xrhcel parallel to the equator, the quadrant of 
latitude, and scmi-circlc of declination, being all furnbhed with screws containing fifteen- threads each, 
framed and moved in the same manner as that of the engine ; the whole of which instrument was already 
framed, and the tcle^opc tube in its place, which was intended to be of the inverting refracting kind, 
and to be furnished with a micrometer. This, however,, was not completed till some years after; but, 
in the year 1748, I received it in London for sale. It staid with me two years, in which time I shewed 
it to all my mechanical and philosophical friends, amongst whom was Mr. Short, who afterwards pub* 
lished in the Philosophical Transactions, vol. XLVI. No. 493, p. 241, an account of a portable Ob- 
servatory, but without claiming any particular merit from the contrivance: However, the model of it 
differs from Hindley's equatorial only in the following articles. He added an. azimuth circle and 
compass at the bottom. He omitted the endless screws, placing verniers in their stead; and at the top 
a reflecting telescope instead of a refractor. This instrument of Hindlky's being aftenvards returned 
to him unsold, I pointed out the principal deftciencies that I found therein ; viz. that, in putting the in* 
Btrument into diflerent positions, the springing of the materials was such as in some positions to amount 
to considerable errors. This remained with him in the same r>tnte till the year of the first Transit of 

Venuif via. 1761 ; when- it was sold to Constable, Esq. of Burton Constable^ in HMernesi, 

Mr. Hindley, to remedy flie evil above-mentioned, applied balances to the different movemeiitt. He 
soon afterwards completed one, de novo, upon this improved plan, for his Grace the late Duke of 
Norfolk. A method of balancing in much the same way, without the knowledge that it had been 
done before, has been fully explained, and laid before the Society, by our ingenioui and worthy brother 
Mi. Nairm£, Phil. Trans, vol. LXL p. 108. 

the 



\H OBSERVATKWS ON Tm GRADUATION 

I 

the cotadon of die point of a tooU carried isound upon a ftrong arixij at the diftwice e6 
the radius of the wheel from the centre of motion^ which arm was carried forward by' 
the wheel itfelf^ and the wheel was put forward by an endkfs fcrew^ formed upon ik 
cylinder to a proper fize of thready cut by his chock lathe i though he (hewed me alfoi 
this chock lathe, and thq medipd employed to make the threads^ of the fcrew equian^ 
gular with the axis, that is, to free the icvew from what workmen term drunkcnnce^i 
and alfo &ewed mft how, by the fingle fcrew of his lathe, he could cut, by means of 
wheels-work, fcrew^ of every oeceffary degree of finencfs * (and, by uking out a. 
wheel, could cut a leftrhandcd fcrew of the very fame degree of finenefi.) ; by which/ 
means he was enabled not only to adapt his plain fcrew to the fize of the teeth of his 
wiiceU but alfo to prevent any drunkennefs that ocherwife the curved fcrew would be 
fhbgect to in confequence of being produced from the plain one ; furthermore, that the 
Icrew and wheel, being ground together as. an optic glais to ic& tool, produced that 
d^ee of fmoothneis ia its motion that I obfervedj and, laftly, that the wheel was 
cut from the dividing plate : yet, how the dividing plate- was produced, he for par* 
ticular reafons referved to himfelf. 

Nor can he be blamed for the reforvatioa of this one fecret % as he had, even aft 
the tinie of my early a.cquaiii.t^nce with hiitix a kind o/ foxeOght that from, the fopeciot 
merit of Hapley's quadrant, a demand for that, and other inllruments for the pur* 
pofe of navigation, wa$ likely to increafe i ^nd that he might live to. lee a public 
reward offered for 9, oiethod of dividing theqsk with greater accuracy and difpatch thaa 
had at that tinae appeared. Indeed, he had himfelf an idea, from the (atisfaAorjr- 
fuccefs that had attended his operations in dividing, that a fcrew and wheel, produced 
from his engines of one foot diameter, would have as much truth as the eight- feet 
quadrant at Greenwich: and though he doubtlefs gready over- rated the accuracy of 
thcfe miniature performances, yet it does not follow, as his methods were not con- 
fined to fo narrow a compafs, but that, his fcalc of operation being proportionably 
enlarged, a degree of accuracy in the graduation of aftronomical inftruments may be 
attuned in proportion. 

* I muft here beg leave to obfervc, that there appears to me to be a natural limitadpn 
to the accuracy of inftruments, confifting of confiderable portions of a circle, fincb 



• A macliinefor cutting the endless, screw of Mr. Ramsosn's engine, upoa principles exactly sioMlsfy 
is fully and accurately set forth iaiiis Deicriptioii of . his dividing Engiiie ahiufe roetUioned. 

aa 






OF ASTRONOMICAL INSTRUMENTS. 185 

fuch as quadrants, &c. ♦ I do not find that the fincft ftrokc upon the limb of a qua- 
drant, made by Bird's own hand, if removed from its coincidence with its index, can 
be replaced with any degree of certainty nearer than the 400odth part of an inch, 
though aided by a magnifying glafs f . 

A 400odth part of an inch being then determined to be the m'mium visihile by the 
ftrokes of an inftrument, this will be Icfs than one fecond of a degree upon a radius of four 
feet J and therefore, if the whole fet of divifions upon the limb could be preferved true 
to this aliquot part of an inch, the eight-feet quadrants of Greenwich might be expefted 
to be true to half a fecond. How far they are from this, I do not exaftly know 5 but I 
have reafon to think they vary from it fome fcconds : nay, I believe it is generally 
allowed, that our largeft quadrants, even when executed by the accurate hand of 
Mr. Bird, do not exceed thofe of a lefs fiz?, by the fame hand, in proportion to 
their increafe of radius : nor can it well be expected that they Ihouldj fince, as th6 
weight neccflarily increafes in a triplicate ratio of the radius, the greart weight of the 
Greenwich quadrants in moving and fixing them (as they could not be divided in their 
place) may eafily derange the framing; or even the internal elasticity of the mate- 
rials may give way, by a change of pofitionj to fo minute a quantity as a 40oodth 
part of an inch. It therefore appears to me, that fince the divifions of a quadrant of 
four feet radius are more than fufiicient, and even thofe of three feet admit of all the 
diftinctncfs that in other rcfpects is wanted, a three feet quadrant, in point of fize^ 
is capable of all attainable exactnefs ; and would be as much to be depended on as any 
of thofe now in being of eight feer. By adopting quadrants of this fmaller fize, we 
fliall of courfe get rid of xiths of the prefent weight j and confequently of mucl| 
cumber, unhandinefs, and derangement, that mud arife from that weight, as well as 
the fear of totally difcompofing them, if ever moved out of their place. 

It now comes to be time to open a principle upon which there is a profpect of 
effecting fuch an improvement. I have fhewn that a 400odth part of an inch is tht 



* The zenith sector consists but q^ few degrees, with little variation of its position in using it. 

f It will be to little purpose to attempt it with a greater power. Double microscopes can doubtless be 
formed to magnify objects^ far less than a 4000dth part of an inch, to distinct surfaces ; but then the 
advantage of such degrees of magnifying power is chiefly upon the organized bodies of nature. Let a dot, 
or the finest point that can be made by human art, be so viewed^ anJitwill appearnot rounds but a very 
nigged irregular figure. 

B b ultimatum 



186 OBSERVATIONS ON THE GRADUATION 

ulthnatuni that we arc to expect from sighty though aided hj glafles, when obferving 
the divlfions of an inflrumcnL But in the XLVIIIth volume of the Fhilofophical 
Tranfactions (page 149 of this volume) I have Ihcwn the mechanifm of a ntvfr pyrometer, 
and experiments made therewith j whereby it appears, that, upon the principle of 
contact, a 24,ooodth part of an inch is a very definite quantity. I remembered very 
well that I did not then go to the extent of what I might have affcrtcdi being willing 
to keep within the bounds of credibility : but'onoccalionof the prcfent fubjcd, I have 
re-examined this inftrumcnt, ancLfind myfelf very well authorifed to fay, that a 60,000th 
part of an inch, with fuch an inftrument, is a more definite and certain quantity than a 
40COth part of a;i inch is to the sight, conditioned as above fpecified. The certainty 
of contact is, therefore, fifteen times greater than that of yifion, when applied to the 
divifions of an inftrument : and if this principle of certainty in contad: did not take 
place even much beyond the limit I have now affigned, we never (hould have fecn thofe 
cxquifite mirrors for rcflcding tclcfcopcs, that have already been produced. 

Thcfc refltftions apply immediately to my prcfent fubjeft, as Hindley*s method of 
divifion proceeds wholly by contact, and that of the firmeft kind; there being fcarcely 
need of magnifying glaflcs in any part of the operation. 

, In the year 1748, I came to fettle in London j and the firft empteyment I met with 
was that of making philofophical inftruments and apparatus. In this fituation, my 
friend HjNDLET, from a principle the rcvcrfe of jealoufy^, fully communicated to me, 
by letter, his method of divifion ; and though I was enjoined fccrecy rcfpefting others 
(for the reafons already mentioned), yet the communication was exprefsly made with 
an intention xhat.I might apply it to my own purpofes. 

The following are extracts from two letters, which contain the whole of what related 
tQ this fubjpa ; and fince I have many things to obferve thereon, fo that the paraphrafc 
•^puld be much greater than the text, I think it beft not to interrupt the defcription with 
any commentary, as perhaps bis own mode of expreflion will. more, briefly and happily: 
convey the general idea of the work than any I can ufe inftead of it. 

I^y.Pear Friena« York, 14th Nov. 1748. 

AS to what you was mentioning about my brother^s knowing how I divided my engine 
plate, I will dcfcribe it as well as I can myfelf j but you will want a good many things 
to go through with it. 

The 



or ASTTRdNOMICAL INSTRUMENTS. 



187 



The manner is this : firft ehobfe the largcfl: number you want, and then choofe a long, 
plate of thin brafs ; min* was about one inch in breadth, and eight feet in length, which 
I bent like an hoof> for m hogfhead, and fbldered the ends together ; and turned it of 
equal thicknefs, upon a block of fmooth-grained wood, upon my great lathe in the air 
(that is, upon the end of the mandrel) : one fide of the hoop muft be.rather wider than 
the other, that it may fit the better to the bloek, which will be a (hort piece of a cone of 
a large diameter : when the hoop was turned, I took it ofF, cut, and opened it ftraight 
again* 

The next ftep was to havfc ^ piecd of fteel bended into the form as per 
margin • ; ^v^lich had two fmall holes bored in it, of equal bigncfs, one 
to receive a fmall pin, and the other a drill of equal' fize. I grouogl the 
holes after they were hardened^ to make them round and fmooth. The 
chaps formed by this fteel plate were as near together as juft to let the 
long plate through. Being open at one end, 'the chaps fo formed would 
fpring-a little, and would'prcls the long plate clofe, by fetting in the vise^ 
Then I put the long plate to a right angle to the length of the fteel 
chaps, and bored one hole through the long plate, into which I put the 
fmall pin; then bored through the other hole; and by moving the fteel 
chaps a hole forward, and putting in the pin in the laft hole, I proceeded 
till 1 had divided the whole length of the plate. 

The ncxc thing was to make this into a circle again. After the plate was cut off at 
the end of the intended number^ I then proceeded to join the ends, which J did thus : I 
bored two narrow ftiort brafs plates f as I did the long one, arid put one on the infide> 
and the other on the outfide of the hoop> whofe ends were brought together ; and put 
two or three turned fcrcwplns> with flat heads and nuts to them, into each end, which, 
held them together till I rivettcd two litde plates, one on each fide of the narrow plate^ 
on the outfide of the hoop^ Then I took out the fcrews, arid turned my block down^ 
till the hoop would fit clofe on ; and by that means my right line was made into an equal 
divided circle of what number I pleafed* 




\ 



■hH>^i 



• The figure is considerably less than the real tool should be. 

t These I AM hereafter distingvish by the name of stiddU platen. 



The 



/ 



188 OBSERVATIONS ON THE GRADUATION 

The engine plate was fixed on the face of the block, with a ftccl hole fixed before it, 
to bore through -, and I had a point that would fall into the holes of the divided hoop i 
(b by cutting Ihorter, and turning the block lefs, I got all the numbers on my plate. 

I need not tell you, that you get as many prime numbers as you pleafe ; nor that 
the diftance of the holes in the fleel chaps mult be proportioned to the length of the 
hoop. 

You may aflc my brother what he knows about my method of dividing; but need 
not tell him. what I have faid about it; for I think neither he nor John Smith }^novr 
fo much as I have told you, though I believe ihey got fome knowledge of it in general 

terms *. 1 dcfirc you to keep the method of dividing to yourself, and conclude 

with my bcft wifbes^ 

And am, dear Sir, yours, &c 

Though the above letter was in itfelf very clear and explicit as to the general traces 
of the method, yet fome doubts occurring to me, a further cxpl.mation became ne- 
cefTary. A copy of my letter not being prcferved^ the purport of ir may be inferred 
from the anfwer, which was as follows : 

■ 

Dear FrjenPj York, 13th March, 1748-9. 

I THINK in your lafl: you feem to be apprehenfive of fome difficulties in drilling 
the hoop for dividing : Firft, that the centre of the hole in the hoop might not be 
prccifcly in the centre of the hole of the fteel chaps^ it was drilled in; but if I de- 
fcribed fully to you the method I ufcd, I can fee no danger of error there : for my 
chaps were very thick, and the iwo correfponding holes were a little wnical, and 
ground with a fteel pin ; firft one pair, and then the other, alternately, till the pin 
would go the fame depth into each- Then for drilling the hoop, I took any com- 
mon drill that would pafs througli, and bore the hole. After that I took a five-fided 



* The persons here referred to were both bred with iiim. His brother, Mr. Rogee Hindley, who 
has many years followed i\\v ingenious profession of a watch-cap maker in London, was so much younger 
as to be an apprentice to him. Mr.. John Smith, now dead, had 6ome years past, the honour to work ia 
the instrument way, under the direction of the late Dr. Demaxic bray, for his present Ma jesty, 

broach^ 



\ 



*♦. 



•I 



OF ASTRONOMICAL INSTRUMENTS. ^ 189 

broach, which opened the hole in the brafs betwixt the ftecl chaps, but would not 
touch the ftecl; fo confequently the centre of the holes in the brafs muft be con- 
centric with the holes in the chaps ; and for alterations by air, heat, cold, &c. I was not 
^bove two or three hours in drilling a row of holes, as far as I remember. 

adly, For drilling, in a right line, I had a thin brafs plate, faftened between the fteel 
chaps, for the edge of the hoop to bear againfl:, whilft I thruft it forward from hole to 
hole. What you propofe of an iron frame with a lead outfide, will be better than my 
wooden block 5 but confidering the little time that part, betwixt transferring the divifions 
of the hoop to the divifions of my dividing plate, I did not fufFcr much that way. It 
was when I drilled the holes in my dividing plate that I ufed a frame for drilling, which 
had one part of it that had a ftecl hole, that in lying upon the plane of the dividing plate 
was fixed (kd in its place for the point of the drill to pafs through: then, at the length of 
the drill, there was another piece of fteel, with a hole in it, to receive the other end of 
the drill to keep it at right-angles to the plane of the plate. This piece was a fpring, 
which bended at the end, where it was fattened to tile frame of the lathe, at about 
eighteen inches from the end of the drill ; fo it pufhcd the drill through with any given 
force the drill would bear : and though that end of the drill moved in the arch of a 
circle, it was a very fmall part of it, being no more than equal to the thicknefs of the 
dividing plate* 

My good wifhcs conclude me yours, 

^ Hen. Hindley. 

Whoever attentively confiders the commiinication contained in the above letters will 
fee, that more happy expedients could not have been devifed to procure a fet of divi- 
fions, where there fhould be the moft exadt equality among neighbours ; and which, 
for the purpofes of clock- making, is the principal thing to be wifiied for. But herein, 
as in M. Roemer's method, there were no means of checking the diftant divifions, 
which run on to 360 : now fuch a cheeky when the expanfion of metals is confidered, 
and particularly the difference of expanfion between brafs and fteel, fecms abfolutety 
neceflary for thepurpofe of divifions upon inftruments, where the accurate menfuration 
of large angles is required, as much as the equality of neighbouring divifions *. 

■ 

^ The ingenious Mr. Stakcliffs (some years a workroaaof Hini>l«t*s) has suggested, that the dif- 
ference of expansion between the steel chaps and the brass hoop may be avoided by making the chaps of 
brass alf*^ 'with hard steel holes scjt scparatefy therein, somewhat similar to the jewelled holes of watches. 

With 



r 



190 OBSERVATIONS ON THE GRADUATION 

With this view the invention of this ingenious peribn ftjggeflbed to him the dioug^t of 
making his curved fcrcw to lay hold ot fifteen teeth or degrees together : this, in effect, 
becomes a pair of compafTrs, 24 removes of which complete the whole circle, and pro- 
c'liicc 24 checks in the circumference : and whoever confidcrs the very ezquifite degree of 
truth that refults from the grinding of furfaces in contact, as already noticed, muft ex- 
pect a very great degree of rectification of whatever errors might fubfift ia die wheel 
after its firft cutting. 

What degree of truth it might in reality be capable of upon its firft production and 
adjuftment, is not now to be afcertaincd, he never having ufed it for the graduation of 
any capital inftrument. Thofe that he made with a view to an accurate meafure of 
angles, he always made with a fcrew and wheel, or parts of circles cut by his engine 
into teeth, and ground together as before-mentioned ; but I have reafon to think, that 
its performance, if put to a ftrict teft, was never capable of that accuracy that he him- 
fclf fuppofcd it to have. 

The method itfclf, however, from its fimplicity, and eafe of execution, feems to me 
to be a foundation for every thing that can be expected in truth of graduation j and in con- 
fcquencc for reducing inftruments to the leaftlize that is capable of bringing out all that 
can be expected from the largeft ; when it (hall, like manual divifion, have received thofe 
advantages that the joint labours of the moft ingenious men can beftow upon it. That 
I may not appear to be without grounds for my expectations, I will beg leave to propofe, 
what near forty years occafional contemplation has fiiggefted to me on the fubjeft ; and 
a^ I cart defcribethe procefs I would purfue, where difii:rent from Hindley's, in fewer 
words than I copld make out axcgulv.icriticifm upon his letters^ I will immediately pro- 
ceed to the dcfcription of it^ 



Proposed Improvements of Hindley's Method. 

I would recommend the number of parts into which the circle is to be reduced to be 
1440 ; that is 4 times 360 ; which divifions will therefore be quarters of a degree -, the 
diftances of the holes in the chaps wiU therefore, to a three-feet radius, be -r'oV-y of an 
inch nearly j that is, between the onc-fixth and onc-feventh of an inch diftance centre 
and ccnuc 

Having 



OP ASTRONOMICAL INSTRUMENTS. 191 

Having provided myfclf with a ftout mandrel, or arbor, for a ckoch lathe, properly 
framed, that would turn a circle of fix ktx. diameter, I would prepare a chock, or plat- 
form, for the end of it, of that diameter, or a little more, compofcd of clean-grained 
mahogany plank, all cutout of the fame log; which, when finiflied, to be about ij 
inch thick, and formed in fectors of circles, fuppofe i6 to make the circle i the middle 
line of each fector lying in the direction of the grain of the wood, this will confequently 
every where point outward : the method of framing this kind of work is well known. 

The way of getting a flip of brafs to anfwer the circumference of this platform is 
fuggefted in Mr. Bird's account of conftructing mural quadrants. Let a parallelogram 
of brafs of about three feet long, and of a competent fubftance (fuppofe half an inch) 
to make it when finifhed about one-twentieth of an inch in thicknefs, be caft of the 
fineft brafs ; and this to be rolled down till it becomes of fufficient length for the hoop, 
and about one-fifth part more. I would then cut off, from the whole length, fomewhac 
better than one-fixth part, the whole being fufEciently reduced to a thicknefs by the 
rollers. Perhaps no way will be more ready and convenient to get fuch a long ftrip of 
brafs reduced to an equal breadth, than the method prcfcribed by Hindley j viz. by 
turning it upon the chock prepared ; but I would not make it wider on one fide than the 
other, like the hoop of a caOc, as he defcribcs, but exactly to fit the chock, when truly 
cylindric ; for the internal elafticity of the brafs, in fo great a length, will be very fuf- 
ficient for fitdng it on tight enough, without any tapering. This I will now fuppofe 
done; and a pair of ftecl chaps^ as defcribed by Hindley, to be alfo prepared, and 
ready for grinding ; which, by foch a careful admeafuremcnt as can eafily be made, will 
£ive the length of the hoop fufficienriy near, on its firft preparation. 



Method of forming a Pair of Straps a^ a Check to the Divisions. 

The part firft cut off muft be again cut into two equal parts in length i which, for dis- 
tinction fake, I will call the straps ; and which are to fcrve as checks co every 6oth 
and every x 20th divifion of the circle. 

A fteel plate, of about half an inch in breadth, the fame thicknefs as the ft raps, 
and in length equal to the breadth of the hoop plate, muft be foldered with filver 
folder to one end of each of the ftraps, by which means their length will be incrcafed 
half an inch by the fteel. An hole muft then be made through each fteel plate, of the 
fame fize as thofc through the chaps, and anfwcrable to the middle of the ftraps j but 

fo 



192 OBSERVATIONS ON THE GRADUATION 

fo near the border of the fteel, that when the chaps arc put on, and adapted to the 
ilecl hole, the next will fall through the brafs. The fteel plates muft then be hardened; 
and a pin being put through the two holes and the two plates, thefc muft be wrought 
to a right line in contiguity to each other; by this means the ftraight edge of each 
of the ftraps will be reduced to the fame diftance from the fteel hole: the hard fteel 
edges may be rectified by the grindftone, if neceflary. 

This being done, not only the holes in the chaps, but the holes in the two fteel 
plates, applied to each other, like the two fides of the chaps, muft be refpectively 

ground together; not with a taper pin, as prefcribed by Hindley ; but fo as not 

■* 

only to be cylindrical, but that the fame cylindrical pin fliall equally fit them all, and 
leave them fmooth and polifhed ; which is a procefs no ways difficult to a curious 
artift, and of which therefore a minute defcription is unneceffary. 

The chaps being then put upon one of the ftraps, with its ftraight edge upptrmoft, 
and a pin put through the holes on the left-hand, and through the fteel hole in the 
ftrap under operation, the chaps muft be fet upright, fo that the line joining the centres 
of the holes (hall be parallel to the upper edge of the ftrap ; the brafs plate mentioned 
by Hindley, between the chaps, as a guide for directing them always to that upright 
pofition, may be then adjufted and fixed to the infide of the chap next the operator *• 

The performance of the enfuing part of this work fliould be at a feafon when the 
temper of the air is not very variable; rather above the mean temper (fuppofe 60^) 
than below it ; but above all things the artift fliould be|himfelf cool ; that is^ not in a 

• 

ftate of fenfible perfpiration ; and there fliould be a free circulation of air in the room. 
Things being thus conditioned in refpect to temperature, he may begin to drill the 
holes in one of the ftraps ; the pin being iirft put through the chaps and through the 
fteel hole of the ftrap ; and the next hole, being drilled through the brafs with a com- 
mon drill, that and every hole as it goes is to be finiftied with a taper broach," as 
prefcribed by Hindley; and he may then prove or finifli every hole by the ap- 



* It would be well, previous to the drilling of the steel chaps, that another hole was driUcd in the chaps, 
that should be Somewhat above the upper cd^e of the straps, and in the middle betwixt side and side^ to 
receive a sUady pin therein, antecedent to drilling the main holes ; for then a tempered steel pin, a little 
taper, will, by driving it in as Ikras necessary, constantly answer this purpose from first to last, so as to 
regulate the holes in grinding, to be truly opposite : proper holes should also be drilled for fixing the brass 
guide plate to one of the chaps. 

plication 



OP ASTRONOMICAI^ INSTRUMENTS. 193 

plication of a thorough blxuch^ mad* fo fuU as to require a degree of preflure to force 
it through i and this broach being a little Qemperf d^ and the holes quite hard» there will 
l^e no fear of injuring the fteel holes ^. 

Calling the hole in the fteel plates o, and obfcrving the time of beginning, you may 
proceed to drill 60 holes as prefcribed by Hikdlby $ and noting how long you have 
been about it^ you may lay the work afide the length of time, equal to the time you 
took in drilling 1 that any addition of warmth it may have acquired in handling or work- 
ing may be again loft in a great degree f. After this paufe you may begin again, and 
go on to finifli 60 holes more ; that is> to the length of 120 holes from the beginning . 
you then proceed in the fame manner with the other ftrap. i 



Method of drilling the Hoop. 

You are now prepared to commence the work upon the long or hoop-plate ; and ypu 
proceed therewith, in forming the firft hole with the chaps, as before directed by 
HiNDLEYj and this firft hole you call o. You then place the ftraps one on each fide the 
hoop, with their gaged edges upward, afid put the pin through the boles denominated 
60 upon the ftraps, and through the firft hole alre^y made, and denominated o upon the 
hoop ; then^ bringing the gaged edges of the fteel plates to be even with the upper or 
working fide of the hoop, you pinch them together in the vife, and drill and broach the 
hole through the fteel plates^ which will make the hole^ number 60, upon the hoop. 
This done, you put the pin through the left-hand hole of the chaps, and the hole 
marked o upon the hoop-plate firft made^i and proceed to drill with the chaps to 59 
holes inclufive^ which will fill up the whole ipace from o to the 60th divifion before 
obtained.' 



* The steel holes in the chaps need not to be above one-twentieth of an inch in diameter ; abd though 
it may be proper to make the steel plate^ of which thty are formed^ one-tenth of an inch thick, in order 
l» give the spring Ibfmed btiw^ea them a convenient dogieo of s^flhctSi yet they nuty b4 reduced (^y 
chamfering the outsides) to half that thickness. 

t As there is not moch occasion for the artist to touch his work, the effects of that may also be very 
mi^ch ^tomM by wearing ^tbiek gloves; 9jt4 the friction being but slight, and the wor)^ ^^WMt continually 
in the vise, the variation of temperature in the metals concerned cannot.be sensible ox connd^rable. 



xl'.i' 



Cc You 



194 OBSERVATIONS ON THE GRADUATION 

You now again have recourfe to the ftraps, and placing them one on each fide the hoop-* 
plate, you put the pin through the 1 2cdi hole of die ftraps, and through the hole 
marked o upon the hoop-plate ; and regulating the fteel plates to die hoop-plate as 
before, you drill and form a hole with the fteel plates, which will correfpond with the 
s 20ch liole upon the hoop-plate ; and afterwards filling up the 59 holes wanting, by means 
of the chaps, you then have all completed to the 1 20th divifion, which is one-twelfdi of 
the whole circle. 

You then proceed, in like manner, with another fet of 120 holes; that is, placing 
the 60th hole of the ftraps to the 1 20th hole of the hoop-plate, and from it producing 
the 1 8och hole ; you, in like manner as before, fill up this 60 with the chaps ; and 
afterwards placing the 1 20th hole on the ftraps in the 1 20th hole on the hoop-plate> 
you will obuin the 240th hole ; fo that filling up this laft fet of 60 divifions, you have 
obtained 241 holes, including 240 fpaces or divifions of the hoop s and repeating this 
procefs ten dmes more, you will, in like manner^ obtain 1441 holes, comprehending 
1440 fpaces ^. And this procefs being carried on in temperate weather, the manner 
of working produces twelve fimilar operations, wherein the materials and tools con- 
cerned will not only be fubjeft to very little change of temperature, but that change^ 
whatever it is, will be nearly fimilar in each fet of 1 20 holes : we may therefore infer^ 
that the greateft inequality, or indeed any that can be fenfible, mufl be at every 60 
divifions, that is, between the 59th and 6oth^ and between the 1 19th and 120th, both 
which will be equally repeated 1 2 rimes, in the whole lengdi which b to compofe the 
circumference of a circle, and which will thus be checked thereby 12 times in the cir* 
cumference, and 12 rimes more at the intermediate diflances; that is, with 12 mafler 
checksj and 1 2 fubordinate ones, in the whole round. 

It is proper here to obferve, that in M. Robmer's method even fixty divifions could 
fcarcely be trufted in an aflfair of great accuracy, on account of the objeftions already 
made, arifing from the points having fuch flight hold in the furfiure of the brafs ; but 
here the parts are held fo exceedingly firm^ and the operation carried on with fo much 
power^ that any fmall inequality in the hardnefs of the braia, or irregularity of furfaccj 



It will be proper, for reasons hex«itfter to be nentioiied, to contiiiae ihn diriBioni to SO holes more, 
in the whole 146l holes. , 

cannot 



OF ASTRONOMICAL INSTRUMENTS. 194 

cannot be fuppofed to afitct the place of the centre of the hole i nor will any frnaU in* 
equality that may be fufpe&ed from the wear of the fteel holes fenfibly affeft the centre 
of the hoIe^ to which every thing is ultimately referred. 



Method of joining the Hoop. 

A more happy thought than that of Hindley's^ for joining the two ends of the 
hoop, could fcarcely have been wiihed foo in regard to preferving the fame equality of 
the fpace between the holes contiguous to the joint, as in the other parts : for though, 
geometrically Ipeaking> the two saddle plates, in which the litde cylindrical bolts are 
fixed, for bringing the terminating holes of the hoop plate to their due diftance, being 
one applied within the hoop, and the other without, will belong to circles of different 
radii ; yet this difference being exceedingly fmall in fuch thin metal, and fo great a 
radius, and one being as much too big for the hoop as the other is too little, when the 
bolts are put in, and the hoop in that part fet nearly to a circle by a mould $ the mean 
between them affumed by the hoop> from the claftie compreflibility of the matcrials» 
will be the truth* 

It muft, however, be remarked, that in the ufe of the ftraps, the joining of the hoop 
fhoold not be made at any part betwixt an 119th and an 120th divifion, as fbme inequa* 
lity mufl be fuppofed there^ unkfs the fikddle plates were adapted thereto. The method 
the moft eafily praAifed> w31 be to continue the divifion upon the hoop> about twenty 
more than the completion of the number intended to form the circle^ and to cut off all 
the overplus pnes at the beginning. 

The faddle plates I would recommend to contain ten boles each ; t^ that if the divi- 
fions are carried on to twenty more than what will be contained in the circle, there will 
be a piece containing twenty to cut off; and this again being cut in the middle will afford 
ten holes to make each faddle plate ; fb that there will be a place for a bolt on each fide 
the joint, and then putting a bolt through every other hole^ there will be three bolts at 
an end. 

The pieces deftinedfor the faddle plates, thus obtained, being broader than can be 
admitted when put to this ufe^I would advife to divide the breadth of the plate into 
three equal parts ; and with a cutdng hook (which perhaps will be attended with the 
leafl violence in the feparation) to feparate the two outfide pieces from the middle piece : 

by 



196 OBSERVATIONS ON THE ORADUAtlON 

by this means the two faddle plates (though double) will octtipy OAe-th!txl otily of d^ 
breadth of the hoop in the middle i and .two of the pieces cut off being appliedi one oh 
each fide of the faddle plate on the outfide, will Wfwer tn Kke wantter fof the tittt 
plates. 

The laft operation to complete the joining of the hoop is the putting on the rivet 
plates : to complete this, I would advifc a piece of bralsj of three or four inches ia 
length, to be Bled fo as to anfwer to the infide of the hoop^ when reduced to a true cir- 
cular form ; and being three-eighths, or one-half an inch in thicknefs, to file the oppofite 
fide fomcwhat nearly concentric thereto $ apply the middle of its convex arch to the 
infide of the hoop at the joint, and then bring on the middle of one of the rivet plates 
to the joint of the hoop, confine the thire together by a couple of narrownrhapped hand 
vifes, leaving a fpacc between them capable of receiving a couple of pins as rivets on 
each fide the joint ; the holes for the rivets are then to be drilled through all, and a 
little fmoothed with a broach at their entry, into which fmooth taper pins are to be 
driven $ not with violence^ but moderately, that no fenfible ftretching of the folid parts 
may take place thereby ; then cutting ofi^ and fmoothing the heads, fliift the viies fo as 
to receive another couple of holes, and a third couple in the fame end of the hoop ; and 
proceed progreflively in the fame manner, from the middle to the other end c^ the rivet 
plate ; then gently ieparate the internal brafs mould with a thin kmfc, or luch like in* 
flrument ; and cutting ofi^, and very lightly rivetting the inner ends, proceed to fix the 
other rivet plate, in the fame manner, on the other fide : by this means the hoop will be 
firmly joined in the very pofition given it by the faddle plates and mould. Thcfe plates 
may then be removed, the infide of the hoop cleared and fmoothed, if necefiafy ; and 
the outfide will have the middle part clear where the divifions lie, and that without fen- 
fible lofs or gain in the juncture. 

Method of transferring the Divisions of the Ilodp to a dividing Plate. 

The hoop being thus refitted for the chock, thdt fiiould be tiMcd dowi! to leave a 
ihoulder on one fide, that the hoop, now reduced to an equal breadth, may be forced 
againft it i and the divifions, being equally diftant from one of its edges, will be all 
found in a circle, as if turned upon it. It fliould be very carefiilly fitted to the chock, 
that it may go on with a fufiicient degree of tighmefs, and without the neceflity of 
much forcing i and it will be no inconvenience now, if it goes on upon a very flight 

degree 



OF ASTRONOMICAL INSTRUMENTS. 197 

degree of taper of the chof:^» «s die intcrnil fpring of the materials will eafily accommo- 
date it to diis ftape without any iiijiicy to its general truth: a flight degree of a 
groove fliould be turned in the place where the divifions will come, that any conical 
pin, that is to ferve as an indexj let drop into the divifions or holes, may not, by 
reaching through diis thin plate^ abut upon the wood, radier than upon the fides of 
the holes I and thus this hoop is made into a, wheel of 1440 equal dLvifions, move- 
able round upon its own axis, whereon it was formed. 

Againft the time that this is completed, there riiuft be prepared a flat circular plate 
or wheel of brafs, the rim of whiqh fhould be of about 3^ inches breadth,, and about 
two-tenths of an inch . in thicknefs when finifhed, to make a dividing plate ; the ex- 
ternal diameter of this is to be fuch, that when laid flat upon the furf^ce of the 
mahogany platform, its extreme edge will exceed the diameter of the hoop by aboiit 
half an inch all round. There miift' alfo be prepared brafs arms (fuppofe eight ih 
number) of an equal fubftance with the outer rim, and all connected with a circular 
plate in the middle 5 and, the whole of this work being framed beforehand, is to be 
let on flat upon the mahogany platform ; whofe face is fuppofed to 'be turned truly 
flat, and fufEciently afiixed with fcrews : in this fituation^ the outward edge is to be 
turned, and the outward face of die rim turned flat. The centre plate, which may 
be about twelve inches diameter, is alio to be turned as flat as pofliblej and a centre 
holej of about half an inch diameter^ to be very carefully turned therein. 

A piece of clean, ftraight-grained, well-feafoned mahogany, of about two feet long, 
three inches thicks and five or fix inches broad, is then to be well aflixed to fome 
part of the general frame of the lathe, which mull now have its pofidon altered, fo 
that the platform will become horizontal i and therefore the frame ihould be originally 
made with this view ^. The piece of mahogany is to be aflixed fo that one of its 
larger fiures fliall be in a parallel plane to the face of the platform^ and fb low as to 
clear the under fide of the platform in its rotation ; and fo far diftant from the centre, 
that an index may be .fixed upon this upper face of the piece of wood, fo as con- 
veniently to drop into the holes of the hoop j while the comtiion cufter frame of a 
clock-maker^s engme fliall be firmly attached upon the fame face of the wood, and (b 



* After changing the porition of the lathe, the coUar of. its. .mandcel should b^rcmorcd; and the neck 
made to moft frithm thrc^ planes, so as to preserve an exact centre^* in tW maimer of an t^Mnl Mititudc 
initrument. . . • * .-oi- . . 

fixed 



198 OBSERVATIONS ON THE GRADUATION 

fixed as to cut the'^edge of the dividing pfate into teeth> anfwerable to the ieveral 
divifions of the hoop. The teeth need only to be cut with a common cutter^ making 
a parallel notch : and here it will be proper to obferve^ that not only both the index 
and cutter are to be founded on the fame piece or bafe of wood $ but that the nearer 
they are together^ the more free they will be from the efiedts of aU variations of ex- 
panfions by variations of temperature *• 

The equalising the Teeth of the dividing Plate by grinding. 



/ 



The objeft of transferring the divifions of the hoop to the teeth of the dividing 
plate^ is ftill farther to equalize the teeth by grinding ; efpecially thofe that> fiilCng 
ivithin the compafs of each fet of 1 20 divifions, may be fuppofcd, if any^ to be 
mended thereby \ but as it may be incommodioin to conftruA a curved fcrew^ of 
fuch a length and fize, in Hikdl£y*s mediod, as' would be fufficient for the purpofc ; 
I would propofe to ufe two fcrews of brafs^ cut from a cylinder in the way fet forth by 
Mr. Ramsdek^ each of which^ with a very little grinding upon this large circum- 
ference^ would lay hold of ten or twelve teeth together. I would place the two fcrews^ 
that is^ their middles^ to be ninety divifions aiimder ; of confequenccj when one of 
the fcrews is between the 59th and the 6othj or between the 119th and laoth divifion 
of each fet^ the other will be in the middle of the ipace divided by the chaps only f* 

The threads of thefe fcrews I woidd adyife to be cut a little taper, fo that as they 
grind in, they may fill the notches of the teeth % which allbj by this means will 
acquire a little tapering towards theit extremities f and by cutting the notches parallel^ 



* It is. proper to obs^rve^ that as it may be impraeticable to|;ct tha rim of the dividiag plate cast of 
the proper size, in one entire piece, it will be very practicable, if cast of a less sise (suppose half), but 
of a sufficient thickness, to roll it down ; and by having the otitward edge origtnally thicker^ than the 
inner, in the proportion of'the raSIUi it may be so m^naiged by the'rMleta'at'^tO'k^ C|f aii ^equal thickness 
when brought to its proper site.' Bttt the amis aivI centiia 4)latiB shottld be :tf Aft shsc metali rolled is 
the same degree. 

^ The best way of giving an equal motion to those two screws, seems to be by a detached axis carrying 
two common fiat wheels; one acting upon a like flat wheel, upon the axis of one screw, and the other 
in the same manner, upon the other; and applying the pulley for commilnicatitkg thQ power to the 
middle of the. detached axis between the two wheels, the spring or twist will be equrtl bpth ways; so 
that in turning the ce»lrary way round, tUcy will still be in equal advance. 

as 



OF ASTRONOMICAL INSTRUMENTS, 



lj» 



as I have mentioned, the true ground part will alt^rays be certain of being at the 
extremity. . 

When the fcrewa have been ufed in grinding tiU they are found to have the eficft 
of a perfectly equal and eafy rotation all round, and all the teeth reduced to a fenfible 
taper, and regular bearing, I would then totally remove the fcrews from the fquare 
block of wood, upon whofe upper face I fuppofe them to have been mounted ; in 
like manner as I fuppofe the index and cutting frame to have been removed, to make 
room for the mounting of the fcrews. I now confider the teeth of the dividing plate, 
fb formed, as having all the equality that the prefent known Hate of human art has 
pointed out ; and the whole convertible upon the axis or mandrel upon which it has 
been originally formed, and the central hole of the plate concentric therewith : I 
therefore confider th6 ground faces of the teeth of the plate as the a£bial diviHons. 
It now remains to (hew how they are to be transferred^ to form the divifions of an 
inllrument. 



Preparation of the dividing P/j/^ybr graduating Instruments. 

If a fmall cylinder of hard fteel is duly poli(hed, and made of a fize fo as juft to 
chock in betwixt the extremities of die teeth, then tint centre of that cylinder will be a 
fixed point, in refpeft to the circumference of the wheel : if another cylinder is applied 
in like manner, at the diftance of a number of divifions (fuppofe it a prime number, fo 
as to crofs all former divifions, viz. 17 or 19), then the middle of the line joining the 
centres of the two cylinders will rem^ in the direftion of the same radius^ though 
one of them fliould force in a minute quantity further than the other ; and if a point is 
aflumed in the diredion of a tangent to a circle at this middle point, then though both 
the cylinders fiiould drop in a minute quantity further at one time dian another, yet the 
middle point would refnain at the fame diftance from the point in the tangent i provided 
that point was removed to a competent diftance, that is, to five or fix inches. On this 
principle I would conftrufi: an index^ the two cylinders bemg fixed in a frame, con*- 
vertible about the middle point, and to be centered in the end of the lever, reprefoitixig 
the tangent; then this lever being again convertible about the point m the tangent line, 
the middle point would always have a fixed diftance from the point in the tangent, and 
there hold it fteadily faft | the tangent point being placed upon the fixed block before- 
mentioned. 






t 



• f 



Ufi 



20© OBSERVATIONS ON THE GRADUATION 



Ufc of the dividing Plate in the Graduation of Instruments^ 

Our dividing plate is now ready for the reception of an inftrument ; fuppofc it a 
quadrantj whofe radius^ however^ muft not exceed the radius of the dividing plate : It is 
to be laid upon the face of the dividing plate,' and a weight, or weights, equivalent to 
that of the quadrant, is placed on the oppofite fide, to balance it. It muft alfo be fup- 
pofcd, that the quadrant is made with a view to be divided by this engine ; and con- 
sequently, that the central cylinder is fo well adapted, and nicely fitted to the centre hole 
of the quadrant, that the centre cylinder can be removed, in order for the limb to be 
divided, and again replaced;' without fenfibly altering its centre. This being the cafe, 
let a piece of metal be turned, to apply to the quadrant, perfccdy like its centre cylin- 
der at the upper end, and turned nicely to fit the central hole in the dividing plate, at the 
lower end $ then, the quadrant being fixed with proper faftening fcrews, I would cut the 
divifions with a beam compafs ; and, if a fixed point is aiTumed, viz. the centre of the 
tangent point for the index i then the beam compafs being always opened to the com- 
puted length of the tangent of die circle of divifions, it will be fufiiciendy near for 
cutting the ^vifions, fqpare to the circulai' arches between which they are placed. 

It will alio be proper (to prevent unequal expanfions) thvt the ^e^m of the compafs 
ibouU be formed of a piece of dean-graihed ^mhit'cfir.;, and that the length between 
the points be inclofed in a tiibe of tiii or brais ; without touchitig the beam, except at 
the cerminatiohs, which will in a great meafure protcft it from both akcration of moiftur t j 
and of heat from the body of the ardfi^ during the operation. 






It will be likewifQ proper to have a le^r> oc fotM equivalent contrivance, t& bring 
the divi4ing plate ibrviard; ^tfaat after lifting t&o little cyHnders oiic of the divifionsj, 
and reftiog fhem upon the tops q£ the teeth» they may be brought gently forward with 
an equal drag, and ultimately fi^ap in between, the teeth, \xf the ftrength of the fpriotS 
commaading die index; by .diis flleaai the dragbf ttbtfin^tioaof the wholes wiU bt €0A-» 
%mtlyte:ftiQt way;.:? '. :; .. :.:\i nl ;/ 



• . . . ^ .. t . 

• I • • • 

•Jt.t J •. ■ -St f ' . . . ' \ ■ I. . .,•■ 



I ^^ » f • ■ 

• CenchtMn. 

if • • ... 

New, if, as it has been {hewn, a quadrant of any radius may be read oflF to the 
400odth part 6f an inch, then this quantity upon a radius of three feet will not be fo 

much 



OF ASTRONOMICAL INSTRUMENTS. ftOl 

much as 1 7 fecond ; and as the whole of the procefs is carried on by'contaftj in which 
a greater error than that of a 6o,ooodth part of an inch cannot be admitted in any 
fingle operation^ I (hould afluredly expedl a three -feet quadrant, fo divided^ to be true 
in its divlfions, and read ofF to at mod: two feconds. 

But, after all, in an inftrument like this, I (hould expCiS): the greateft fourcd of error to 
be in the want of perfcft coincidence of the centre of the divifions with the aftual centre 
upon which the index revolves; and therefore, that if, inftead of a quadrant of thrce-fcet 
radius, a complete circle of five feet diameter was divided^ and its divifions read off 
from the two oppofite points (taking the mean), then the errors of the centre will be 
wholly avoided. For this reafon, I am very clearly of opinion, that the fagacious pro- 
pofition of Mr. Ramsd£K» to ufe circles inftead of quadrants, or other portions of cir- 
cles, will bid much the faireft for perfe&ion in aiStual pradice ; and that his ingenious 
method of making them both ftiff and light, by the ufe of hollow conical tubes by way 
of fpokes, in the manner of a common wheel, will enable him to mount them of five 
feet diameter, upon hoUow axes, in the nature of a transit. By this means we fhall 
have all the good properties of both the quadrant and tranfit united in one iriftrumenti 
and obfervations both of right afcenfion and declination, through the very fame tclefcope, 
as long fince attempted by M. Roemer ; and to a degree of perfedion and certainty, 
in point of declination, hitherto unattainable by the largeft inftruments that have yet 
been made. 

N. B. In matters of very nice determination, fmall circumftances often come to be 
of confcqucnce ; and it is in this view that I mention what, follows. It was a pra6ticc 
of Hind ley's of many years ftanding, and fince followed by myfelf and others, 
wherever he made aiiy ufe of the vernier ^ to lay the vernier plate in the fame plane, or . 
cylindrical furface continued, whereon the principal divifions are cut. It is of equal 
utility, though the vernier be rejected, to lay the index ftroke in the plane of the 
•divifions. In this way the divifions being by convenience upon the external border of 
the limb ♦, /^'o fcts of divifions are thereby rendered incommodious ; but thofe that 



*" Jt has been objected^ that laying the divisions upon the extreme edge of the limb of the instrument 
silbjrcts it to injury: but, to obviate thi?, in aii-HADLKY's quudmnt made for* mc, by my direction, by^ 
the late Mr. MoRGAM, in the year 17:")(), wherein the vernii'r is laid even with the divisions; those are 
protected by a projection of the solid part of thelimb, beyond the dixislons; a Rabbet being sunk in the 
edge of the limb, to clear the vernier. , ■ . , 

I>.d - • *. 'wifli 



* ; 






202 OBSERVATIONS ON THE GRADUATION, &c. 

wi(h two fets, as a check, will in a great mcafurc aid themfclves, by reading from two 
different parts of the fame fet of divifions ; which is very cafily provided for, by putting 
an additional (Iroke upon the index plate, at the.diftance of 9, 11, or any prime num- 
ber of divifions to 19, 23, or more; and reading off from that ftroke alfoj as before 
recommended for great quadrants, where the vernier is propofcd to be rejected * : fo 
that they will thereby be mutually checked by divifions that had no corrcfpondencc in 
their original formation. 



* I would not have it thought, irom my proposal of rejecting the vernier, that I have any quarrel with 
it ; I think it a very simple and ingenious contrivance, where it is properly applicable ; that is, where the 
strokes of the vernier, or their estimated halves, are sullicient for all the precision required or expected 
from the instrument, as in Ha dley's quadrants, theodolites, &c. but where still more minute divisions 
are required than can easily be had by estimation from the vernier ; to do this by a screw, as a supplement 
to the vernier, appears to me in the light of bringing a more accurate tool to supply the deficiencies of 
one less accurate ; when the former might, with more propriety, supply the place of the latter 

altogether* . 






REMARKS 



[ 203 ] 

REMARKS on the diflcrent Temperature of the Air at Edystone, from that 
observed at Plymouth, between the 7th and 14th of July, 1737, by 
Mr. John Smeaton, F- R. S, 

Read January i2th, 1758- 

SIR, 
/^N reading of Dr. Huxam's letter at the laft meeting, fome obfervations occurred 
^^ to me, concerning the different temperature of the air^ which I had obfervcd at 
theEdyftone, from what had been obferved by the Doftor at Plymouth, between the 
7th and 14th of July laft j which, having been defired by fome members to be put into 
writing, I beg leave to trouble you with the following : • 

Edyftone is diftant from Plymouth about fixteen miles, and without the head-lands of 
the found about eleven. 

The 7th and 8th were not remarkable at Edyftone for cold or heat ; the weather was 
very moderate with a light breeze at eaft^ which allowed us to work tipon the rock both * 
days when the tide ferved. 

About midnight, between the 8th and 9th, the wind being then frefh at caft, it was 
remarkably cold for the feafon, a$ I had more particular occaiion to obfervcj on account 
of afhip that was caft aWay upon the rocks. . 

The wind continued cold the 9th all day, which was complained of by fome of the 
fhipwrecked feameti, who had not time tofave their clothes; andfo frcQi ateaft as pre- 
vented, our going near the rocks, or the wreck; and fo continued till Sunday the loth ; 
when feeing no profpeft of a fuddcn alteration of weather, I returned to Plymouth in a 
failing boat, wrapped up in my thick coat. " As foon as we got within the head-lands, 
I could perceive the wind blow coadderably warmer^ but not fo warm as to make my 

m 

great coat uneafy. , Having had a quick paflage, in. this manner I went home, to thp 

great aftonilhment of the family to fee me lb wrapped up, when they were complaining 

of the excelTive heat : and indeed it was not long Before I had reafon to join in their 
opinion. 



■ • 



■ This 



204 REMARKS ON THE DIFFERENT, &c. ' 

This heat I experienced till Tuefday the I2th, when I again went off to fea, where I 
found the air very temperate, rather cool than warm, and fo continued till Thurfday, 
the 14th. 

In my journal for Wednefday the 13th, I find the following remarks, viz, "This 
evening's tide," (from 6 A. till 12 A.) " the wind at eaft, but moderate, with frequent 
flafties of lightning to the fouthward. Soon after we got on board the ftore veffcl, a 
fquall of wind arofe from the fouth-wcft on a fudden, and continued about a minute, 
part of which time it blew fo hard, we expecfled the mails to go by the board ; after 
which it was perfectly calm, and prefcntly after a breeze returned from the eaft/' 

And in the journal of the 14th is entered, " This morning's tide," (viz. from i M. 
to I A.) " the air and fea quite calm." 

Hence it appears how different the temperature of the air may be in a fmall diftance ; 
and to what fmall fpaces fqualls of wind are fometimcs confined. 

It may not be amifs further to obferve upon this head, that once, in returning from 
Edyfione, having got within about two miles of the Ramhead, we were becalmed -, and 
here we. rolled about for at lead: four hours ; and yet at the fame time faw veflels not 
above a league from us, going out of Plymouth Sound, with a freihof wind, whofe direc- 
tion was towards us, as we could obferve by the trim of their fails ; and as we ourfelves 
experienced, after we got into it by ticking and rowing. 

I am, 
SIR, 

■ 

^ Tour moft bumbk Servant, 

J. SMEATON. 
FurnivaVs Inn Courts 
1 2th Jan. 1758. 



AN 



AN ACCOUNT OF THE EFFECTS OF LIGHTNING. 205 

AN ACCOUNT of the Effects of Lightning upon the Steeple and Church of 
Lestwithiel, Cornwall ; in a Letter to the Right Honourable the Earl of 
Macclesfield, President of the Royal Society, by Mr. John Smeaton, 
F. R. S. 

Read April 21 ft, 1757. 

JANUARY a5th, 1757, about five o'clock in the evening, returning home from 
the Edyftone works, near Plymouth, I obferved four flalhcs of lightning, within 
the fpacc of fix or fevcn minutes, towards the weft, but heard no noifc of thunder, being 
diftant thrty miles. A fews days after I was informed that the fame evening the lightning 
had Ihattered the church of Leftwithicl in a very furprifing manner. 

The I ft of March I was at Lcftwithiel ; they had then begun to repair the damages ; 
but had not made fuch a progrefs but that the principal eSeds were equally obfcrvablt 
as at firft I obfervedj and was informed as follows : 

At the time before mentioned, the inhabitants were alarmed by a violent fiafh of 
lightning, accompanied with thunder fo fudden, loud, and dreadful, that every one 
thought the houfe he was in was falling upon him -, almoft every one being within doors^ 
on account of a violent ftiower of rain, which preceded the lightning ; fo that nobody faw 
or heard any thing of the mifchief done to the church, till it was obferved accidentally 

after the ftiower. 

■ 

The fteeple is carried up, plain and fquare, to about forty-nine (ect, with a kind of 
flate ftone, rough cafted on the outfide ; upon which is formed a very elegant oftagon 
gothic lanthorn, about nine feet high, and thereon a ftone fpire about fifty- two feet 
height, with a fpindlc and vane rifing- about three feet above the ftone ; fo chat the 
whole together was about one hundred and thirteen feet. Each face of the lanthorn 
finiOies above with a fort of a gothic pediment, with a little pinacle upon each, 
feparaced from the body of the fpire. 

I will not affirm, that the lightning entered in at the fpindle or vane at the top, but 
will fuppofc it, for the fake of methodizing the Picts. The vane was of copper-plate, 
which, being turned round, and rivetted, made a fockct to turn upon. The fpindle 
did not reach through the focket, but the weight of the vane refted upon the top of the 
fpindle, the top of the focket being clofed. About the vane were many acute angles, 
and fome almoft (harp i but I did not obferve any pointing dire6kly upward. The vane 



20G AN ACCOUNT OF THE EFFECTS OF LIGHTNING. 

was much bruifed, which might be occafioned by the fall ; but the fockct was rent open 
as if it had been burft by gun-powder, and in fuch a manner as I cannot conceive could 
be occafioned by the fall. Under the fpindle, that carried ihc vane, was a bar about four 
feet long and one inch fquarc, that paffcd through the centre of fcvcral of the uppcrmoft 
ftones fucccflively, in order to unite them more firmly together, and was run in with 
lead; all which furrounding ftones were broke off, except one, which, together with 
the bar, fell down within the tower. 

The (hell of the fpire, as far down as thirty-five feet from the top, was no more than 
fcvcn inches thick, and the courfes about the fame heighth ; fo that fcarce any one ftonc 
in the fpire could weigh more than thirty or forty pounds i but rhcy were joined together 
at the ends with mortoife and tenon, in a curious manner. Above twenty feet of the 
upper part was entirely thrown down, and difpcrfed in all direftions ; and, as I was in- 
formed, feme pieces were found at the diftance of two hundred yards. A great many 
ftones fell upon the roof of the church ; and feveral made their way through both roof 
and ceiling down into the church, breaking the pQws and whatfoever they fell upon. 
Six feet ftill lower the fpire was feparated, the weftcrnmoft half being thrown down ; 
the eaftern half was left ftanding, but disjointed, and in fo critical a pofture, that it 
feemed ready to fall every moment, fo that this was ordered to be taken down im- 
mediately j andHkewifc to fix feet below, the work being found remarkably fhattered. 
In this condition it was when I faw it. The whole of the fpire I found much cracked 
and damaged, but the remainder of the feven inch fliell fo greatly, that there feemed 
fcarcely a whole joint. 

The pediments over every face of the lanthorn were damaged more or Icfs, but the 
whole alhlering of that to the N. W. was torn off from the inner wall ; to which it was 
connedled. At firft fight this might feem to be done by the falling of the ftones from 
above ; but I was convinced to the contrary, by obferving, that fcvcral of the pedi- 
ments were damaged, and even ftones ftruck out, where the little pinacles above them 
were left ftanding. 

About the top of the lanthorn is a bell for the clock to ftrike on : it is hung upon 
a crofs-bar, with gudgeons at each end ; the whole being fufpcndcd to a beam laid 
acrofs the tower. The crofs bar was fo bent, that the clock hammer could not touch 
the bell by above two inches. This could not be done by falling of ftones, becaufe 
the beam would defend the bell from receiving any ftroke in the dircftion to which the 
crofs bar was bent. As to the wire that drew the hammer, as I was informed, not 
one bit of it could be founder. ... 

The 



AN ACCOUNT OF THE EFFECTS OF LIGHTNING. '207 

The bell^ (four in number) for ringing, hung in the fquare part of the tower, below 
the lanthorn, two above and two below : the wheels of every one were broke to pieces ^ 
and one of the iron ftrapSj by which they are fattened to the yoke, unhooked, and 
as appeared to me could not be replaced without great force or unloofing. Whether 
thelc accidents were occafioned by the lightning or the falling of ftones I leave un- 
determined. In the floor under the bells was placed the clock, cafed up with flight 
boards. The verge, that carries the pallets, was bent downwards, as if a ten pound 
weight had fallen ten feet right upon it. The crutch, that lays hold of the pendulum, 
looked as if it had been ciit oflp by a blunt tool, and heated by the blow, till it 
was coloured blue, at the place where it was cut. It turned at a right angle, and might 
be abouc ^^ of an inch broad by tV thick. As to the pendulum, whicli hung pretty 
near the wall, the upper part of the rod was fl:ruck with fuch violence againft the wall, 
that a fmart impreflion thereof was made in the plaiftcr : and near the upper part of 
the impreflion appeared a fliady ring, of a blackifli colour, fomeching like as if a 
piftol. had been difcharged of powder, and the muzzle held near the wall. The cafing 
of the boards round the clock remained unhurt. 

In this ftory, on the north and fouth fide, are two narrow windows or air loops ; 
againft the upper part of which, on the outfide, were fixed the timber dials belonging 
to the clock, both of which were blown ofi^ and broke to pieces, poflibly by the fall : 
and not only that, but part of the ftone jambs were broke out alfo, near to where the 
rod paflfedi that carried the hands. In this ftory alfo was a fort of window or air 
loop on the eaft fide, that had communicated with the church, but was flopped up 
with lath and plaifter ; alfo feveral putlock holes for the fcaffblding, which had gone 
through the wall into the church, but were flopped up with ftone, and plaifl^red over.; 
all thefc were forced out into the church, and the plaifter. torn from the wall. 

In the ground ftory of the tower or bellfrey, the fouth and north entrances were 
fliut with wooden doors. The upper part of the eaftern entrance, that communi- 
cated with the church, was made up with lath and plaifter ; and before it, in the 
church, are feats raifed one higher than another j fo that the floor of the feats next the 
wall was half up the door way j confequently the vacuity under the feats lay open to 
the bellfrey.. 

About the middle of the wefternmoft fide one of the paving ftones, about one 

foot fquare, and one and a half inch thick, was thrown up, and a hole pierced into 

the wall, rather below, the level of the pavement, into which one might put three 

.fingers, on the oppofitc fide, the fouth weft angle of the middle buttrefs, which 

together is eight feet ^ but the hole was too rugged and crooked to put any thing 

through 



203 AN ACCOUNT OF THE EFFECTS OF LIGHTNING, 

through. Befidcs this hole the wall was pierced in fcvtral places, and the plaifter 
thrown ofF both within and without. One place within about four feet above the floor, 
was a hole of about fourteen inches fquarc, pierced fix inches in the wall ; and fo nearly 
fquare, that I enquired whether it had not been made by art, but was aflured of 
the contrary. 

The north and fouth doors of the tower were both blown out, and broke in m an 
pieces. Many of the arch ftones over both doors were disjointed and difplaced : two 
of the ftonts making the jamb of the fouth door were forced quite out, and one 
of them broken. 

The vaulting of the eaft door way was plaiftercd underneath : the plaifter was 
fprung from the Hone in 30 or 40 places, like as if a bar of iron had been drove from 
above through the joints of the ftone, and thereby forced off the plaifter, with its end. 
The lath and plaifter partition, which ftopped up the upper part of this door-way, was 
forced into the church, and the wainfcotting making the back of the laft (eat was torn 
from the wall from end to end. Some part of the vapour feems to have made its way 
through the cavity under the feats ; for moft of the boards, compofing the rife of the 
fteps from feat to feat, were blown out forwards i and feveral pannels of wainfcot at 
each end of the feats above mentioned, were forced out and broken. Hence, the vapour 
feems to have divided itfelf into three branches, one moving direfUy forward to the 
eaft window, being 13 feet wide, and about 20 feet high, confifting of five principal 
lights divided by ftone mullions : two of the lights were in a manner wholly deftroyedj 
and feveral large holes in thofe remaining ; the glafs and lead being carried outward» 
like as if an harlequin had leaped through the window. The north window, fronting 
the broken pannels of the feats, was very much (battered : but the fouth window 
oppofice had fcarce a whole pane left. 

It is farther to be noted^ that almoft all the lights in the church, though not broken^ 
were bagged outward. 

N. B. It was faid in the London Papers, that the organ was entirely fpoiled : it is cer- 
tun there is not^ nor ever was, any organ in this church. 



r. 






^1 

FINIS. •■:«•*' 






Architectural Library, 
69, High Holborv, 1826. 

In the Press, and shortly will be Published^ in Quarto, Ulustraied 
by 20 Plates, and various Woodcuts, price 1/. 155. in Boards, 

THE 

STEAM ENGINE, 

COICPRISINO 

AN ACCOUNT OF ITS INVENTION, 
AND PROGRESSIVE IMPROVEMBirT; 

WITH 

A Full Investigation of its Principles, and Proportions of its Parts 

for Efficiency and Strength ; 

ESPECIALLT DETAILIKC 

ITS APPLICATION TO NAVIGATION, MINING, IMPELLING 

MACHINES, CARRIAGES, kc. fcc. 

mtMU coHccM in CobbK br Sractkal Hit. 
By THOMAS TREDGOLD, Civii Engineer. 

The want of a Work on the Theoretical Principles and Practical Con- 
struction of the Steam Engine caused the Publisher to engage Mr. Tredgold 
to undertake one in 1824 ; and he is happy in being able to announce tlua it 
is now nearly ready. 

His fhct of this powerful Agent being employed in almost every branch of 
human industry has rendered it necessary diat an immense number of 
Mechanicians should be informed respecting the best methods of constructing 
it ; and has rendered it desirable that a still greater number should be able 
to distiimiish the merits and defects of different modes of construction. 
lliis is the kind of information it is the object of this work to supply for the 
use of Ciril Engineeis, Manufisuituring Engineers, Engineers to Canals, 
Mfines, Water-wmks, Steam Vesseb, and otners interested in Steam being 
employed economicsJly and efi^ettvely under their superintendance. Also, 
ibr tbe use of those employed in the instruction of Naval Officers, Military 
Engineers, and Gentlemen desirous of studying dns new and important 
department of Mechanical Science. 

The Forms and Resistances of Vessels, the Principles of Combustion, the 
j^fect of Compressed Gaseous Bodies^ and the various probable Sources 
of Heat, and roecies of Vapour that maybe nsed, are analysed ; and numerous 
IU>les are given of the ProportioDS, Quantities of Fuel, and Effect of 
diflRvrent species of Engines,/»Bd for different species of Work. 



r 



[ 



« 



ws 



V 



THE NBn 

BEF 

Thi> book >■ 

tak 


YORK PUBLIC LIBRARY 

ERBNCB DEPARTMENT 


•a from the Buildiaf