Not only the Hiſtory and 


1 


WHOLE WORKS! 


T H E 


Of that Excellent . 2 


PRACTICAS 


Phyſician, © 
Dr. Thomas Sydenham. 


The Sirth Edition, Corrected from 8 oY 14 


FA. HEREIN 4 an 
1 1 
* 4 4 


of Acute Dilſcaſcs are treated off 
ter a New and Accurate Met 
but alſo the Shorteſt and fafeſt: Way * 
of Curing mo nn Dig Ss. [ 5 


ginal Latin, by John Pechey, M. I of the 1 
College of Phyſicians in London, "& * " of Ny 


**D 18 * 
PIT BITES —— n 2 


n 


| L O N*D 0 N, "i _ * 
Printed for B. Wellington, at the Dolphin And 
Cr owns at the Weſt-End of St. P, aul % AUG! 2 bo 4 
Yard. 1715. . 


1 


— — 


. 


7 . 


7 1 K 7; 


. 
* 
7 
Fs . 


4 th. 0 : : g 5 , 5 4 + 
p 9 a 
— 1 . . 4 
* 
* 
„ : 
: 


TRANSLATO R's 


PREFACE 
| E that deſigns toattain to the 11 "hi 
derſtanding of any Art or Profeion, 
uſually chooſes ſome Eminent Man of 
the Art to be his Guide and Pattern, by whoſe 
Directions and Example, joined with a toſtr- 
able Capacity, and ſufficient Diligence, he is, 
and is deem'd, at a ſtated Period, legally quali- 
fied for the Exerciſe i Art he profeſſes. And 
this T take to be tlie Heſt and readieſt Way of 

attaining to the Knowledge of any Art. 
But ſeeing by the Cuſtom of our Country, 
Phyſicians are educated another way; and chie- 
fly improve themſelves by Study and Books, it 
behoves them to make Choice of ſuch Authors 
as have been much converſant in Practice, and 
are generally accounted Candid and Sincere; In 
the firſt Rank of theſe I place this Author, Who 
was peculiarly diſpoſed for Practice, anda Vein 
of Sincerity runs through his whole Works; a 
Thing very rare in Phyſica! Authors, eſpecially® 
in the Modern; and for this Reaſon it was he 

was ſo much caluimniated by ill Men. KO 
This worthy Man was always buſied in im- 


proving the Practice of Phyſick, even then 
A 2 | when 


© 


Judgment, an 
ſay no more of him, his Book will be the beſt 


The Tranſlators Preface. 
when he was ſtepping on the Threſhold of the 


other World, and, like the great Archimedes, 


would not ſuffer himſelf to be interrupted by 
any Thing but reſiſtleſs Fate. 

He died in the Sixty Eighth Year of his Age: 
A great Age it was for one that had been cloſe- 
ly Felieg'd near half the Time, with the Oppro- 
brium Medicorum, the Gout ; which finding its 
frequent Efforts repell'd by his great Skill, cal- 
led in its Auxiliary the Stone, and together, with 
much aWo, they ſtorm'd the tottering Tene- 
ment of Clay, when by reaſon of Age it was 
ſcarce Tenible any longer. 

He was born in Dorſerſbire: His Father was a 
Gentleman of good Reputation, and a plentiful 
Eſtate. He was educated in All-Sowls College in 
Oxford, and was Fellow the ſame, and after- 
wards a Member and OHament of the College of 
Phyſicians, in London. 

He was Religious, Loyal, Learned, of a Solid 

4 Sterling Honeſty: But I ſhall 


and molt laſting Monument of his Fame. 


From my Houſe in Bow-Lane, 
the Corner of Robin-Hood's 
Court, june 23.1711. 

* 5 


& We 1. 


La 


ao 
* 
8 _—_— ——— > _——_—— 


A U T H O R's 
| PREFACE 


S the Human Body is ſo framed by Nature, that by 
reaſon of a continual flux of Particles, and the 
force of external Things, it cannot always continue 
the ſame; upon mhich account there have been great 
numbers of Diſeaſes in all Ages; ſo without doubt, the ne- 
ceſſity of finding out the Art of healing hus exercisdthe Wits 
of Men for many Ages, not only before the Grecian Xicula- 
pius, but the Agypt ian too, who was a Thouſand Tears his Se- 
nior. And indeed, as there is ni Man can tell who firſt con- 
triv'd the uſe of Houſes and Cloaths to defend us from the In- 
juries of the Weather, ſo thgbeginning of the Art of Phyſick 
can be no more diſcover'd the Fountain of the River 
Nile; for this, as well as other Arts, has been always in uſe 
" thou it has been more or leſs cultivated, according to the va- 
rious Diſpoſitions of Times and Countries. How much the 
Ancients, and amongſt the chief, Hippocrates, have per- 
form'd, is well known from whom, and whoſe Writings we 
have receiv'd the beſt part of the Therapeuticks And in 
the ſucceeding Ages the Induftry of ſome has appear d, who 
have enlarg'd the Province of Phyſick, by applying themſelves 
either to Anatomy, Pharmacy, or the Art of Healing, to 
ſay nothing of Britain, and of this Age, wherein there has 
not been wanting ſome who have labour'd in every kind of 
Science, whereby they might encreaſe the Medingl Art : 
But I amtunable to ſpeak their Praiſe. But how great ſotver 
others Endeavours have been, I always thought Tlivd. in 
vain, unleſs I, bein of the ſame Employment, contributed 
ſomething, how ſmall ſoever, to the Treaſury of Phyſick : 
Wherefore, after long Meditation, and a diligent and faith- 
ful Obſervation of many Years, at ſength I reſolv'd to pra- 
poſe my Opinion, by what means ti Art of Healing may be 
further promoted, and then to publiſh a Specimen of my En- 
deavours in this Buſineſs. N 


The PRE F ACE. 


Ithint our Art may be beſt improd d, firft by a Fliſtory or 
Deſcription of Diſeaſes, as Graphically and Naturally as 240 
fibly may be ;, and, ſecondly, by a perfect and table Practice 
or Method reſpecting them. It is indeed, very eaſie to deſcribe 
Diſeaſes groſly ;, but ſo to write the Hiſtory of them, that the 
Cenſure af Lord Bacon may be avoided, whereby he cha- 
ftiſes ſome ſuch Promiſers, is more difficult. We know, ſays 
the Noble Author, we may have a Natural Hiſtory large pdf 
Bulk, and pleaſant for Variety, and neatly conttiv'd : But 
if any one ſhould weed out the Fables, Quotations, need- 
les Controverſies and Flouriſhes, which ate more praper . 
for Table-Talk, and Stories in a Chimney-cornerg, than 
for an Inſtitution in Philoſophy, the Matter woul@tall to 
nothing. This is far from the Hiſtory we propoſe; In liſte 
manner the Hiftory of Diſeaſes,” according to Cuſtom, are 
eaſily propoſed. But to do this ſo, as that Words may paſs 
into Actions, and th.it the Event may be agrecable tb" the 
Promiſes, they will judge is a Tast mare difficult, who ſee 
there are many Diſcaſes in practical Writers, which neither 
they, nor any Body elſe are able to cure.ßxß?] 

But ac to the Hiſtory of e one ey the Mat 
ter carefully, he will ſoon perctbde, that the Writer a 
apply his Mind to many more T hings than is commonly ti 
It will be ſufficient to touch upon a few of them at proſe, ' 

Firſt, Ii is neceſſary that all Diſeaſes ſhould be rd to 
certain and definite Species, withthe ſame diligence we'ſee it 
is done by Botanick Writers in their Herbals. For there are 
found Diſeaſes that are reduc'd under the ſame Genus and 
Name, and as to ſome Symptoms, ure like one another; yet 
they are different in their Natures, and require a different 


may of Cure. Every one knows that i Word Carduus is ex- 


tended to a great many Species of Heros: but he would be 


thought a very ignorant Herbalift, that ſhould content him- 


ſelf to ꝓropoſe only the general Deſcription of the Plant, 
whereby i differs Fo the reſt, and in the mean while ſhould 
negleGt the proper and peculiar Signs af every Species, where- 
by they are diſtinguiſh'd one from "\andtfgr >, ſo it is not ſuffi- 
cient for aWriter to mart only the common Appearances of 
any Diſeaſe : For the the ſame Variety does not happen to all . 
. et very mag that are treated of by Authors un- 

der the ſame Title wiWout any diftintFion of Species, are 

very unlike, as I hope to make appear plainly in the following 
Pages: And when they are diſtributed into Species, it is moſt 
. nn — © 


1 
* 


r "YO 


The PREFACE. 


commonly done to_ſerye an Hypothefis built upon the true 
Phænomena, and ſo ſuch a Diſcrimination is not 7 ac- 


commodated to the Nature of the Diſeaſe, as to the Humour 


of the Author, and his Theory of Philoſophi xing. How much 
Phyſick has been obſtructed for want of ſuch an gxaftneſs in 
this Matter, many Diſeaſes He w, the Cures mhef det had not 


$5 now to ſeek, if Writers, in communicating their Expe- 


ume nts and Obſervations had not took one Diſeaſe for ano- 
ther : Aud this, I ſuppoſe, is the reaſon why the Materia 
edica is ſo wonderfully encreaſed, and to ſo little purpoſe. 


= Moreover, in writing a Hiſtory of Diſeaſes, every Philoſo- 
Phic bet heſis that has inveigled the Writer's Mind, ought 


ro ae, and then the clear and natural Phænomena 
of Diſeaſes, how ſmall ſoever they are, ſhould be exactly 
marked, as Painters expreſs the ſmalleſt Spots or Moles in 


the Face: For it can ſcarce be imagin'd how many Errors 


have been occaſion'd b Hypoth hen Wri de- 
"EY an tdypotheſis, when Writers, de 

ce: dy falſe Colours, have 7 ſuch Phenomena, for 

Diſea es, a5 are no where tobe found but in their own Brains, 


1 5 4 . ought to appear, if the Truth of the Hypotheſis, 


ty count certain, were manifeſt. Moreover, if ai 


N ein which exattly ſuits with the ſaid Hypotheſis, really 


es to the Diſeaſe they are about to delineate, that they 
above meaſure, as if that were all; but if it do not 
e with their Hypotheſis, they e her paſs it by in ſi- 
lence, or touch it bythe bye, unleſs they can, by ſome Philo- 
ſophical Subtlety, make it ſerve a tur, . 
But Thirdly, 1t is neceſſary in deſcribing any Diſeaſe, to 
mention the peculiar and perpetual Phenomena apart from 
thoſe which are accidental and adventitious; ſuch are thoſe 
which come from the Temper and Age of the Patient, and 
fromthe different Methods of Cure; for it often happens, 
that the Face of the Diſeaſe varies according to the various 
Proceſſes of Healing, and ſome Symptoms rather proceed 
from the Phyſician than from the Diſeaſe ;, and thoſe that 
labour of the ſame Diſeaſe, and are treated with different 
Methods, have various Symptoms; therefore, unleſs Caution 
be vſed, the Judgment about the Symptoms of Diſeaſes will 
very uncertain: to ſay nothing/of rare Caſes, which do no 
2197e properly belong to the Hiftory of Diſeaſes, than in the 
Deſeription of Sage, the biting, of the Palmer is to be ac- 

counted among the diſeriminating Signs of that Plant. 
Laftly, The Seaſons of the Year, which chiefly feves? 3h 

it 


A4 


_—O 


The PREFACE. 
kind of Diſeaſes, are carefully to be obſerv/d. I confeſs ſome 


Come at any Time; yet others, and not a fem, by a certain oc-= © 
cult inſtinct of Nature, follow the Seaſons of the Tear, as cer- 
tainly * Birds and Plants do. I have often, indeed, 
wonder'd, that this Diſpoſition of ſome Diſeaſes, which is ſo 
obvious, has been yet obſerved but by a fem; whereas many 
have ceouſiy obſerved under what Planet Plants ſpring, and 
Heaſtagencrate. But whatever is the Cauſe of this Neglect 
Ido affirm, That the knowledge of Seaſons wherein Dilcate® 
are wont to come, are very advantageous for the Phyſician, 
both as to the knowledge of the Species of the Diſeaſe, and ta 
the manner of extirpating of it; and when this Obſervation" 
is negletted, the Event of either of theſe is not goa. 

Theſe Things, tho' they are not hall, yet they art the moſt 
confiderable, which ought to be obſerved, in writing the Hi- 
Rory of Diſeaſes. The Utility of which Hiſtory, with reſpect 
to Practice, exceeds all Eftimation in compariſon wheremith 
the nice Diſcourſes, which nauſeouſly tuff the Books of mo- 
dern Authors, are of no Value; for by what more compen- 
dious, or other way, can the curative Indications, on te 
Aorbifick Cauſe, which we are to oppoſe, be ſearched. , 
than by a certain and diſtintt Perception 4 peculiar Symptoms: 
Nor is there any Circumſtance ſo ſmall, or conte mpiibig 
not to ſerve for both Uſes: For tho' we muſt grant, thatthere.”- 
is ſome variety upon the account of the Femper ane — 
viduals, and the management of the Cure; yet notwithſtand- 
ing the order of Nature is ſo equal in producing Diſeaſes, 
that the ſame Symptoms of the ſame Diſeaſes are moſt com- 
monly found in divers Bodies; and thoſe which were obſerv'd 
in Socrates, in his Siekneſs, are generally the ſame in any 
other Men aflicted with the ſame Diſeaſe ; as the univerſal 
Characters of Plants are the ſame in all the Individuals of 
every kind He, for inſtance, that has accurately deſchibd 
A Violet, as to its Colour, Taſte, Smell, Figure, and the 
like, will perceive, that that Deſcription agrees almoſt in 
every Thing with all the Violets in the whole World. 

And, indeed, Ithink the chief Reaſon,why we ftill want 
an exatt Hiſtory of Diſeaſes, is becauſe moſt ſuppoſe, that 
they are only the Confuſed and diſordered Effects of Nature 
ill defending her ſelf ;, and, that he labours to no purpoſe, 
whe endeavours ajuft Narration af them. | 

But to return to the Buſineſs: A Phyſician may as certatuly 
take the turati ve Tadications from the ſmalleſt , 

hi | Shore Pate: ok; | x 


© |} 


duces inthe 


*The PREFACE. 


of the Diſeaſe, as he does the Diagnoſtick from them: And 
therefore I have often thought, if we had an exatt Hiſtory of 
every Diſeaſe, we ſhould never want a Remedy ſuitable to it, 
the various Phænomena of it -plainly ſhewing the way we 
ought to proceed in; which Phænomena, if they were care- 
fully compared one with another, would lead us to thoſe ob- 
vious Indications, which are taken truly from Nature, and 
not from the Errors of Fancy. 

And by theſe Means and Helps, the excellent Hippocrates, 
arriv d at the top of Phyſick, who laid the ſolid Foundation for 
building the Art of Phyſick upon, viz. Nature cures Diſeaſes. 
And he deliver'd plainly the Phænomena of every Diſeaſe, 
without pre ſſin 5 Hypotheſis for his Service, as may be 


ſeen in his Books of Diſeaſes, Aﬀett ions, and the like, He 


alſo delivered ſome Rules gathered from the Obſervation of 
that Method that Nature uſes in promoting and removing 
Diſeaſes; ſuch are his Prænotiones, his Aphoriſms, and the 
like : And of theſe Things conſiſted the Theory of the Divine 
old Man, which was not drawn from a vain and laſcivious 
Fancy; like the Dreams of fick Men, but it exhibited a legi- 
ti mate Hiſtory of thoſe Operations of Nature, which ſhe pro- 

Di eaſesrof Men. And now ſeeing his Theory 
was nothing elſe but an exquifite Deſcription of Nature, it 


"was wery reaſonable, that in Practice, his only Aim ſhould be 


torelzeve her when ſhe was oppreſſed, by the beſt Means he 
could and therefore he allow'd no other Province for Art, 
than the ſuccouring of Nature when ſhe was weak, the reftr ain- 
ing her when ſhe was outrageous, and the reducing her to order, 
and to do all this in that way and manner whereby Nature en- 
deavours to expel Diſeaſes, for the ſagacious Man perceive 
ed that Nature judges Diſeaſes, and does all, being help'd by 
a few ſimple Forms of Remedies, and ſometimes without any. 
Dye other Method whereby,in my Opinion, the Art of Heal- 
ing may be further promoted, conſiſts f a fix'd and perfect Me- 
thod of Healing, ſuch an one Ime an, mhich has been ſufficiently 
ftrengthen'd by agreat number of Experiments, and has been 
found able to cure this or that Diſeaſe ;, for I do not think that 
it is enough to publiſh particularSucceſſes either of a/Method or 
Remedy, if neither one nor the other has been found to attain 
univerſally the end in all, at leaſt the Circumſtances being ſo 
and ſo; for I declare, that we ought as certainly to know that 
this or that Diſeaſe may be cured, if we anſwer this or that 
Intention; as we certainly know that this or that Remedy will 


anſwer 


_ 
— — 
5 - — .. _— . 
* 
— 
bh — _ — 
—— . —— 


A 1 
— 


The PREFACE. 


anſwer this or that Intention, which tho" not always, yet moſt 
commonly anſwers our Deſires: S we purge with Senna, and 
cauſe Sleep with Poppies. But I do not deny that the Phyji- 
cian ought to mind carefully the particular Events both af 
Method and Remedy, which he uſes in the Cure of Diſeaſes, 
and to lay them up for Uſe, both to eaſe his Memory, and to 
render him more Skilful, ſo that at length he may eftabliſh a 
Method, from which he need not recede a whit in the Cure of 
this or that Diſeaſe ;, but the publiſhing of particular Obſer- 
vations is not, in hy Opinion, ſo beneficial : For if the Obſer- 
vator deſigns only to arquaint us, that this Diſeaſe was once, 
or oftener cured by this Remedy, what Advantage, I pray, will 
it be, that one unknown Medicine is added to the almaſt inſi- 
nite heap of celebrated Medicines? But if I, laying afide all 
ether forms of Medicines, wholly addict my ſelf to this, ought 
no: the Vertue of it to be approved by a great many Experi- 

ments? And are not a great many Circumſtances to be weighed 

reſyect ing the Sick, aud the Method, before we can gain any 

Fruit by a ſol [tary Oiſervation? If the Medicine always ſuc- 

ceed with the Obſeruator, why does he take up with Particu- 


lars, unleſs he diſtr uſts himſelf, or think he may eaſier impoſe- 


upon theii/orld bypiece-meal But hom gaſie it is to write large 
Volumes of this kind, every one that wx hut little converſant in 


Practice knows : Aud on the contrary, how difficult it is to 


eſtabliſb a perfect Method of Healing in any Diſeaſ: ? If vat 
only one in am Age had treated but of one Diſeaſe in this man- 
er, the Art of Healing, which is the Phyſician's Province, 
had come to as great Perfection many Tears ago as our mortal 
Condition would have allow'd of. But, which is our great Mi- 
ſery, we long ago for ſook our ancient and Skilful Guide, Hip- 
pocrates, and the ancient Method of Healing, founded upon 
the knowleage of conj undt Cauſes which may be certainly kngw1, 
ſo that the Art winch is now exercisd, contriv'd by Men gi- 
den to quaint Words, is rather the Art of Talking, thay of 
Healing. But that it may not ve thought that I ſpeak this a 
VI beg leave to make alittle Digreſſion, that 1 may prove, 
that the remote Cauſes which take up the vain . 77011 
of curious Men, and wherein they triumph, are wholly ine u- 
table, and that only conj unct Cauſes can be known by v:, and 
that the curative Indications are to be taken only from theſe, 
We muſt therefore ot ſcrue, That if the Humours arc re- 
tain'd longer in the Body than they ought, either becauſe Ma- 
ture cannot concoct them, ana afterwards expel them; or ve- 
cauſe 


- 
_— ge „ 
_ "IE 2 3 
. by . . 5 5 2 * 22 

2 . 3 4 4.5% yo - 

wy ® - Sx — * , 4 * 9 N 23 5 

» =, * 8 1 - 

3 . 3 * at! |  # 2 = — 0 — Ns 


4 2 * Fg * C = " p_ 
P 3 * * 4 — 8 F ; 3 = - w_ 
* LY , - 4 4 . 'F * - : * - 103 F 
wa Re a — 4 *. I RAI . =. — 4 
on * 2 — s |. . - — =] . * 1 
— a” A I » 2 * * * _ pe: M 3 — g - bo 


_- 


1 
"aw" 
%* i 


The NH RAGE. 


cauſe they have contratted a Morbifick Diſpeſtion, by this 
or that Conſtitution of the Air: On, laſtly, becauſe they are 
infected with ſome Venom. By theſe, I ſay, and the like ways, 
the ſaid Humours are exalted into a ſubſtantial form or Spe- 
cies, which a:ſcovers it ſelf by this or that Diſorder, that ts 
agreeable with its own Eſſence ;, and theſe Symptoms, tho to 
the leſs wary they may ſeem to ariſe from the Nature of the 
Part which the Humour poſſeſſes, or from the Nature of the 
Humour, before it has put on this Species, yet they are real- 
ly Diſerders proeceding from the Eſſence of the ſaid Species, 
newlyraiſed to this degree, ſo that every ſpecifick Diſeaſe is a 
Diferder ariſing from this or that ſpecifick Exaltation, orSpe- 
cification of ſome Juice in the Body. Under this kind may be 
comprehended the greateſt Part of Diſeaſes,that have a certain 
Type or Form, and Nature is as methodical in producing and 
ripening theſe, as of Plants and Animals : For as proper and 
peculiar Affections belong to every Plant and Animal, ſo it 
is in every exaltation of any Juice, when it has broke out into 
a Species. We have aclear inſtance of this in thoſe Species of 
Excreſcences, which Trees and Shrubs emit, either upon 
the account of the Perverſion, and depravation of the Nutri- 
cious Fuice, or by other vr h es, in the form of Moſs or Miſ- 
leta, Muſhroms, and the lite; all which are Eſſences or Spe- 
cies plainly different from the Tree or Shrub they grow 07. 
And, indeed, he that ſhall exactly confider thoſe PhXnome- 
na that accompany a Quartan Ague, viz. That it moſt com- 
monly comes about Autumn ;, that it keeps atertain Order, 
repeating its periodical Revolutions, ns certainly as a Clock 
flrikes, unleſs the Order of it be diſturbed by ſome extrinſick - 

ing; that it begins with ſhivering, and a notable Senſe of 
Cold, which is ſucceeded by a ſenſible Heat, which at length 
ends in large Sweats. And Laſtly, That this Diſeaſe, whom- 
ſoever it invades, is ſeldom cured before the Vernal Equi- 


nox: He, I. 75 that jhall reg weigh all theſe T ings, may 


as reaſonably believe, that this Diſeaſe is a Species as a Plant 

is ſo, which in like manner ſprings out of the Ground, flow- 
ers, and dies, and in other Ihings is affected according to its 
Eſſence, For it cannot be eafily imagin'd why this Diſeaſe 
ſhould ariſe from a Combination of Principles, or evident 
Qualities; whereas a Plant is reckow's i ail a Subſtance and 
diſtinct Species in Nature, tho' we do not deny, that whereas 
every Species of Plants or Animals,excepting a veryfem, ſub- 


fiſt of themſelves ;, the Species of Diſeaſes depend on thoſe 


Humours from whence they were generated, But 


X The PREFACE. 


But tho it appears from what has been ſaid, that the Cauſes 
of moſt Diſeaſes are wholly inſcrutable, yet the Oueftion how 
they may be cur d, may, notwithſtanding, be reſol7#4 ;, for we 
diſcourſe here only of oy remote Cauſes, and any one may ſee, 
that the curious Speculators of remote Cauſes loſe their La- 
vour, whilſt they endeavour to underſtand them, tho Nature 
oppoſe ;, and yet they contemn the mediate and conj unct Cauſes 
that are near at hand, which it is neceſſary to know, and may 
be ſo without ſuch Trifles; for they offer themſelves plainly to 
the Underſtanding, or may be diſcover'd by the Teftimony of 
the Senſes, or by Anatomical Obſervations made long ago. 
And as it is plainly impoſſible that a Phyſician ſhould under- 
Rand thoſe Cauſes of Diſeaſes, which have no manner of Com- 
merce with the Senſes, ſo neither is it neceſſary; for it is ſuf- 
Fcient if we know the immediate riſe of the Diſeaſe, and ſuch 
Effects aud Symptoms of it, as may enable us to diftinguiſh 
exattly betwixt this and another Diſeaſe not unlike it : In a 
Pleuriſie for inſtance, he will weary himſelf in vain, and will 
not be able to underſtand the ill Diſpoſition, and the incohe- 
rent Texture of the Blood, which isthe firſt Origin of it: But | 
he that rightly knows the Cauſe whereby it is immediately © 
produc'd, and can diſtinguiſh it from all other Diſeaſes, will 4 
as certairly cure it, tho he neglect the trifling and unprofi- 
rable Search after remote Cauſes : But this 7 the bye. 
But now if any one ſhould asꝶł whether to the two aforeſaid 
Things that are wanting in Phyſick, namely, a true and ge- 
nuine Hiſtory of Diſeaſes, and a certain and confirmed 
Met hod of Cure, a third ought not to be added, viz. the * 
Invention of Specifick Remedies. I agree with him, tha” | 
Method ſeems to me molt commodions for curing acute Diſ- 
eaſes, in doing which, when Nature has appointed ſome cer- 
tain way of Evacuation, whatever Method aſſiſts her in pro- 
moting the ſaid Evacuation, neceſſarily gonduces to the heal- 
ing of it. But it were indeed to be wiſhed, that the Sick 
might arrive to Health by a nearer way, bythe help of Speri- 
ficks, if any ſuch can be found, and lech id of greater ino- 
ment, may be placed out of the Dangers which follow t hoſe 
Errors, whereinto Nature often and unwilliagly failis, in 
expelling the Cauſe of the Diſeaſe, how powerfully and learn- 
ealy ſoever ſhe may by ſuccoured by the Phyſicians Al/ift ance. 
But as to the Cure of Chronical . tho 1 do not 
at all doubt, that a greater progreſs may be hoped for from a 


Method alone, than can be preſentlyimagin'd, yet it is very 


. manifeſt, 


o s 2 . * * 2 
* n >, fit Nee 3 838 5 8 

* 2 1 E We nn a q — fa Rees 0 £ - 

AST: . 2 r 1 0 N 


r * 
: „ 12 


4 
9 


The PREFACE. 


manifeſt, that that is wanting in the Cure of Chronical Diſ- 
eaſes, chiefly for this Reaſon, viz. becauſe Nature has not an 
effett ual Method in theſe Diſeaſes,to eject the morbifick Mat- 
ter as in acute, whereby, we aſſiſting and aiming at the right 
Mark, the Diſeaſe may be cured. In conquering therefore a 
Chronick Diſeaſe, he may deſervedly be called a Phyſician, 
that has ſuch a Medicine as is able to detres the Species of the 
Diſeaſe ;, not he who only introduces from the firſt or ſecond 
uality ſome nem one in the room of the former, which m 
indeed be done, and the Species not extinguiſhed * For inſtance, 
He that is afiitted with the Gout, may be heated or cooled, 
and yet the Gout may be as violent as ever; for Specifick 
Diſeaſes are not more immediately cured by that Method, 
wherewith'only different Qualities are introduced, than a 
Fire is extinguiſhed by a Sword : For what, Ipray, can Heat, 
Cold, Moift ure, Siccity, or any other of the nad ualities 
that depend on theſe, ſignifie as to the Cure of a Diſeaſe, 
whoſe Eſſence conſiſts of none of theſe ? If any one ſhould ob- 
Jett here, that we had long ago a ſufficient number of Speci- 


fick Remedies, this very Man, if he will make diligent ſearch, 


would be ſoon of another Mind; for the Peruvian Bark is 
all the Specificks we have. For there is a vaſt difference be- 
t wit thoſe Things, which anſwer ſpecifically to this or that 
curative Indication, which if we attend well to, the Diſ- 
eaſe may be cured, and ſuch Things as Cure this or that 
Diſeaſe ſpecifically and immediately, no Reſpett being had 
to this or that Intention, or curative Indication. For in- 
ftance, Mercury, and the Roots of Sarſa, are common 

accounted Specificks in the French-Pox; and yet they oug 

not tobe counted proper and immediate Specificks, unleſs it 
can be proved by ſuſſicient Arguments, that Mercury with- 
out Salivation, and Sarſa without Sweat, have performed 
the Bufineſs;, for in the ſame manner other Diſeaſes are 


cured withother Evacuations, and yet the Remedies that are 


zſed, do no more immediately conduce to the Cure of thoſe 

Diſeaſes, which are cured by thoſe Evacuations, for the pro- 

curing which, ſuch Remedies are 77 properly deſigned, than 
u 


a Lancet for à Pleuriſie, which, I ſuppoſe, no one will call a 
Specifick in this Diſeaſe. f ; 


Therefore Specifick Medicines, if they are reftrained to this 
our Senſe of them, do not fall to every Man's Share; and yet 1 
do not at all doubt, but out of that abundant Plenitude, with 


which 


The PN EF ACE. 


mhich Nature over-flows, by the appointment of the excellent 
Maler of all Things, Care is taken for the Preſervation of all, 
by the Cure of thoſe great Diſeaſes which aflitt Men, and 
that near at hand in every Country. And indeed it is to be 
lamented, that the Nature of Plants is na better known to ag 

which ſeemto me the chic feſt of the Materia Medica, au 
be the likelicft to afford ſuch Remedies as we haue now diſ- 
eourſed of. For parts of Animals may ſeem to agrge too much 
with the Human Body, and Minerals differ tos much; up- 
on which account the Minerals anſwer, Iconfeſs, Indications 
more power fully than either Things taken from Plants or A. 
nimals, but not ſpecifically in the ſenſe and manner we have 
mention'd. I have ſpent much Time in the ſearch after theſe 
Things, but have not ſucceeded ſo well, as that I may pru- 
dently publiſh the Reſult. 

But tho' Hants pleaſe me beſt, yet I would by no means 
condemn thoſe excellent Medicines taken from another Tribe, 
which have been found by the Induſtry and Labour of Men, 
of this or any other Age, to anſwer Intentions well, A- 
mont theſe Dr. Goddard's Drops claim the firft Place, They 
are prepared by the learned and diligent Searcher after Me- 
thod and Rejnedies, Dr. Goodal : T he Ejficacy and Vertue 
whereof for taining tie end to which they are commonly di- 
rected, 4 prefer oefore all other volatile Spirits whatever, 

To conclude Having in tis Jutroduttion promiſed to 
give a Specimcs of theſe Things, which I contrivd for the 
cacreaſe ef this Art, I will now endeavour to fulfil my Pro- 
miſe in delivering the Hiftory of acute Diſeaſes: In doing 
whici I am very ſeaſible that I jhall expoſe to the Lazy and 
Ignorant, all the Fruit of thoſe Things which I have labour'd 
for in Body and Mind, through the Getter Part of my Life: 
But 1 eee underſt and this ill natur d Age, aud I ex- 
pect therefore to receive nothing but Reproaches, aud that I 
ſhould have much more aavanc'd my Fame, if I had contriv/d 
ſome vain and fruitleſs Speculation: But be it ſo, I expect 
ay Reward elſewhere. I any one ſhould here object, That 
others that are as much converſant in Prattice as I, are not 
of my Mind It does not concern me to enquire what others 
think, but to propoſe faithfully my own Obſervations; in do- 
ing which, I beg the Reader's Patience, not his Favour ;, for 
the Thing it ſelf will ſhortly ſhow, whether I have atted ſin- 
cerely, or whether I have been a Manſlayer; only 1 beg 
Pardon for that I have not ſo accurately deſcribd the | wa 

ory 


The PRE FACE. 
Rory and Cure of Diſeaſes, as I propoſed,; for I do not pre- 


tend to have compleated the Work, but to have encouraged 
thoſe of better Parts ta undertake hereafter, what I have nom 
imperfectly handled. 

One Thing yet remains, whereof the Reader is to be ad- 
monifhed, Vit. That I do not intend to inlarge the following 
Treatiſe with a great Number of particular Obſervations, 
whereby I may give a Reputaticn to the Method there de- 
livered © For it would be to no Purpoſe, and nauſeous to re- 
peat thoſe Things ſingly, which have been treated of together. 
I count it ſufficient at the end of every general Ouſervaticm, 
at leaſt as it reſpects the late Tears, to add here and there 
a particular Obſervatioa, wherein the Subſtance of the pre- 
ceding Method is contained: And I declare, That no genc- 
ral Method has been publiſhed by me, which has not been 
eſtabliſhed by repeated Experience. 

He will be diſappointed that expetts a great number of Re- 
medies and Forms here The Phyſician muſt uſe thoſe ace 
cording to his Judgment as the Occaſion requires: it is 
Sufficient for me to mention by what Indications he muſt works) 
and in what Order ang Time: For the Prattice of Phyſick 
chiefly conſiſts in this, Viz. in being able to find the genuine 
Indications, and not Remedies to anſmer them; and they 
that have not obſerved this, have inſtructed Empiricks to 
zmitate Phyſicians. 

But if any one objects, That in ſome Things I have not on- 
ly renounced the Pomps of Medicines, but have propoſed ſuch 
>} Remedies as are ſcarce reducible to the Materia Medica, ſo 
3 ſimple and inartificial are they. But in this, 1 ſuppoſe, I 

hall only diſpleaſe uathinking People; for the Wiſe know 
that all Things are good that are uſeful, and that Hippo- 
2 crates, when he propoſed the uſe of Bellows in the Iliack Paſ- 
ſion, and nothing for a Cancer, and the like, which may be 

* ſecn almoſt in every Page of his Writing, deſerved as well 
For his Medical Art, as if he had filled all with pomporcs 
Forms of Reinedies, | | 
I deſigned alſo to have treated of Chronical Diſeaſes, at 


1 io leaſt, of thoſe that I Bad been more converſant with; but it 


being agreat Task, I will omit it for the preſent, and am wil. 
Ling to ſee firſt how theſe Things will be received, , 


BOOKS 


BOOKS Printed for, and Sold by R. Welling- 
ton at the Dolphin and Crown, at the Meſt- 
End of St. Paul's Church-Yard. 


Tmullerus Abridg'd, or a Compleat Sy ſtem of the Theory 
and Practice of Phyſick, being a Deſcription of all Diſ- 
eaſes incident to Men Women or Children; with an Account 
of their Cauſes, Symptoms, and moſt a pprov'd Method of 
Cure, both Phylical and Chirurgical ; To which is prefix'd, 
a ſhort View of the Annual and Vital Functions, and the ſe- 
veral Vertues and Claſſes of Medicines, Tranſlated from the 
laſt Edition of the Works of Michael Etmullerus, late Profeſſor 
of Phyſick in the Univerſity of Lezpfich, Price 65. 
Sir Thomas Pope Blunt's Natural Hiſtory, Price 35. 64. 
Michaelis Etmulleri in Academia Lipſienſi quondam Profeſ- 
ſoris Celeberrimi, Opera omnia in Compendium Redacta. In 
quo Continentur, r, Inftitutionum Medicarum Synopſis ab 
ipſo Authore concinnata. 2. Pyrotechniz Rationalis ſeu Col- 
legii Chymici Epitome. 3. Commentarius in Schroderi Phar- 
macopeiam contractus. 4. Univerſa Praxis Medica in au- 
gu ſtum coacta. Cui in calce adjicitur Chirurgio Medica ſum- 
matim perſtricta. a 
A Treatiſe of Medicines, containing an Account of their 
Chymical. Principles, the Experiments made upon them, 
their various Preparations, their Virtues, and the modern 
Way of uſing them. Together with a ſhort View of the Na- 
ture and Periods of Diſeaſes, in which they are proper, and 
ſome Cautions relating to the Diforders they ſometimes oc- 
cation, The Medicines are rang'd in their proper Claſſes, 
according to their Virtues, and drawn up in Tables for Rea- 
ders Conveniency, with their juſt Doſes annex'd. Written 
Originally in French, by M. Tawvry, M. D. a Member of the 
College of Phyſicians, and Fellow of the Royal Society of Paris. 
Tranſlated from the French, Price 5 s. 
A General Treatiſe of the Diſeaſes of Infants and Children, 
Collected from the beſt Practical Authors. By Fobn Peachy, 
of the College of Phyſicians. Price 15. 64, | 


A Natural Hiſtory of the Paſhons. The Second Edition, | 


Enlarged. By Dr. Charleton. Price 25. 64, "2 

Rzverius Reformetus: Or the Modern Riverius; containing 
the Modern Practice of Phyſick. Set down in a Method very 
near the ſame with that of Riverius, but accommodated to the 
moſt received Principles amongſt the moſt Modern Philoſo- 
phers as well as Phyſicians; with Practical Obſervations an- 
nex'd to each Head or Chapter. Unto the whole are added, 
a Treatiſe of Venereal Diſeaſes, and the Secrets of the Famous 
Lazarus Riverius, never Publiſhed before, Tranſlated from the 
Third Edition in Latin, By a Doctor of Phylick, ry V K 


CR 


(1) 


Dr. SYDENAHMs 
Prackice N 


PHYSICK 


S RCT. I. Cnap. I. 


Of Acute Diſeaſes in general. 


bento om 


/ 


| E ASON dictates, if I judge right, that a Di- 
ſeaſe is nothing elſe but Nature's Endeayour to 
thruſt forth with all her might the Morbifick 
Matter for the Health of the Patient; tho' the 
Cauſe of it be contrary to Nature : For ſeeing it has plea- 
ſed GOD, the Governor of all Things, that Human 
Nature ſhould be fitted to receive the various Impreſſions 
that come from Abroad, it could not be; but it muſt be 
ſubject alſo to many Diſeaſes, which partly proceed from 
Particles of Air ill agreeing with the Body, which when 
they have inſinuated themſelves into it, and are mixed with 
the Blood, affect the whole with a morbifick Contagion, 
partly froni the various Ferments or Putrefaction of Hu- 
moirs, which are detain'd in the Body beyond their due 
Tinte beexaſe it was not able to — igeſt or evacuate them ei- 
d Er 


— . 


— — — - 8 
— — 
B —— at 
- * 


—— 


. - — 
. - : 
4% A, > 7 — — > 
* - 1 — — - 
ny ” - * 
©. — — —— 


3 
— — 
— 


2 A 


— 


- 
— 2 — 
. 4 . — * 


- — —— —— w JAM 
—__ = 
_ - 
- 
— 
— — - . 


2 Of Acute Diſeaſes. 


ther upon the account of their Bulk, being too Great, or 
the incongruity of their Quality. Theſe Circumſtances 
being ſo nearly joined to the Human Eſſence, that no 
Man can clearly free himſelf from them, Nature provided 
for her ſelf ſuch a Method, and concatenation of Sym- 
ptoms, as that ſhe might exclude the peccant Matter 
thereby, which would otherwiſe ruin the whole Fabrick ; 
and ſhe would much oftener than ſhe does, attain Health, 
by theſe harſh Means, if ſhe were not forced ont of her 
Courſe by the Ignorant : But tho' ſhe be left to her ſelf, 
ſhe deſtroys the Man, either by doing too much, or too lit- 
tle for her ſelf, and fo obeys reſiſtleſs Fate, to which we 
are all indebted, according to the Saying of Boetius. 


A Law eternal does Decree, _ 
That all Things born ſhould mortal be. 
_— . . 3 

But to confirm what have faid by an Inſtance or two; 
what, I pray you, is the Plague, but a complication of 
Symptons, by which Nature uſes ti caſt out the malig- 
nant Particles, by Impoſthumes in the Emunctories, or 
other 2 0 that were drawn in by the Air? What is 
the Gout, but Nature's Contrivance topurifie the Blood of 
old Men, and to purge the deep Parts of the Body, to uſe 
Hippocrates's Phraſe : And the like may be ſaid of many 
other Diſeaſes, that are perfectly formed. But Nature 
performs this Office ſometimes quicker, and ſometimes 
ſlower, according to the different Methods ſhe uſes to ex- 
clude the morbifick Cauſe; for, when ſhe requires the 
help of a Fever, whereby ſhe-may be able to ſeparate the 
vitiated Particles from the Blood, and afterwards expel 


them, either by Sweat, a Looſineſs, or ſome Eruptions, 
Buſineſs is done in the 


or the like Evacuations, the whole B 
Maſs of Blood; which is a thin and fluid Body, and that by 
violent Motions of the Parts; therefore it is abſolutely ne- 
ceſſary that ĩt ſhould not only be determined ſuddenly, ei- 
ther for the Health or Death of the Patient, viz, as Na- 
ture can either critically diſſolve the morbifick Matter, 
or is oppreſſed or vanquiſhed thereby, but alſo that it 
ſhould he accompanied with worſe _ mote vehement 


Symptoms. And of this Sort are thoſe Diſeaſes, which are 


called Acute, which move to their State quickly, and With 
Danger. And tho' it be not ſo proper, yet it is as ttue, 


f 


[ 
# 
' 
5 


f 
4 


CY 
* 
74 
M2 
F 
[7 
* 
"i A 
0 
* 
W 
. 


f Acute Diſeaſes. 3 


to ſay, that thoſe Diſeaſes are to be accounted Acute, 


which tho' with reſpe& to the Paroxyſms taken together, 
move ſlow; but with reſpect to one particular Fit, quickly 
attain their end, Of this Sortare af intermitting Fevers; 
but when the containing Matter of the Diſeaſe is of that 
Nature, that it cannot have the Aſſiſtance of a Fever, for 
the univerſal ſeparation of it; or when this kind of Mat- 
ter is fixed to any Part which is unable to exclude it, ei- 
ther upon the account of its Conformation, as it is in the 
morbifick Matter of a Palſie, that the Nerves are ſtuffed 
with, and in the ſuppurated Matter in the Cavity of the 
Breaſt of thoſe that have an Empyema; or by the defect 
of the natural Heat and Spirits, as when Flegm falls upon 
the Lungs of thoſe that are weakened by Age or a long 
Cough: Orlaſtly, upon the account of a continual Flux 
of new Matter, wherewith the vitiated Blood, which is 
only diſpoſed to carry it off, does oppreſs and overwheln 
the Part: I fay, in theſe Caſes the Matter is very. ſlowly, 
or not at all, concocted; and fo Diſeaſes that proceed from: 
ſuch unconcocted Matter are, and are called Chroxical ; 
therefore from theſe two Principles, that are contrary 
one to the other, concerning which we have now treated, 
ſome Acute and ſome Chromcal Diſeaſes ariſe. _ 

As to Acute Diſeaſes, which I intend to treat of now, 
ſome proceed from a ſecret and inexplicable Alteration of 
the Alr, infecting Mens Bodies: nor do they at all depend 
on a peculiar Craſis of the Blood and Humors, any other- 
wiſe than the occult Influence of the Air has imprinted the 
ſame upon them. They continue as long as this ſecret 
Conſtitution of the Air, and no longer, neither do they, 
come at any other Time: Theſe are called Epidemicks. 

Other Acute Diſeaſes, ariſe from this or that parting 
irregularity of particular Bodies, which becauſe they are 
not produced by a general Cauſe, do not therefore invade 
many at once: Beſides, this fort comes every Year, ant 
at any Time of the Year, excepting thoſe we ſhall mention, 
when we come to ſpeak ; pprticyﬀRatty of this kind. Thefe 
I call Hutercurrent or Sporadick, becauſe they happen at 
any Time, when Epidemicks rage. I begin with Epide- 
wicht, and firſt of all propoſe a general Hiſtory of them. 


10 J 


F 3 | CHAP. 


eta. 


1 Epidemick Diſeaſess 


+ WR-A: Pu. 
Of Epidemick Diſeaſes. 


1 Think nothing will cauſe ſuch Admiration in him that 
_ = diligently views the Province of Phyſick, as the great 
Variety of Epidemick Diſeaſes; not ſo much for that they 
reſemble the various Seaſons of the ſame Year, as that 
they are like the divers Conſtitutions of Years, that vary 
one from the other, and depend on them. And this mani- 
feſt difference of theſe Diſeaſes will plainly appear by their 
proper a) peculiar Symptoms, and the different Method 
vhich each requires, tho' theſe Diſeaſes may ſeem alike 
to the Unwaty, becauſe in ſome. ſort they do agree to 
outward eg yet if you ſeriouſly conſider, they 
are very different; and it is hard to ſay whether a dil- 
ligent Search, for which the ſhort Life of Man is not 
ſufficient, would teach us, that Epide mical Diſeaſes circle 
about in one continual Series, or whether they come diſ- 
- orderly, according to the ocult Diatheſis of the Air, or 
the inexplicable courſe of Times. But this I am ſure of 
by many Obſervations, that the above- mentioned Species 
of Diſeaſes, eſpecially continual Fevers, do very much dif- 
fer; for that Method which is ſucceſsful one Year, may 
525 aps be deſt ructive another. And when I had once 
appily met with a Method of Cure, which this or that 
kind of Fever did particularly require, I ſcarce ever failed 
of Succeſs, reſpect being had to the Temperament, and 
Age, and the like, till this Species was extin&; but when 
a new one did ariſe, I was in doubt which Way I ſhould 
Meer, lo as to be ſerviceable to my Patient; and unleſs I 
took great Care, and uſed my utmoſt Endeavours, I 
could ſcarce help, but that One or Two of thoſe I had 
firſt in hand would be in great danger, till I had found 
out the Genius of the Diſeaſe, and then I could again pro 
'ceed readily to the curing of it. þ 
And tho' I have obſerv'd,with as much Diligence as poſ- 
ſibly I could, the various Diſpoſition of divers Years, as 
to the manifeſt Qualities of the Air, that from ace. | 


5 * * 8 
- * o * „ . * 1 . 
$4. . a k n 3 "© ». 3 » A SIT,” "2 505 bw * 
OY, "i no F 4 #0 8 5 £ * * 8 g 
1 w 4 — as by b - « * . . * 5 
"#4 - a4. ” as. , Q 3 A. . 7 44 * 4 
- - . 2. 
So" 


— , AL. Es. , . Mc Bw r 


A 5 A398. 


.” 5E Mio. 8. A. Ä n 


* * — 
2 „ 8 Y > 8 1 * « . F 
3 * a " " - = 2 s * U W a wi p N _ "WF 
CF — W . 33 wy us "Ss, R 4 22 Q a. 4 Ew 3 * ; 8 
ha Sha -4 D 8 1 1 N ws Was 4 4 5 8 * 4 * 
2 5 * , a” © —Aas * a 3 - as : 1 3 — - . * — 2 _ 2 „ * I Me — * 
5 | . . VS Bags 5 SI 9 9 a — 2 * 1 — 
- — g 


Of Epidemickh Diſeaſes: g 
might learn the Cauſes of this great variety of E denier, 
Diſeaſes, yet I have received no Benefit thereby; for 1 
perceive that Years. that do agree as to the manifeſt Tem- 
per of the Air, are infeſted with various Diſeaſes: and ſo 
on the contrary. And thus it happens, there are many 
Conſtitutions of Years that ariſe neither from Heat nor 
Cold, nor Moiſture nor Drought, but proceed from a ſe- 
cret and inexplicable alteration in the Bowels of the Earth, 
whereby the Air is contaminated with ſuch EANuvia as diſ- 

ſe Bodies to this or that Diſeaſe, as long as the ſame 
onſtitution prevails,. which at length in a certain'Space 
of Time withdraws, and gives way to another. Every one 
of theſe general Conſtitutions is accompanied with a Fever 
proper and peculiar to it felf, which never appears at'any 
other Time; theref6re I call theſe Fevers Stationary. _ 
Moreover, there are particular Temperaments of the 
ſame Year, as I may ſay, wherein, tho' according to the 
manifeſt Qualities of the Air, thole Fevers that follow the 
general Conſtitution of the Year are more or leſs Epide- 
mical, or come ſooner or later; yet chiefly theſe Fevers 
that come every Year, (which therefore we call'd Inter- 
currents) owe their Riſe to this or that manifeſt Temper of 
the Air, viz. a Pleurifie, Quinſie, and the reſt of this ſort, 
which moſt commonly proceed from ſudden Heat, fol- 
lowing preſently a long and ſevere cold Seaſon. There- 
fore *tis-probable, that the ſenſible Qualities of the Air 
may be Inſtrumental in producing the Fevers which exert 
themſelves in every, Conſtitution; but not as to thoſe that 
are peculiar to any one Conſtitution : But we muſt con- 
feſs, that the above-mentioned Qualities of the Air do 
more or Jeſs diſpoſe our Bodies to generate this or that E- 
pidemicł Di ſeafe, which is likewiſe to be ſaid of any Er- 
ror in the Six Non-naturals. N 
But We muſt take notice, that ſome Epidemical Diſ- 
eaſes in this or that Year are regular, and have the like 
Phænomeng and Symptoms in almoſt all that are infected 
with them, and go off in the ſame Way and Manner; 
therefore a true and certain Hiſtory of Epidemick Diſ- 
eaſes, is to be learnt ftom theſe, as being moſt perfeft of 


u TT 1 5 
There be other Diſezſes of other Years, which tho 
they be Epidemical. yet are they ſo irregular, that they 
cannot. be Sothprehenged under any Form, and are 4 
g 0 OE $8 IS. . g 1 3 14 191.4 | ” + e | 


. * 
. 
46 
l it 
r 


6 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes 
deed ill-condition'd upon the account of the uncertain va- 
riety of Symptoms, and their certain changeableneſs, 
and as to the Method whereby they are cured. This 
great Diſparity ariſes from hence, viz. becauſe every Con. 
ſtitution produces Diſeaſes that are very much unlike 
thoſe of the fame kind, under another Conſtitution, 
which not only happens in Fevers, but in many other E- 
pidemick Diſeaſes, | 3 
And this is not all, for there is à variety of wanton 
Nature, that is of a more nice Speculation, v:z. that the 
ſame Diſeaſes ſhonid vary often under one and the ſame 
Conſtitation, as to its Beginning, State and Declina- 
tion, which is of ſo great Conſequence, that the Cura- 
tive Indications are to be omitted or us'd, according as 
the Diſeaſe is diſpos'd. 4 1 
Moreover, we muſt take notice, that Epidemick Diſeaſes 
muſt be divided into two Ranks, vix. Veranl and Autum- 
nal; and tho' they may happen at any other Time of the 
Year, yet if they do, they belong to that Rank they are 
neareſt; for ſo it falls out ſometimes, that the Temper of 
the Air does ſo much agree with ſome one Epidemick Diſ- 
eaſe, that by the help of it, it comes before its Time : 
And on the contrary, 'tis deferr'd when there is no ſuit- 
ahleneſs; ſo that it does not invade the Body pre-difpos'd 
till ſome Time after: Therefore when I mention the 
Spring or Autumn, I do not exactly mean the Equinox, 
Whether Vernal or Autumnal. ns; | 
Some Epidemick Diſeaſes begin early in the Spring,v:z. 
in January, and encreaſing by degrees, come to their 
height about the Vernal Zquinox, then decreaſe and va. 
niſh about the Summer Solſtice, fab ing, that a very few af- 
terwards may now and then happen. Of this Sort are the 
Meaſles and Spring- Tertians, which, tho' they appear ſome- 
What later, diz. in February, yet they allo withdraw at 
the approach of the Summer Solſtice: But others that be- 
gin in the Spring encreaſe daily, and do not come to their 
State till the Autumnal Equinox, which being paſt, they 
begin to retreat, and at lengrh Are Extinguiſh'd, by the 
cold of Winter. Of this kind is the Plague and Small- Pox, 
in thoſe Years they are Epidemical, . The Cholera Morbus 
belongs to the Family of Autum nal Epidemicks; it begins 
in Auguft, and finiſhes its Courſe in the ſpace of a Month: 
There are other Diſeaſes that begin at the fte Time, but 
f ; continue 


3 
* 


8 W „ 


a os. 


„„ c 988 


* 


4 
* 
—__ iD ce 


Of Epidemich Diſeaſes. = 


continue till Winter; for inſtance, the Bloody Flux and 
Autumnal-Fevers, both Tertian and Quartan; all theſe 
loſe the Name and Nature of Epidemicks in the ſpace of 
two Months moſt commonly, but ſome are afflicted with 
them ſometimes longer, ſometimes not ſo long. 
But in particular, as to Fevers, we muſt take notice, 
that the greateſt Part which are continual have yet no 
Name allotted them, as they proceed from the influ-nce 
of a general Conſtitution, but they borrow thoſe App a- 
tions they are known by from ſome remarkableAlterations 
imprinted upon the Blood, or from ſome evident Symp- 
tom; and upon this account they are call'd Putrid, Malig- 
nant, Spotted, and the like; but foraſmuch as every Conſti- 
tution is prone to propagate ſome other Diſeaſes of Note at 
the ſame time more Epidemical, beſides the Fevers it pro- 
duces, of which ſort is the Plague, Bloody-Flux, Small-Pox, 
and the like, I cannot ſee why ſuch Fevers ſhould not ra- 
ther take their Name from the Conſtitution, as it favours 
the Production of either of theſe Diſeaſes at the Time 
when they appear, than from any alteration of the Blood, 
or any particular Symptom, which may as well agree 
with Fevers of another kind. Inter mittents take their 
Names from the Intervals between the Fits; and this is 
ſufficient to diſtinguiſh them, if the Seaſons of the Year 
wherein they happen, viz. Spring or Fall, be conſider'd; 
but ſome of theſe have no very viſible Character, whereby 
they may be diſtinguiſh'd, tho' they really participate of 
the Nature of Intermittents;, as when Autumnal Intermit- 
ting Fevers come early, viz. in Fulyand are common, they 
do not preſently put on their own Shapes, (which is cuſto- 
mary in Spring Intermitting Fevers) for they imitate con- 
tinual *Fevers{o well, that tis hard to diſtinguiſh them. 
But the violence of the Conſtitution being a little quell'd 
about the end of Autumn, they put off their Diſguiſe, and 
then openly appear to be Intermittents, either Terti ans 
or Quartans, as indeed they were really at firſt: And if 
this de not carefully obſerved, we ſhall be deceived in our 
PreſcriptiAs, much to the Prejudice of our Patients, 
while we miſtake Fevers of this kind, which are to be ac- 
counted Intermittents for real Continual Fevers. 
Moreover, we muſt diligently obſerve, that when ma- 
ny of theſe Diſeaſes infeſt the ame Year, one is more pre- 
dominant, and all the reft are as it were under it, and 
w * don't 


[ 


8 Of Epidemick ' Diſeaſes. 
don't rage ſo much at that Time, fo that as this encreaſe 
they decreaſe; and when this decreaſes, they encreaſe; an 
ſo by turns they-vex poor Mortals, as the Genius of th 
Year, and the ſenſible Temper of the Air favour moſt thi: 
or that Diſeaſe z but that Diſeaſe which rages moſt, and is 
moſt deadly about the Autumnal Equinox, namies the 
Conſtitution of the whole Lear: For it plainly appears, 
that whatſoever Diſeaſe prevails over the reſt at that Sea- 
{on, will have the Dominion over the reſt for the whole 
Year, to whoſe Genius all the Epidemicks that are Con- 
temporaries With it, accommodate themſelves, as far as it 
conſiſts with their Nature: For inſtance, when the Small- 
Pox aid rage, at the ſame time the Fevers that did wander 
here and there, did plainly partake of that Inflamation, 
which produced the Small-Pox; for both Diſeaſes began 
after the ſame manner, and there was great likeneſs be- 
twixt the proper Symptonis of each, excepting the Erup- 
tion of the S-mall-Pox, and the reſt that depended on it, as 
it manifeſtly appear'd by that great inclination to ſponta- 
neous Sweats and Spitting, which were proper to both. In 
like manner when the Bloody-Flux chiefly prevail'd, the 
Fever that raged that Year was not a little like it, (only 
the Bloody-Flux did put off the Morbifick Cauſe by's oo! 
and ſome other Symptoms aroſe from thence) which did 
manifeſtly appear, for that the beginning of both were a- 
like, and thoſe that had either Diſeaſe were inclin'd to 
Apththe, and did mutually partake of the ſame Symptoms. 
And truly the Bloody-flux we now ſpeak of was that very 
Fever introverted which did exonerate it ſelf into the In- 
teſtines, and was put off that way. It is to be noted, 
that tie chief Epidemick that rages about the Autumnal 
#quinox, recedes at the approach of Winter, and the E- 
pidermicks ofa lower Rank exert themſelves until the chief 
pidemick of the Year returns and ſuppreſſes themi. 
Laſtty, we miſt obſerve, That when any Conſtitution 
produces varions Species of Epidemicks, that each Species 
differs ju Kind from thoſe that have the ſame Name; but 
are under _anotijer Conititution : But how many ſoever 
peculiar Species there be that invade under one and the 
ſame Conſtitution, they all agree in the common and ge- 
neral Cauſe that produces them, vi, in this or that pecu- 
liar Diatheſis of the Air, and by conſequence, how much 
ſoever they diffet one from the other, as to their I e and 
1 ** a a be 15. 4 Cv ET PR . ; pecifick 


8 53 . N 


— a 8 


= F 4 Ba 
2 Py. 5 wk : ** < 80 
— 2 fag „ S 0 


Of Epidemick Diſeaſes. 9 


ſpecifick Form, yet the Conſtitution that is common to 
all, reduces the ſubje& Matter of Particulars to the like 
Condition and State; ſo that the chief Symptoms which 
do not belong to the particular manner of Evacuation, are 
alike in all: And in this they all agree, v:z. they equally 
encreaſe and decreaſe at the ſame Time. Moreover, we 
muſt obſerve, that in thoſe Years wherein various Species 
of theſe break forth, they all make an Aſſault at the ame 
Time, and after the ſame Manner, and have the ſame 
Symptoms at their firſt Invaſion, e 

Hence we may learn the various and accurate Method 
Nature uſeth in generating Diſeaſes, which I believe no 


Man has hitherto ſufficiently obſerved : And from hence 


it appears (ſeeing the ſpecifical Differences of popular Diſ- 
eaſes, Viz. Fevers, rig from the ſecret Conſtitution of 
Years) that thoſe labour in vain who deduce the Reaſons of 
divers Fevers froma morbifick Cauſe reſerv'd in the Body: 
For it is evident, that if any Perſon who is very well, travels 
to ſome Parts of this Kingdom, he will be ſeiz d with the Fe- 
ver that rages there in a few Days, and yet it is ſcarce credi- 
ble that any manifeſt Change ſhould be imprinted by the 
Air upon the Humours of this Man in ſo ſhort a Time. Nor 
is it leſs difficult to accommodate general Rules, and to fix 
ſome certain Bounds, which we may not paſs in the Cure 


of theſe Fevers. Therefore in ſo great Uncertainty, I think 


it beſt to pauſe a while, when any new Fever ariſes, eſpeci- 
ally, to proceed gently, and with Deliberation, to great 
Remedies, and in the mean while to obſerve diligently the 
Genius of it, and likewiſe thoſe Things that do either Good 
or Harm, that we may avoid the one, and chuſe the other. 
In a word, as it is very hard to reduce all the Species of 
Epidemicks into Claſſes, according to the variety of their 
Phenomena, and todecipher the Idjopathick Characters of 
each, and to accommodate a Method of Healing particu- 
lar to every one; ſo alſo, becauſe they do not invade in 
any certain Series of Years, (atleaſt not yet known) per- 
haps the Age of one Phyſician will not be ſufficient to col- 
let an exact Apparatus of Obſervations of them. But tho 
this Labour be lo tedious, we muſt perform it before we 


can juſtly boaſt ofany Thing we have done fit tobe remem- 


bered in explicating the various Series of theſe Diſeaſes. 


But how may we give an account of the diſtinct Species 
of Epidemicks, that do not only (at leaſt as it appears to 


.. 


4 
4 
* 


10 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes. 


us) invade by chance, but alſo for one Year, or one cer- 
tain Series of Years, are of the ſame Genius, in another 
Year, are diſtinguiſh'd in ſpecie one from another? Why, 
in this caſe no Method ever ſeem'd more fit to me than 
that which deſcrib'd them in the Order they ſucceeded one 
another for a ſufficient number of Years; which that I 
may do according to my own Model, I will faithfully deli- 
ver to the learned World the Hiſtory and Cures of thoſe 
Epidemicks (as well as I could poſſibly collect them from 
the moſt accurate Obſervations) that did rage from the 
Year 1661, to the the Year 1676, v:z. for the {pace of 
Fifteen Years: For it ſeems to me plainly impoſſible to 
perform this Work by aſſigning the Cauſes of the Riſe of 
them to the manifeſt Qualities of the Air, much leſs to 
ſome particular Diſcraſie in the Blood and Humors, unleſs 
as it riſes from a ſecret Influence of the Air. 

Moreover, it is alſo impoſlible to deliver the Species of 
various Epidemicks, which ariſe from ſpecifick Alterations 
of the Air, tho' it may ſeem very eaſie to thoſe who are 
wont to give Names to Fevers, according to their Notions 
iI grounded upon the Speculations of thoſe Alterations 
which may arif: in Human Blood and its Humours; for 
when we do not follow Nature, the beſt Guide, but allow 
our ſelves to gueſs, there will be ſo many Species of Diſea- 
ſes as we can repeat; and in the mean while we take that 
Licenſe which no Man will grant to a Botanift, from whom 
we require the Teſtimony of the Senſes for his Relation 
of Plants, not a ſpeculative Diſcourſe, tho' he may be 
excellent in this Particular, and exceed others. 1 

do not aſſume ſo much to my ſelf, as that I would be 
thought to have accompliſh'd what I now treat. of, per- 
haps I have not ſo muchas repeated all the Families of E- 
* emicks: Nor can I ſay that theſe Diſeaſes which in the 

ears paſt, whereof I now treat, did mutually ſucceed one 
another in that Order we ſhall mention hereafter, will like- 
wiſe continue to do ſo for Years to come. All that I pre- 
tend to is, to declare how this Thing has been of late, and 
to confirm by the Obſervations of ſome few Years what re- 
lates to theſe Regions, and this City wherein we live, that 
I may offer rf Mite for the beginning a Work, which if 
am not miſtaken, will be very much to the Advantage 
of Mankind, when it is perfected by Poſterity, who may 
traverſe the whole Series of Epidemicks 1 Ny TE) 


_ * — * 1 


C HAP. III. 
The Epidemick Conſtitution of the Yea 
| 1661, 62, 632 64. 


IN the Lear 61, the Autumnal Intermitting Fvers, which 


for ſome Vears paſt prevail'd, did again break forth a- 
freſh, (eſpecially obſtinate Tertians) about the beginning 
of July, and daily encreaſing, fiercely raged in Auguſt, and 
in many Places, whole Families being ſeiz'd,they were very 
Mortal, and then decreaſing by degrees, they were ex- 
tinguiſh'd by the Cold of Winter coming upon them, ſo 
that there was very few in October. The Symptoms which 
accompanied this Tertian chiefly, differ'd from the Symp- 
toms of other Tertians in other Years, in theſe things, viz. 
the Fit was fiercer, and the Tongue was blacker and dryer, 
and when the Fit was paſt, the Fever did not clearly go 
off; the Appetite and Strength were more dejected, and 
the Fits more inclined to double : In ſhort, all the Acci- 
dents were worſe, and the whole Diſeaſe fiercer than was 
uſual in Intermitting Fevers, When this Diſeaſe ſeiz d 
People that werein Years, or thoſe that were of an ill ha- 
bit of Body, or others that were weaken'd by Bleeding, 
or any other Evacuation, it continued for Two or Three 
Months. Some few © uartans accompanied the Fevers now 
deſcrib'd, but both being unable to bear the approach of 


| ed before) withdrew, and were ſucceeded by a continual 
Fever differing from the intermitting Autumfals only in 
this; Thoſe did come at certain Times, and This was con- 


Winter, He then they invaded nonethat were not infect- 


tinual; for they invaded the People almoſt alike, and 
thoſe that violently labour d of either, vomited; their Ex- 
ternal Parts were dry, and their Tongues black, and they 


were Thirſty, and the morbifick Matter of both was rea- 


dily ii at their Declinations by Sweats. It 
was manifeſt, this Fever belong'd to the Family of Au- 


tumnal Intermititars, becauſe it rarely appear'd in the 


Spring. 


. 


1x2 Conſlitution of the Tear 61. 


Spring, andit was a ſort of Compendium of the Intermit- 
tents, and on the contrary every one of their Fits ſeem'd 


to be a Compendium of this Fever. So that the difference 


chiefly conſiſts in this, viz. That the Continual Fever per- 
feed its Efferveſcence, onee begun, witli the ſame degree 
of Heat; but the Intermittents perform their Buſineſs by 
Parts, and at ſeveral Times. I cannot ſay how long this 
Ever has prevail'd, for hitherto I have had enough to do 
to attend upon the general Symptoms of Fevers, for as yet 
I have not been able to diſtinguiſh them according to the 
various Craſis of Years, or according to the various Sea- 
ſons of the ſame Year. . This I certainly know, That there 
as but one Species of a Continual Fever till the Lear 1665, 
and the Autumnal Intermittents, which were frequent till 


* . * 


this Vear, afterwards became more rare. ; 
But to return to the Buſineſs : That Tertian Fever which 
in the ſaid Year ſo much prevail'd, contracted it ſelf into 
a leſs Compaſs when the Year was over; and in the fol- 
lowing Autumns, the Quartans exceeded all other Epi- 
demicks, as long as the Conſtitution of the Air remain'd; 
but after Autumn, the Quartans always deceaſing, the 
Continual Fever (which through all this Time appear'd a 
little) now violently raged till Spring, at which Time 
the Vernal Inter mitting Fevers ſucceeded ;, which going off 
likewiſe about May, the Small-Pox here and there appear- 
ed and diſappear'd again at the approach of the Autumnal 
Epidemicks, I mean the Continual Fever, and the Quar- 
tanc. And in this Order the Epidemick Diſeaſes follow'd 
one another, and paſs'd thro' this whole Conſtitution .of 
the Air. I ſhall particularly treat of theſe, viz. the Fe- 
ver, and the Fernal and Autumnal Intermittents, which 
chiefly infeſted this Conſtitution. 3 e 
IJ will begin with. this Fever, which ſeems to me the 
chiefeſt of all; becauſe Nature ated in it more regularly 
than in any other, both in bringing the ferible Matter to 
a due Concoction, and by caſting it forth at a certain ap- 
ointed Time. Moreover, foraſmuch as thoſe Conſtitu- 
tions of Years that produce Antumnal Intermittents,much 
oftner returning communi bus Annie, than thoſe that caule 
other Epidemicks, it neceſſarily follows, That the Conti- 
nual Fevers that accompany them ſhquld often happen. 
Beſides the Symptoms that belong to other Bevers, this 
was alſo accompanied with theſe following, The Sick moſt 
"3 S$S4 33S da a „enen 9 Coins 


K 1 
37 
4 
oF | 

1 
N | 5 
wt 

[4 


WG 


buy 


e 


* 


N 


* 


1 
80 


Contintal Fever in the Tear 1661, &c. 13 


commonly was violently Ill, he vomited, his Tongue was 
dry and black, there was a great and ſudden dejection of 
the Strength, the External Parts were dry, the Urine al- 
ways thick, or thin, both were equally a ſign of Crudi- 
ties: In the Declination of the Diſeaſe there was a Looſ- 
neſs, (unleſs the Phyſician chanced to prevent it at the 
beginning, which. prolong'd the Diſeaſe; but according 
to its own Nature and Genius, it went off about the 14th 
or 21ſt Day, at which Time it was expell'd by Sweat, or 
rather gentle Breathing ; and the Signs of Concoction ap- 
pear'd moſt commonly in the Urine about this Time, and 
not before. Other Symptoms ſuperyen'd when the Diſ- 
eaſe was unskilfully handl'd, but theſe and the whole Ge- 
nius of it will more clearly appear from the peculiar Me- 
thod that heretofore I accommodated to this Fever, 
which therefore I will transfer hither, (at leaſt as much 
as concerns the Buſineſs) as I publiſh'd it long ago, at 
which Time I did not know there was any other kind of 
Fever to be found any where. 


—_— — 


— 


CH AP. ÞY. 


Of the Continual FEVER of the Tear 
1661, 62, 63, 64. 


F! RS T, Iobſerve, That in the inordinate Commotion 

of the Blood, the Cauſe, or Companion of this Fever, 
is ſtarted up by Nature, either that ſome Heterogeneous 
Matter contained in it, and offenſive to it, ſnould be caſt 
out, or that the Blood ſhould be ſome way alter'd. 

And in this Buſineſs the word Commot ion pleaſes me beſt, 
becauſe it is more large and general than either Fermenta- 
tion or or Ebullition, for it prevents the occaſion of a vain 
diſpute about Terms, that perhaps Words of that kind 
may ſeem to countenance, tho' they may admit of an Ex- 
plication that is not incommodious, yet are they thought 
ſomething improper by ſome ;, for tho' the Commotion 
of the Blood may be ſomething like the Fermentation, 

ome- 


14 Continual Fever in the Near 166 15 &c. 


fometimes like the Ebullition of Vegetable Liquors, yet 
there are ſome that think it very much differs from both, 
and they produce one or two Examples of Fermentation. 
Firſt, tho' Liquids fermenting are wont to obtain a Vi- 
nous Nature, ſo that a hot Spirit may be drawn from them 
by Diſtillation, and eaſily turns to Vinegar, which is no- 
tably ſharp, and yields by Diſtillation an acid Spirit, yet 
they ſay, that neither of theſe Diſpoſitions has hitherto 
been found in the Blood. 

And they obſerve, That in Vinous Liquors the fermen- 
tation and depuration are finiſh'd at the ſame Time, and 
as it were, keep Pace together; but the depuratian of the 
Blood in Fevers, does not accompany, but follows its E- 
ſtuation, which they think is manifeſt even to ſight, in a 
Feveriſh Fit carried off by Sweat. 

But as to Ebullition, the Analogy ſeems more difficult 
to them, and which Experience contradicts in many 
Caſes, where the Fury of the Blood is not fo violent as 
thatit may deſerve the Name of Ebullition; but be it as it 
will, (for I will by no means engage in theſe Diſputes, ſee- 
ing the Terms of Ebullition and Fermentation have been ve- 
ry much uſed among modern Phyſicians, I will not refuſe 
to uſe them too, now and then, whilſt it is manifeſt from 
what has been ſaid,that theſe Words ſerve only in this Trea- 
tiſe for a clearer Explication of what is to be diſcourſed of. 

Undoubtedly, all ſorts of Fevers that are accompanied 
with Eruptions, make it appear, that this Feveriſh Com- 
motion of the Blood is raked for the Secretion of ſome 
Heterogeneous Matter, that is contrary to Nature, ivr 
that in theſe, by the help of Ebullitton, and Excrement 
of an ill Quality is caſt upon the Skin that lay hid before 
in the Blood. | | 

And I think it is no leſs probable, that the febrile com- 
motion of the Blood ſhould often (not to ſay oftner) aim 
at no more than to be changed into ſome new State and 
Diſpoſition, and that a Man, whoſe Blood js pure and un- 
tainted, may be ſeiz d with a Fever, as we commonly find, 
it happens to healthy People, in whom we find there is no 
Morbifick Furniture, either as to a Plethora, or ill Habit, 
no unhealthy Indiſpoſition of the Air, which may occaſion 


a Fever; and yet notwithſtanding, by reaſon of ſome no- 


table alteration ef the Air preceding, or Change of Diet, 
or of the reſt of the Non-naturals, as they are called, 115 
F en 


* 
* 10 N . a * 
o id FR _ ? - — 2 9 
5 FE. PS OMe 6 ht hots — 
Wer * n * 1 _ 
9 5 — — . bs O#.: = 


— 


W 1 WWW r 


Continual Fever in the Tear 166 1, &c. 1 ; 


Men are likewiſe ſeiz d with a Fever; and the Reaſon is, 
becauſe the Blood endeavours to gain a new State or Con- 
ö dition, ſuch as the Air, and manner of Diet requires; 
not that the irritation of vitious Particles lodg'd in the 
Blood canſe the Fever, tho” I do not at all doubt, but that 
the Matter that is commonly excreted in the diſpumation 
of the Blood after the Febrile Commotion, is vitious, tho” 
the Blood before was well diſpos'd, which is no more to 
be wonder'd at, than that ſome Part of what we eat ſhould 
be corrupted and ſtink, after it has been conſiderably al- 
ter'd in the Body, and ſeparated from the reſt. 
| Secondly, I reckon, that the true and natural Indica- 
tions that ariſe in this Diſeaſe, ſhew, that the Commoton 
of Blood muſt be kept in that degree which is ſuitable 
to Nature's Purpoſe, that it do not riſe too high on the 
one hand, from whence great Symptoms flow, nor be de- 


t preſsd too low on the other Hand, whereby the protuſion 
1 of the Morbifick Matter may be hindered, or the en- 
$ deavours cf the Blood affecting a new State fruſtrated ; 
. ſo that whether the Fever ariſe from ſome Heterogeneous 
d Matter irritating it, or from the Blood affecting a new 
4 Condition, in both Caſes the Indications are the ſame. 
- Theſe Things being premiſed, I order the Method of 
1 Cure in the following manner. 
p When I am called to Patients, whoſe Blood of it ſelf is 
weak, as it is moſt commonly in Children, or when it 
1 wants Spirits, as in old Age, and in young Men, weaken'd 
5 by long Sickneſs, I forbear Bleeding; for if I ſhould Bleed 
E ſuch, their Blood being already too weak, it would become 
r — unfit to perform the Buſineſs of Depuration, and conſe- 
ft _ quently the whole Maſs would be perverted, and the Life 
K of the Patient hazarded, (as when the Fermentation of 
Beer, or any new Liquor is unſeaſonably ſtop'd, it is moſt 
2 q commonly ſpoil'd) for Nature can no more aſſociate with 
11 the Particles which it has once begun to eject, which tho' 
q they were pure when they were equally mixed with the 
-  ._ Blood, are now corrupt, and apt to infect the other Hu- 
, _ mours. Truly, I know very well, that thoſe that are in- 
jur d by Bleeding, are ſometimes reſtor'd by proper Cor- 
t, _ dials, the Blood being enabled by them to purifie it ſel} - 
fn 5 But Prevention is better than a Cure. 
* N When l am called to thoſe whoſe Bloo is of a contrary 
„ Nature, ſuch as is tyont to be in young Men of a ſtroug 
1 Con- 
n © 


a0 


16 Continual Fever inthe Year 1661, &c. 


Conſtitution, and ſanguine Temper, I order Bleeding in 
the firſt Place, which cannot here be omitted without 
danger, (beſides, in ſome Caſes to be mention'd hereaf- 
ter) for otherwiſe not only Pleuriſies, Phrenſies, and ſuch 
Inflammatiens may be feared, by reaſon of the too great 
Ebullition of the Blood, but alſo on the account of the 
ſuperfluity aſtagnation of the whole Maſs. | 
As to the _—_ [ only take away ſo much Blood 
as I ſuppoſe will free the Sick from thoſe Dangers where- 
unto, as we ſaid, he is obnoxious by the violent Commo- 
tion of if, Moreover, I regulate the Eſtuation by re- 
peating Bleeding, or omitting it, by uſing, or forbidding 
the uſe of hot Cordials. And laſtly, by A the Body 
looſe, or ſtopping it, as I find that Motion high or low. . 
After Bleeding, if ir be neceſſary, according to the a- 
bove-mention'd Caſe, I carefully enquire whether the 
Sick was inclin'd to Nauſeouſneſs, of Vomiting at the be- 
ginning of the Fever; and if fo, I preſently order a Vo- 
mit, unleſs ſome great Weakneſs of the Patient, or the 
tender Age forbid it. Indeed a Vomit is ſo neceſſary, 
when an inclination to Vomiting went before, that un- 
jeſs that Humour be evacuated, it will occaſion many dif- 
ficult Symptoms, that will obſtru& the Phyſician in per- 
forming the Cure, and very much endanger the Sick. A 
Looſeneſs is the chief and moſt frequent, which moſt com- 
monly follows in thedeclination of the Fever, when Vo- 
mits were omitted, when they were indicated; for in 
the Progreſs of the Diſeaſe, when Nature has ſomewhat 
quell'd the malignant Humour in the Stomach, and thruſt 
it down to the Guts, they are ſo corroded by a continual 
Flux of a ſharp Humour from this Fountain in the Sto- 
mach, that a Len muſt neceſſarily follow; But I 
have taken notice, That in Inflamatory Fevers, which are 
commonly call'd Malignant, a Looſeneſs did not con- 
ſtantly follow the omiſſion of a Vomit, as it did in this 
Fever, tho' ſuch an Inclination to Vomiting went before: 
But of this Matter more hereafter. This ſort of Looſeneſs 
is more dangerous, becauſe the Sick being much weakned 
before, is more enervated thereby ; beſides, which is 
worſt, it happens at the declination of the Fever, when 
the Blood ſhould contract it ſelf, and vſe its utmoſt En- 
deavours for finiſhing Deſpumation, but is hinder'd by 


this Evacuation. 8 
| But 


and. OM on Ss Ay Dolls 


A Mof &. koh occndd An 


„ieee Oo. 1, ART . 


it 


Continual Fever in the Tear 1661, &c. 17 


But that you may not doubt that this Humour log” 
in the Stomach, unleſs it be expell'd by a Vomit, will in 
a ſhort Time cauſe a Looſeneſs, upon enquiry we almoſt 
always find, that when a Looſeneſs accompanies this Fever, 
the Sick was inclin'd to Vomit at the beginning of the Diſ- 
eaſe, but a Vomit was not given. Furthermore, you may 
take notice, That tho' the inclination to Vomiting went 
off long before, yet the Looſeneſs will ceaſe for the moſt 
Part upon taking a Vomit, it the Sick be able to! bear it: 
But I have frequently obſerved, That when the Looſenels 
is come, aſtringent Remedies do little or nothing, either 
taken inwardly or outwardly ayply'd to ſtop it. 

I commonly ule the following Vomir. 


Take of Vinum Benedictum fix Drams, of Oxymel of 
Squills, and compound Syrups of Scabious, each half an 
Ounce, mingle them, make a Vomit. 


I order it ſhould be taken two Hours after a ſmall Din- 
ner, and that it may work the better, Six or Eight Pints 
of Poſſet-drink may be provided : For theſe Medicines are 
dangerous, if they are not well waſh'd off; and therefore as 
often as the Patient Vomits, or goes to Stool, he muſt take 
preſently a Draught of it, whereby the Gripes will be pre- 
vented, and he will Vomit eaſily. 

After a nice view of the Matter caſt up by Vomits, 
which was neither much, nor ill, I often wonder'd how 
it comes to pals, that the Sick ſhould be ſo much reliev'd 
by it; for as ſoon as the Vomit hath done working, the 
violent Symptoms, v:z. the Nauſeouſneſs, Anxiety, Reſt- 
leſneſs, Sighing, and Blackneſs of the Tongue, were com- 
monly mitigated, which before afflicted the Sick, and 
frighten'd the By-ſtanders, fo that the reſt of the Diſeaſe 
was very tolerable: 1 | 

It is to be obſerv'd, That if the Caſe requires Bleeding 
and Vomiting, it is ſafeſt to Bleed firſt, for otherwiſe the 
Veſſels being ſtretch'd with Blood, there is great danger, 
leſt, by violent ſtraining to Vomit, the Veſſels of the 
Lungs ſhoulÞbe broken, and the Brain hurt, the Blood 
being violently poured in and out, and & the Patient 
may die of an Apop/exy; whereof I could mention fame 
Inſtances, if it were proper; it is @Ecizut, that 1 warn 
you to uſe great Caution in this Calb. 1 

a — 


16 Continual Fever in the Year 1661, &c. 


Conſtitution, and fanguine Temper, I order Bleeding in 
the firſt Place, which cannot here be omitted without 
danger, (beſides, in ſome Caſes to be mention'd hereaf- 
ter) for otherwiſe not only Pleuriſies, Phrenſies, and ſuch 
Inflammatiens may be feared, by reaſon of the too great 
Ebullition of the Blood, but alſo on the account of the 
ſuperfluity aſtagnation of the whole Maſs. | 
As to the Quantity, I only take away ſo much Blood 
as I ſuppoſe will free the Sick from thoſe Dangers where- 
unto, as we faid, he is obnoxious by the violent Commo- 
tion of if, Moreover, I regulate the Eſtuation by re- 
peating Bleeding, of omitting it, by uſing, or forbidding 
the uſe of hot Cordials. And laſtly, by A. the Body 
looſezor ſtopping it, as I find that Motion high or low. 
After Bleeding, if ir be neceſſary, according to the a- 
bove-mention'd Caſe; I carefully enquire whether the 


Sick was inclin'd to Nauſeouſneſs, of Vomiting at the be- 


ginning of the Fever; and if ſo, I preſently order a Vo- 
mit, unleſs ſome great Weakneſs of the Patient, or the 


tender Age forbid it. Indeed a Vomit is ſo neceſſary, 


when an inclination to Vomiting went before, that un- 
Teſs that Humour be evacuated, it will occaſion many dif- 
ficult Symptoms, that will obſtru& the Phyſician in per- 
forming the Cure, and very much endanger the Sick. A 
Looſeneſs is the chief and moſt frequent, which moſt com- 
monly follows in thedeclination of the Fever, when Vo- 
mits were omitted, when they were indicated; for in 
the Progreſs of the Diſeaſe, when Nature has ſomewhat 
quell'd the malignant Humour in the Stomach, and ng 
it down to the Guts, they are ſo corroded by a continua 

Flux of a ſharp Humour from this Fountain in the Sto- 
mach, that a Lookneſs muſt neceſſarily follow: But I 
have taken notice, That in Inflamatory Fevers, which are 
commonly call'd Malignant, a Looſeneſs did not con- 
ſtantly follow the omiſſion of a Vomit, as it did in this 
Fever, tho' ſuch an Inclination to Vomiting went before: 
But of this Matter more hereafter. This ſort of Looſeneſs 
is more dangerous, becauſe the Sick being much weakned 
before, is more enervated thereby; beſides, which is 
worſt, it happens at the declination of the Fever, when 
the Blood ſhould contract it ſelf, and vſe its utmoſt En- 
deavours for finiſhing Deſpumation, but is hinder'd by 
this Evacuation. e 1 


i 


But 


„% „% end A + > A 0 © kx” 


£ a et. 8 3 
JFF A OS ERR 2: $# 
c 


6 td. At. A Mn et 


C wan War” rw 8V YF_ © 7 ag” 


/ BE 4 ©, oc old fe. 


WF uw UW A 


1 


„eee Vo, ©, V6, ee eee v- 


\ 
1 


N. * 
8 


Continual Fever in the Tear 1661, &c. 17 
But that you may not doubt that this Humour lodg'd 


in the Stomach, unleſs it be expell'd by a Vomit, will in 
2 a ſhort Time cauſe a Looſeneſs, upon enquiry we almoſt 
always find, that when a Looſeneſs accompanies this Fever, 


the Sick was inclin'd to Vomit at the beginning of the Diſ- 


| eaſe, but a Vomit was not given. Furthermore, you may 


take notice, That tho' the inclination to Vomiting went 
off long before, yet the Looſeneſs will ceaſe for the moſt 


Part upon taking a Vomit, it the Sick be able to! bear it: 


But I have frequently obſerved, That when the Looſenels 
is come, aſtringent Remedies do little or nothing, either 
taken inwardly or outwardly apply'd to {top it. 

I commonly ule the following Vomit. 


Take of Vinum Benedictum fix Drams, of Oxymel of 
Squills, and compound Syrups of Scabious, each half an 
Ounce ;, mingle them, make a Vomit. 


I order it ſhould be taken two Hours after a ſmall Din- 
ner, and that it may work the better, Six or Eight Pints 
of Poſſet-drink may be provided : For theſe Medicines are 
dangerous, if they are not well waſh'd off; and therefore as 
often as the Patient Vomits, or goes to Stool, he muſt take 
preſently a Draught of it, whereby the Gripes will be pre- 
vented, and he will Vomit eaſily. 

After a nice view of the Matter caſt up by Vomits, 
which was neither much, nor ill, I often wonder'd how 
it comes to pals, that the Sick ſhould be {o much reliev'd 
by it; for as ſoon as the Vomit hath done working, the 
violent Symptoms, v:z. the Nauſeouſneſs, Anxiety, Reſt- 
leſneſs, Sighing, and Blackneſs of the Tongue, were com- 
monly mitigated, which before afflicted the Sick, and 
frighten'd the By-ſtanders, ſo that the reſt of the Diſeaſe 
was very tolerable; 7 | | 

It is to be obſerv'd; That if the Caſe requires Bleeding 


and Vomiting, it is ſafeſt to Bleed firſt, for otherwiſe the 
| Veſſels being ſtretch'd with Blood, there is great danger, 


leſt, by noi ſtraining to Vomit, the Veſſels of the 
Lungs ſhouldbe broken, and the Brain hurt, the Blood 
being violently poured in and out, and ſo the patient 
may die of an Apoplexy; whereof I could mention ſame 
Inſtances, if it were proper; it is ſufficieut, that I warn 
you to uſe great Caution in this Caſe. , 

3 1 


18 Continual Fever in the Tear 1661, &c. 


If any one ſhould ask, at what Time of the Fever I 
would give a Vomit, I lay at the very beginning, if I had 
my Choice, for by this means the Sick may be preſerved 
from thoſe dreadful Symptoms that riſe from the Filth of 
thoſeHumours that lurk in the Stomach and Neighbouring 
Parts, and perhaps you may ſtop the Diſeaſe, at the begin- 
ning, which otherwiſe would encreaſe to the hazard of the 
Patient, aud become tedious, being nouriſh'd by the fore- 
mention'd Humours, which either by reaſon of their ſub- 
ſtance paſs into the innermoſt Parts of the Body, and are 
mingled with the Blood, or becauſe they are kept too long 
in the Body, wax worſe, and put on a venemous Quality, 
which they continually impart to the Blood as it paſſes by 
their Neſt: And of this, not to go far, the Diſeaſe cal- 
led Cholera Morbus is a clear Inſtance; for ſometimes 
when the Vomiting is unſeaſonably ſtop'd in that Diſeaſe, 
whether it be by an Opiate, or aftringent Medicines, a 
worſe Train of Symptoms follow; for the ſharp and cor- 
rupted Humours being on this acconnt repelled, whoſe 
excluſion ought to have been permitted a while, till they 
were ſufficiently evacuated, exert their Fury and Force 
upon the Blood, and kindle a Fever, which is wont to be 
irregular, and accompanied with ill Symptoms, and can 
{carce be cured without a Vomit, tho' the Patient do not 
then Vomit. | 

But if we are called in late, as we are often, ſo that 
we cannot aſſiſt the Patient at the beginning of the Fever 
by ordering a Vomit, yet I have 4 4 it proper to 
give one at any Time of the Diſeaſe, if the Patient has 
{trength to bear the working of it: Indeed I have given a 
Vomit with good Succeſs on the Twelfth Day of the Fever, 
tho” the Sick had left off Vomiting before, and ſo I have 
{topped the Looſeneſs, which obſtructed the Blood in 
performing its deſpumation; and I ſhould not doubt to 
do it later, unleſs the Patient, by reaſon of Weakneſs, 
cannot bear it. 


After Vomiting I always endeavour to quiet the Tumult 


raiſed in the Humours by the Vomit, and thexefore I order 
an Anodyne to be taken at Bed-time, after the Vomit. 


Take of Red Poppy-Water two Ounces, of Aqua Mirabilis 


two Drams, of Syrup of White and Red Poppies, each 
half an Ounce ;, mingle them, make a Draught. i 
ut 


x 
. bt 
ke." 
— 
* # \ 


* 
4 
F þ 


a 
= * 
* 
— 
7 1 


* 
3 


. Ry” > * 


Continual Fever in the Tear 1661, &c. 19 
But if there be no fear of raiſing the Ebullition for the 
future, either by reaſon of a great loſs of Blood, which 
was taken away in order to the Cure, or by frequent Vo- 
miting and Stools occaſioned bythe Vomit, or by a preſent 
Apurexy or Weakneſs of the Fever, or its declining State, 
then I boldly order a large Dole of Diaſcordium, either 
by it ſelf, or mixed with {ome Cordial Water inſtead of 
the Anodyne above deſcribed, and it is really an excellent 
Medicine, if it be given in a due Quantity. | 
And now, b#fore I leave off diſcourſing of Vomits, 1 
muſt acquaint you; that it is by no means ſafe, at leaſt in 
this Fever, to give Vomits of Vinum Benedictum to Chil- 
dren, or any under Fourteen, no, not in the leaft Quan- 
tity : It were to be wiſhed that in the room of this We had 
ſome ſafer Medicine that was as powerful; which might 
root out the Humour, that always almoſt threatens a 
Looſeneſs at the declination of the Fever; at leaſt, that 
we had ſucha one as would ſo alter the ſharp Matter that 
it could not occaſion a Looſeneſo . eee bY 

I have indeed been frequently at a ſtand, when I have 
viſited Infants and Children in a Fever, and have ſeen an 
Indication, which perſuaded the Uſe of a Remedy that 
would have cured them, and yet Idid not dare to ofder it, 
for fear of the ill Conſequences; but in grown People L 
have hitherto obſerved no hurt proceeding from a Vomit, 
if it were given with the Cautions above-mention'd; 

Vomiting being over, I confider whether, notwith- 
ſtanding the foregoing Evacuation, the Blood rages fo 
much that it is ſtill neceſſary to leſſen its Efferveſcence, or 
whether it be ſo very low, that it wants to be heightned ; 
or laſtly, whether the Fermentation, being reduced to a. 
due Degree, may be left to it ſelf without danger to the 
Sick. Of each of theſe I ſhall ay fomething, . : 
_ Firſt therefore, if the Blood fetments ſo violently that 
we may reaſonably fear the Sick is in danger of a Phrenſy, 
or ſome other ill Symptom, .proceeding from too great 
an Ebullition of Blood, the Day after taking the Vomit, 
{ order the follow ing Gliſter. ä 


Take of the common Decottion for a Gliſter one Pint, of 
Syrup of Violets and brown Sugar, each two Ounces, 
mingle them; mate a Gliſter; and I order it ſhould 
be repeated upon dceaſion- | 

| C z By 


* 


20 Continual Fever in the Tear 1661, &c. 


By which, moſt commonly, the Blood being ſomewhat 
cooled, its efferveſcence is ſufficiently reſtrained: But 
ſometimes it is neceſſary to repeat Bleeding once again, 
Viz. in thoſe of a very ſanguine Conſtitution, and in the 
flower of their Age, or in others who have inflam'd their 
Blood by drinking Wine frequently; but moſt commonly 
there is no need of fo great a Remedy as is repeated 
Bleeding; and excepting the Caſes above-mention'd, the 
Efferveſcence may be ſufficiently reſtrain'd by the Uſe of 
Gliſters; wherefore if the Blood boil too much, I order a 
Gliſter every Day, or every other Day, as the Caſe re- 
quires, to the Tenth Davy of the Diſeaſe : But if much Blood 
has been taken away, or the Sick is 01d, I order no Gliſters 
at that Time, tho' the Blood be very hot; for in theſe Ca- 
ſes, as there is no fear, that by the omiſſion of Gliſters 
the Ebullition begun ſhould proceed fo far, as that there 
ſhould be great danger from ſome violent Symptom; fo it 
is moſt certain, that by the uſe of them, the Strength, and, 
as I may ſay, tho” leſs properly, the Tone of the Blood is 
ſo much relaxed, eſpecially in old People, (for Gliſters are 
not uſed ſo ſucceſsfully in old People as in young) that 
Nature is obftructed in her Buſineſs, but if not much 
Blood has been taken away, then, as I faid, I order'd 
Glifters to the Tenth Day, more or leſs, and ſometimes to 
the Twelfth Day, eſp:cially for thoſe I did not dare to 
bleed, for ſome fall into a continual Fever after Autumnal 
Azues, (Whether they are Tertian or 33 ) becauſe 
they wer? not purged after the Agues left them; and if 
inch {honld be blooded, there will be danger, leſt that 
Sediment, which the preceding Fermentation put off, 
ould be again ſacked into the Maſs of Blood, and ſo 
ihou!d cauſe new Tumults; therefore in this Caſe, inſtead 
of Bleeding I uſe Gliſters till the Twelfth Day, if 
tient be voung, and the Fermentation too high. 

But whether Bleeding be uſed or not, if the Efferve- 
{cence be too low, and wants to be ſtirr'd up, in this Caſe 
we miſt wholly abſtain from the uſe of Gliſters, even 
Before the Tenth Day, and much rather if it be paſt; for to 
What Purpoſe ſhould we endeavour any more to reſtrain 
ihe Fermentation, which is already too languid ? But it 
after that Time, v/z. in the declenſion of the Diſeaſe, we 
mould nſe Glitters, it would be as ridiculous as if any one 


ſhould 


the Pa- 


— 2 
— * 


* ws 0 —_p 5 _—_— as 4 3 170 ry 


„ Wk. 4 


— 2 * 


» $8 
1 


erer —— 


3 
Cat 3 r . os 


— * 


1 « 3 


* 


, 
1 


WA 


* 


LE 
D__ 


_— 


2 — 


Continual Fever in the Tear 1661, &c. 21 


ſhould give too large vent to Beer when it is dying; for, 
by reaſon of this Evacuation Nature is obſtructed, ſo that 
ſhe cannot attend rhe ſeparation of the morbifick Matter 
with all her ſtrengths, therefore when by proper Evacus- 
tions the Sick is out of danger from thoſe Symptoms which 
are occaſioned by too great Ebullition; or when the Di 
eaſe is in its declination, the more the Body is bound. 
the leſs danger there is, viz. the febrile Matter moving 
gently to its own concoction : Wherefore if the preceding; 
Evacuations have induced as it were a laxity of the Mais 
of Blood, or threaten the ſame ; or if the Fever goes off 
before its due Time, or is come to its full Period, I dc 

not only leave off the uſe of Gliſters, but think that Cor- 
dials are to be given, and preſently endeavour to ſtop 
the Belly. 

As to Cordials, I have found by Experience, that the 
too early uſe of them has been very prejudicial, viz. bleed- 
ing having not been firſt uſed, for there is danger, leſt 
the crude Matter ſhould fall upon the Membranes of the 
Brain, or the like, or on the Plyera, and therefore Hal- 
ways take care that Cordials be not given when no blood, 
or but very little has been taken away, and there has 
been no other conſiderable Evacuation, or when the Sick 
has not paſſed the Vigor of his Age; for I cannot fee to 
what Purpoſe the Blood, that is rich enough of it fell, 
ſhould be heightned to the Patient's Ruin; but rich 
enough it is, nor wants its Reſtoratives, as long as conſi- 


derable Evacuations have not weaken'd its innate Heat, 


fuck Patients are well enough furniſh'd with Cordials with- 
in themſelves, and as to thoſe which come from Abroad, 
they are either unneceſſary, or elſe injurious, and there- 
fore I would either reject all, or at leaſt admit only of the 
ſmalleſt; but if the Perſon be weaken'd by large Evacua- 
tions, or be Aged, I uſe to give Cordials even at the begin- 
ning of the Fever, but on the Twelfth Day of the Diſeaſe, 
Things then tending to ſecretion, I think we ought treely 
to uſe hotter Medicines, and indeed a little tooner, if 
there be no danger of driving the febrile Matter upon 
the principal Parts, for at this Time the more I heat, 40 
much the more I haſten Concoction; nor really can | un- 
derſtand what Phylicians would be at, who fo often ir cul- 
cate their Precepts concerning the giving of Remedi: s to 
promote the Concoction ot the {br Matter, which ihe y 

3 Olten 


22 Continual Fever in the Tear 1661, &c. 


often do, being cali'd in at the beginning of the Diſeaſe; 
and yet notwithſtanding, at the ſame Time, order ſuch 
Medicines as qualife the Fever, which is Nature's Inſtru- 
ment, «whereby ſhe ſeparates the Pure from the Impure. 
By this neans wholly imperceptible, ſhe proceeds from the 
beginning to the height of the Diſeaſe, but performs the 
Bulineſs more manifeſtly at its Declination, which may 
be diſcerned hy the Urine. The Concoction of the febrile 
Matter 4enotes no more than the ſeparation of the peccant 
Mutter from the good. Now in the haſtening of it, you 
muſt not buſie your ſelf with I know not what Attempe- 
raters, but the Efferveſcence of the Fever is to be let a- 
tone, ſo long as the ſafety of the Patient will permit; but 
whea it tends to the Declination, Secretion being mani- 
feſt, then we ought to follow it with hotter Medicines, to 
perform the Buſineſs ſooner and ſafer. And this is, indeed, 
to promote the Concoction, whereas Evacuations and 
Coolers cauſe Delays, and obſtru& the Cure, and drive 
away approaching Health, as I have frequently obſerv'd. 
It the Fermentation go on well, the Deſpumation will 


be perform'd about the Fourteenth Day; but if you uſe 


any Coolers too late, and thereby leſſen the Efferveſcence, 
it is no wonder if the Fever continue to the One and Twen- 
tleth Day, and in weak Bodies ill treated much longer. 
Moreover, which is worth taking notice of, it ſome+ 
times happens, that the Patient, by the uſe of Gliſters, 
and other Purges, unſeaſonably order'd about the Decli- 
nation of the Diſeaſe, ſeems a little to be reliev'd, and 
ſom-tim?s is wholly freed from his Fever, but after a Day 
or two you will perceive not ſo much the old Fever has 
recover'd Strength, as that a new one has broke out, viz. 
Shaking and Shivering preſently ſeizes him, and Heat and 
a Fever ſoon follow A cke. to run the ſame Courſe above 
deſcrib'd, unleſs it happen to turn to an Ague; in this 
Cale the Patient muſt be manag'd as af he had no Fever 
before; and the ſame Method is to be repeated; for De- 
ſpumation which muſt follow Ebullition now begun, will 
not be finiſtid in leſs Time than before mention'd, viz. 
Fgurteen Days, how tedious ſoever it may feem to the 
Patient, much weaken'd by the former Diſeaſe, to waiy 
„O long for Realty. e 2 os | ; 
_ The Cordials I order, are ſuch as I will mention by 
and by: Theſe that are moderate, Iuſe at the deganing 
5 , 7 J . „ OL 


i 


* 
4 # 
Va #7 


Continual Fever in the Year 1661, &c. 23 


of the Diſeaſe, when the Heat is extream, proceeding al- 
ways by degrees to the uſe of hotter, according to the 
Progreſs of the Diſeaſe, and the degrees of Ebullition, al- 
ways remembring that it is lawful, if much Blood has 
been taken away, or if the Patient be old, to give ſtron- 
ger Cordials than when Bleeding has not preceded, or 
when the Patient was in the Flower of his Age. Thoſe 
Cordials I call moderate, are made of diſtill'd Water, 
viz. of Borage, Citron, Strawberries, Treacle, Compound 
Scordium-water, mingled with the Syrups of Baulm of Fer- 
nelius, of Gilliflowers, of the Juice of Citron, and the like; 
but the {ſtronger of Gaſcoign's Powder, Bezoar, Confectiou 
of Hyacinth, Venice-Treacle, and the like. The follow- 
ing are frequently uſed, 


Take of the Waters of Borage, Citron, Compound Scor- 
dium, Black-Cherries, each two Ounces, of Cinnamon- 
water with Barley, one Ounce, of Pearls prepar'd, two 
Drams, of Cryſtalline Sugar a ſufficient quantity, 
mingle them, take four Spoonfuls often in a Day, eſpe- 
cially in the Fits. 


Take of the Waters of the whole Citron, aud of Straw- 
berries, each three Ounces, of the Cordial Water of 
Saxony, one Ounce, of Treacle-water, of the Syrup of 
Baulm, of Fernelius of Gilliflomers, and of the Juice 
of Citron, each half an Ounce, mingle them, make a 


Julip, of which take often. 


Take of Gaſcoign's Powder, of the Oriental and Occiden- 
tal Bezoar-ftone, and of Contrayerva, each one Scru- 
ple, one Leaf of Gold; mingle them, and make a ve- 
ry fine Powder ;, take Twelve Grains as oft as there is 
occaſion, in the Syrup of the Juice of Citron and Gilli- 
flowers, each two Drams, drinking upon it a few Spoon- 


fuls of the Fulip preſcrib'd. 


Take of Treacle-water, four Ounces,of the Seeds of Citron, 
two Dams, beat them together, aid make an Emulſiop 7; 
add to the trained Liquor, a ſufficient quantity of 
pearled Sugar, to make it taſte pleaſantly, fake two 
Soonfuls three times a Day. 


C he It 


24 Contiuual Fever in the Tear 1661, &c. 


t is unneceſſary to mention more Forms, for they are 
innumerable, or may be fo, and they are to be varied in 
the courſe of the Diſeaſe, according to the various Seaſons 
and Symptoms. | 

If the Fermentation be neither too high, nor too low, 
J leave it in that State, and uſe no Remedies, unleſs Iam 
obliged to do ſomething by the Impo-tunity of the Sick, 
or his Friends about him, that may pleaſe them without 
hindering my Deſign. 

And now 1 muſt acquaint yon, That when I was call'd 
to a poor Body, who was not able to be at the Charge of 
going through a long Courſe of Phyfick, I did nothing at- 
ter Bleeding and Purging was over, if they were Indica- 
ted, but order them to keep their Beds all the time of 
their Sickneſs, and to drink Oatmeal and Barly Broths, 
and the like, and that they thovid drink moderately ſmall 
Peer warm'd, toquenci their Thirſt, I alſo order'd, that 
they ſhould have a Glitter of Milk and Sugar every Day, 
or every other Day, till the Tenth or Eleventh Day, and 
towards the end of the Fever; Separation being now be- 
gan, if it were how, 1 allowed them now and then ſtron- 
ger Drink to help inſtead of a Cordial, and ſo without 
more ado, except that I uſed to give a gentle Purge at 
the end of the Dileaſe, I cured them. 

But to return to the Buſineſs: If the Method before- 
mention be well obſerv'd, I uſually perceive about the 
Fifteenth Day, both from the ſigus ofa laudable Separation 
ia the Urine, and ali'o from a plain Remiſſion of all the 
Symptoms, that it is fit to give a Purging Portion, to eva- 
cuate the Sediment, put off here and there by the forego- 


ing Fermentation, and unleſs it be done tim-ly, there is 


danger, left it ſhould return into the Maſs cf Blood, and io 
cauſe a Relapſe, or may, by its abode in the natural Parts 
upon which it is thrown, cauſe hereafter a dreadful Mi- 
nera of laſting Ills in the Body, viz. Separation being now 
finiſhned, the groſs and impure Humours ſent from the 
Arteries to the Blood, paſſing back into the Veins, eaſily 
hinder its return, whereby various forts of Obſtructions, 
and at length various Fermentations ariſe. ® . 

But it is to be noted, That Purging is not altogether ſo 
neceſſary after Spring- levers, as after Fevers in the Fall, be- 
cauſe the Sediment put off by Autummals is more, and of 
a more cartiily and malignant Quality; and which is alſo 

1 to 


F 8 — 
ea —_— 
- "AF 6 
— 2 * 


ö 


Continual Fever in the Year 1661, &c. 25 


to be obſerved in the Small-Pox, and in many other Diſ- 
eaſes raging in the Spring, wherein it is not ſo dangerous 
as in the Caſes before-mention'd. 

And, indeed, he will not be miſtaken much who ſhould 
affirm, That more Diſeaſes ariſe hence, viz. from the 
omiſſion of purging after Autumnal Diſeaſes, than from 


any other Cauſe whatever. 


4 my 3 PF. a 
_ . — —— Z 


If the Patient be weak. or if there be not a perfect 
Deſpumation, ſo that we cannot ſafely give a Purge on 
the kifteenth Day, Idefer it to the Seventeenth, and then 
I give the following, or the like, according to che Strength 
of the Patient. TY 


Take of Tamarinds half an Ounce, of Sena two Drams, of 
Rubarb one Dram and half, boil them in 4 ſufficient 
quantity of Fountain-water, to three Ounces of the 
ſtrained Liquor, add of Manna and Syrup of Roſes 
ſolutive, each one Ounce; mingle them and make a 
Potion to be taken in the Morning. 


After Purging, I order the Patient to riſe, who has been 
kept ina Bed nitherto by my Order, and to return by de- 
grees to his uſual Diet; for that which I preſcribed to this 
Time, was in a manner the ſame with that which I have 
mention'd before, as Oated and Barley Broth, and Pana- 
do made of Bread, and the Yolk of an Egg in Water with 
Sugar, thin Chicken Broth, ſmall Beer, and ſometimes 
when the Fever is high, the Juice of Orange newly expreſ- 
{ed, and a little boiled to correct the Crudity mix'd with 
it, and the like, tho' Oatmeal-broth is as good as any; but 
to deny {mall Beer to be taken now and then moderately, 
is a needlels Severity, and very often hurtful. + 

It frequently happens, eſpecially in old Men, That the 
Sick, tho” the Fever be cured, and the Body well Purged, 
is, notwithitanding, very weak, and ſometimes expecto- 
rates by Congh, and ſometimes hawks up a great quantity 
of Clammy Flegm, which does not only terrifie the Pati- 
ent, but alſo impoſes upon the Phyſician, if he be not 
wary, and makes him believe that this will cauſe a Con- 
ſumption; tho' I have obſerv'd, that the Thing is not very 
dangerous. I order the Sick in this caſe, to drink old Ma- 
laga, or Muskadine with a Toſt, which (ſtrengthening the 
Craſis of the Blood, much weaken'd by the 8 

; ever 


26 Continual Fever in the Near 1661, &c. 


Fever, and conſequently unable to aſſimilate the Juices of 
the Meat lately eaten) removes that Symptom in the ſpace 
of a few Days, as I have often ſound. 

By this Method which I have propoſed, the Sick will be 
ſecured from many ill Symptoms, which are uſually attri- 
buted to Malignity ; for nothing is more frequent with un- 
experienc'd Phyſicians, than to blame Malignify, when. 
by cooling Medicines, and the unſea ſonable uſe of Gli- 
ſters, they have ſo looſen'd the Craſis of the Blood, and 
ſo weaken'd Nature in performing the Deſpumation of it, 

that Faintings and other Symptoms (which are really the 
natural Effects of ſuch Hindrances, occaſion'd by Art) 
happen. But if the Diſeaſe, by continuing long, eſcap'd 
this Aſperſion, then whatever afterwards obſtructs the 
Cure, is laid upon the Scurvy, tho' really, neither the 
Symptoms which happen'd, whilſt the Diſeaſe was at its 
height, were the effects of Malignity, nor thoſe which 
come at its Declination of the Scurvy; but both are occaſi- 
on'd by ill Treatment; as I have frequently obſerv'd. Not 
that I, or any one elſe, who has been any whit acquainted 
with the Hiſtory of Diſeaſes, ean be ignorant that there 
are Fevers which do not only conſiſt of an Intemperies or 
putrid Heat, but alſo of a malignant Quality, the plain 
Symptoms whereof cannot but appear in the Sick; or that 
I deny that ſometimes the Scurvy, and many other Dil- 
eaſes, may be complicated with a Fever; only I {ay, That 
theſe Diſeaſes are often undeſervedly cenſured. 

If the Fermentation go on well, there will be a perfect 
Deſpumation of the Morbifick Matter within the Time be- 
fore-mention'd : But if Gliſters or cooling Remedies have 
been uſed too late, the Fever will continue much longer, 
eſnecially in very ald Men, ill treated by the Phy fician. I 
bave been ſometimes call'd to ſuch after they have had a 
Feder Forty Days, or mare, and have try'd all Things to 
promote the Deſpumation of the Blood; but it was ſo 
much weaken'd, partly by old Age, and partly by Gliſters, 
and cooling Medicines, that I could not obtain my End ei- 
tier by Cordials, or any other ſtengthning Medicine, but 
either the Fever continu'd, or if it ſeem'd to ceaſe, the 
Patient's Strength was very low, or in a manner gone. 

But other Remedies being uſed without Succeſs, I have 
heen often forced to take this Courſe, and really with good 
Sacceſs, wiz, I have apply'd the vigorous Heat of young 

| People 


[ 
C 
t 
4 
c 


a 


4 jay 5 3 A ht 


* 


w & (0 eee ww ww 31A 3 


hat 


Continual Fever in the Year 1661, &c. 27 
People to the Patient; nor is there any reaſon why any 


zone ſhould much admire that the Sick is ſo much ſtrength- 
$zen'd and feeble Nature reliev'd thereby, (tho' it be un- 
Muſual) as that it can free it ſelf from the Relicks of the 
Matter to be ejected, ſeeing it is eaſie to conceive a tranſ- 
fuſion of great Quantities of vigorous EHuvia from the 
found and ſtrong Body, to the weak one of the Sick. Nor 
have I ever perceiv'd that the repeated Applications of hot 
Cloaths could do what this has done; for the heat apply'd 
is more agreeable to the human Body, gentle, moiſt, 
equal and laſting ; and tho' this way of tranſmitting Bal- 
'ſamick Spirits into the Body of the Patient, might ſeem 


ridiculous at the Time when J order'd it, yet it hath ſince 
been uſed by others with good Succeſs. Nor, indeed, am 
] aſhamed to mention this Remedy, tho' perhaps ſome 
impertinent Men ſuperciliouſly contemning all Things 
vulgar, may ridicule me for it ; for I reckon the Health 
and good of my Neighbour is much to be prefer'd before 
their vain Opinions. 

He that with due Conſideration has follow'd the Method 
deliver'd, will ſecure his Patient, if not from all, yet at 
leaſt from moſt of thoſe Symptoms, which are either 
wont to accompany the Fever, or to follow it, and which 
makes the Phyſitian doubtful, and at a loſs in the courſe 
of the Cure, and often kills the Patient, tho' the Nature 
of the Diſeaſe does not ſeem deadly. But becanſe ſuch Ac- 
cidents frequently happen, either by reaſon the Sick neg- 
lected to call the Phyſician in time, or upon account of the 
negligence and unskilfulneſs of the Phyſician, I judge it 
proper to treat briefly of their peculiar Cure, but will 
only confine my ſelf to thoſe Symptoms which require a 


different Cure proper to themſelves, when they happen, 
tho' they might often have been prevented, if the Sick 
Had follow'd the aforeſaid Method. | 


If the Sick, either upon the account of taking hot Me- 
dicines unſeaſonably, or by being naturally of too hot a 
Conſtitution, fall into a Phrenſie, or which is next to it, 
if he cannot Sleep, often calls out, or uſes incoherent 
Words, if he looks and talks fierce, if he takes Medicines 
and common Drink greedily, and, as it were, ſnatches it; 
and laſtly, has a ſuppreſtion of Urine : In this caſe, I ay, 
{ bleed more freely than before, and uſe Gliſters and 
Fo0ling Medicines oftner, eſpecially in the Spring. 4 e. 
; F | p N | thoꝰ 


28 Contizual Fever in the Tear 1661, &c. 


tho' this Symptom does not appear in young rope, and 
in thoſe whoſe Blood is vigorous, they admit of theſe Re- 
medics without much danger, and by the uſe of ſuch Re- 
medics 1 endeavour to keep up the Patient till the Diſeaſe 
has laſted a While, and then it is not hard to remove the 
Symptom and the Diſcaſe too. And this may be done by 
ordering fore Narcotick Medicine in a large Doſe; for 
tho' when the F-ver is at the height, thoſe Things that are 
of a Narcotick Quality do no good, nor anſwer the Phyſi- 
cians Intention, vet being given ſeaſonadly at the declina- 
ion of the Diſeaſe, they are very uſeful; but before they 
can do no good, partly decaule they cannot ſtop the courſe 
of Fermentation, tho they are taken in the largeſt Doſe 
and parti”, ich is moſt conſiderable, becauſe the pec- 
cant Matter a that Time equally mixed with the Blood, 
and not yet ten ding to S2paration, is reſtrain'd by ſuch a 
Medicine, and ſo the Deſpumation ſo much to he deſir d is 
Obſtructed: INI this be the reaſon of this Phenome- 
non, or ſome other more abſtruſe, let thoſe judge who de- 
fire and have leiſure to think on ſuch Things. But I affirm, 
That it is moſt certain, from a faithful and dus Collection 
of many Obſervations, taut Laud mum, or any othęr Nar- 
cotick, in the Beginning, Encreaſe, or State of this Fever, 
does no good for vanquiſhing this Symptom, but is often 
injurious; but in the declination oi the Dilcaſe it is uſed 
ſucceſsfully ina moderate Doſe. once order'd a Narco- 
tick on the Twelfth Day of the Diſeaſe to good Purpoſe, 
but'l never knew It ui-d ſooner with any Succeſs ; but it 
it be deferr'd to the Fourteenth Day, it will iucceed bet- 
ter, Separation then being more perfect. Nor, indeed, 
does this dreadful Symptom, tho' it often much terrific 
the By-ſtanders, preſently kill; for I nave frequently ta- 
ken notice, that it could, and was Wont to bear a Truce 
till it was fit to give Narcoticks, if care was caken that 
the Intemperies begun was not heizhten'd too much by 


I 3 1 . : - ! . , 133 8e 22 © 74 * 2 0 A a. 4 1 
Cordials and hot Medicines; for it o, tne Patient dies 


{24denly. The Narcoticks, Which 1 Irequentiy give, are, 


Fa L CE A adidas ba x Gn 1 | 1 
either aDNHEO0;! F.aui ti, [LO0nt ONS (ram [9 One ILAN 


* 1 * 2 i f ih ' 
and a alt; Or Y2C following. 


A py 17 7 ; * 
T ake of Cami fiumers 070 kind} its boi 1615711 in a fu 
cient quantity of Blackoorry-water, dilſolve half d. 


Qu , Diacozium, ad yalf a Spoorjul of the Furs. 


Ci 
— 


r 


i 


Om „ = 


TI 


— · 
— 


P 


Continual Fever in the Terr 1661, &c. 29 


d k of Lemons, in Three Ounces of the Strained Liquor; 
| mingle them, Or, 


Fate of Blackberry-water one Ounce and ahal!f, Hpide- 


* . . N 
ie mMICR-water 1 Drams, Liguid Landanum frxteen 
WY Drops, Syrup of Gilifiowers ont Dram; mingle them. 
or 
e Il will only add this one Thing, which I think fit to be 


li- noted, That if this Symptom will grant a Truce ſo long, 
ait is beſt to purge the Patient before the taking of the Ano- 
ine, for then it will prove more effectual; wherefore ! 
e frequently give two Scruples of the Pill. Coch. maj. diffoly- 
e ed in Bettony mater ten or twelve Hours before the taking 
i of the Narcotick. Nor is there any danger from the Tu- 
d, mult which that hot Pill ſnould otherwiſe cauſe, for the 
La Virtue of the following Narcotick will quell thoſe Com- 
lis motions, and eſtabliſh moſt gentle and ſweet Peace. 
ne- Hut if the Watching remain after the Fever, and other 
de- Symptoms are gone off, I have obſerv'd, That a Rag dip'd 
m,; in Roſe- water, and apply'd cold to the Forchead and Tem- 
on ples, does more good than any Narcotick whatever. 
ar- + It frequently happens, that the Sick is vex'd with a 
% Couch, through the whole courſe of the Diſeaſe, the Maſs 
cel! of Blood being in a Commotion, and raging violently, all 
fel "Things now tending to Sedition, it comes to pals, that the 
co Humours let looſe, and flowing from the Maſs of Blood 
Die, by the Veſſels of the Lnngs, are alſo by an Apertion of 
t it them, caſt upon the inner Membrane of the Wind pans 
>et- to wit, the thinner being of exquiſite Senſe; and hence 
2&2, the Cough ariſes, which is firſt dry, becanſe the Matter 
ine being yet thin, fruſt rates the expulſive Faculty, preſently 
ta- it grows thick, and isdifficultly expectorated, becauſe, by 
-uce degrees it is bak'd by the Fever, fo that the Patient is diſ- 
that tourag'd by the fear of choaking, becauſe he wants Strength 
1 by 1 congh up the clammy Matter. In this Caſe, I ſeldom uſe 
8 Thing but Oyl of Sweet Almonds treſh drawn, unleſs the 
, 44, Sick has wholly an averſion toOyl; and ſometimes it is ſo, 
rv and then we mult uſe the common Pectorals; butT reckon 
Oz! of Almonds, if the Patient can take it, is to be pre- 
fer'd before other Pectorals, for this reaſon chi:Ay, for 
ſal, that it is neceſſary they are given in a larger quantity, it 
F, Vie do any Thing to the Purpoſe; and by this means we 
fa,, QVCrcharge the Stomach, which was too weak before and 
=. | diipoſed 


30 Continual Fever in the Tear 1661, &c: 


diſpoſed to be Nauſeous; and ſometimes alſo we are 
hinder'd upon the fame account, ſo that we cannot attend 
on thoſe Things which are to be diſpatched at the fame 
time, neither can I underſtand nor learn by Experience 
why we ſhould abſtain from the uſe of this Oil (which we 
have now mention'd) in Fevers, to wit, becauſe its in- 
flamable, and therefore to be feared, leſt it ſhould increaſe 
the Fever ; for, ſuppoſe it is naturally hot, yet certainly 
its heat is not ſo great, but that the Advantage of it upon 
another Account may compenſate for it; for it is plainly 
more pectoral than other Things, and opens and {mooths 
the Paſſages, and helps Expectoration, whereby, eſpeci- 
ally if it happens to be large, the Blood is freed from a 
troubleſome Humour, and alfo ſomewhat cooled; and 
therefore I am not much concern'd when at any Time ! 
perceive this Symptom intervenes, for by it the Patient 
15 much reliev'd; only it is to be noted, That it is not 
good to give it at firſt by whole Spoonfuls, leſt it make 
the Stomach nauſeous, and occaſion a Looſeneſs, there- 
fore it muſt be given ſparingly, and frequently Night and 
Day, whereby expectoration being made, the Cozgh is not 
only leflen'd, but alſo, which is of ſome Moment, the Pa- 
tient's Strength worn out, is ſome what renew'd with a 
gentle Nouriſhment. 

Sometimes it happens, that Bleeding at the Noſe ſu- 
pervenes, either becauſe too hot Medicines were uſed at 
the beginning of the Diſeaſe, or that the Ebullition was 
not ſufficiently reſtrained when the Patient was in the 
flower of his Age, or the Seaſon of the Year furthered it. 
If it ſo happens, theſe Things will do little good to ſtop 
it, V/2, Bleeding, Ligatures, aſtringent and agglutinative 
Medicines, or thoſe Things that qualifie the Acrimony of 
the Blood, or the like ; for tho' theſe Things and the like 
may be uſed according to the Diſcretion of the Phyſician, 
yet the mainBuſineſs is to bridle theEbullition of the Blood, 
with ſome fit Medicines that may ſtop the Force of it ruſh- 
ing upon every Precipice. Indeed, it the Symptom be 
conſider'd apart, theſe Things we have mention'd before; 
eſpecially Bleeding, are proper enough, neither would Þ 
doubt to uſe them, but truly they do not ſufficiently an- 
{wer the cauſe of this Symptom, at leaſt if you except 
Bleeding. And really it is as rational to endeavour with 
2 Sword to put out a Fire, as to take off the Symptom of 

the 


* 


Continual Fever in the Tear 1661, &c. 35 
the Things above-mention'd : Therefore having try'd in 


vain other Things in this Caſe, I uſed to preſcribe ſome 


ſuch Thing as follows. 


Take of Purſlain and Erratick Poppy-water,each oneOunce 
and an half, of Diacodium fix Drams, of Syrup of Com- 
lips half an Ounce , mingle them for a Draught. 


I wonld not be ſo underſtood, as if I would preſently 
ſtop every Hemorrhage; for the Patient may be much re- 
liev'd thereby, partly by ſuppreſſiing too great an Ebulli- 
tion, and ſometimes by carrying off the Diſeaſe critically. 
And truly it is to little Purpoſe to uſe the aforeſaid Re- 
medy for this Symptom before it has continu'd ſome Time, 
or before a Vein has been open'd in the Arm: But it is 
to be noted, That this and ah other immoderate Hemor- 
rhages have this peculiar to them, that as ſoon as they are 
ſtop'd, by what means ſoever it be, the Patient is in dan- 
ger of a Relapſe, if ſome gentle Purge be not given, and 
therefore we muſt Purge, tho' with reſpect to the Fever it 
is wont and ought to be put off for a longer Time, unleſs 
this Symptom happens. 

The Hickops moſt commonly happen to old Men after 
large Evacuations by a Looſeneſs, but eſpecially by Vo- 
miting; they are very often the forerunners of Death. I 
confeſs I cannot fatisfie my ſelf as to the cauſe of the Hic- 
tops, yet I have taken notice, that they ariſe from a di- 
ſturbance of the Stomach, and the Neighbouring Parts 
raiſed by rough Medicines, for the quelling and reducing 
whereof to its former Peace when the Strength of Nature 
is not ſufficient, there is great danger; and therefore l 


; Touch it neceſſary to provide for it, that what Nature 


could not do her ſelf, ſhe ſhould do by the aftiſtance of 
Art; and two Drams of Diaſcordium has done the Buſi- 
neſs, when I could do no good with the Seeds of Dill, and 
other Things that are counted Specificks. 

if a Looſeneſs happens in the courſe of this Diſeaſe, 


which, as we have ſaid, uſed to come when a Vomit was 


indicated at the beginning of this Diſeaſe, and yet was not 
7 in this Caſe, I ay, a Vomit may be uſed at any 
T ime of the Diſeaſe, if the Patient be not too weak, tho 
the inclination to Vomiting be long ſince paſt : But becauſe 
L ſuppoſe I have ſpoken enough of this before, I will only 

mention 


32 Continual Fever in the Tear 1661, &c. 


mention what is to be done if a Looſene come, tho' a 
Vomit has been given, which trvly is very rare, unleſs in 
an Inflammatory Fever, wherea Y omit occaſions it, which 
muſt be obſerv'd; therefore in this Caſe the following 
Gliſter is more beneficial than any other Aſtringent what- 
CTVC!, 


Take of the Bark of Pomegranats half an Ounce, of Red 
Roſes two pugils, boil them in a ſufficient Quantity of 
Cows Milk, diſſolve half an Ounce of Diaſcordium in 
half a Pint of the trained Liquor; mingle them, and 
make Gliſter. | 


It is not convenient that the quantity of the Gliſter 
ſhould be greater, tor tho' it may be naturally aſtringent, 
et there is danger, leaſt it thonld weary the Guts by its 
Bulk, and ſo provoke the Flux, which we endeavour to 


ſtop. 


But here ſome may object, that it ſeems more proper 
eſpecially at the declination of the D:ſcaſe, that the Looſe- 
neſs, it it happens, ſhould rather be let alone than ſtop'd, 
becauſe it is ſometimes critical,and carries off the Diſeaſe - 
I anſwer, that ſometimes indeed the Fever is carried off 
this way, but this ſo ſeldoin haypens, that we may not de- 
pend upon it: And that account {wherein having ſpoken 
generally of the Cure of all Fevers, we endeavour'd to 
proze the neccility of ſtopping this Flux) is alſo here 
much to the Purpoſe; and now this is to be added, and 
{ think is worth noting, i, that for a genuine depu- 
ration of the Blood, it is not only neceſſary that there be 
a ſecretion of ſome Parts by the Feces, but it is requiſite 
alto, taztothers like Flowers ve ſeparated, which is daily 
ſeen in other rich and heterogeneous Liquors z wherefore 
if we too much indulg= the Looſeneis, th depuration ſo 
wuch deſired would be only imperfect, and perchance 
that which ſhould be cait ont laſt would be ſecreted firſt. 
Indezd, I conicis, that ſeparation by Flowers being made, 
(which by the by is performed gradually and inſenſibly, 
apd more frequently by large P-rſpiration than by mani- 
feſt Sweat) the Looſeneſs, it it ſhould chance to happen, 
would not be very dangerous; bat it is to be noted, that 
then it only happens, becauſe Parging to carry ol the 

: eces 


Continual Fever in the Tear 1661, &c. 3 ; 


a Feces was not ſeaſonably order'd, which by their continu” 

n ance, growing Malignant, provoke the Inteſt ines to Ex- 

h 'eretion, to ſay nothing of the liquid conſiſtende of the 

Z Fxcrements (for ſo they are moſt commonly) which {hi- 

(= ficiently indicates, that it is not to be counted a critical 
Solution of the Diſeaſe. 

| ſuppoſe the 1l;ack Paſſion may be reckon'd among the 


Cl Symptoms of Fevers, becauſe violent Vomitings, which 
7 are wont to appear at the beginning of Fevers, ſometimes 
72 occaſion it. Ws 
a This dreadful Diſeaſe, which has been hitherto account- 


ed mortal by almoſt all, ariſes from the inverted and pre- 
poſterous Motion of the Guts, the Fibres of them, which 


r ought to be contracted from the ſuperior towards the in- 
t, ſerior, are drawn to the ſuperior; fo that whatever is 
ts contained in the Guts is vomited up, and Gliſters, how 
0 ſharp ſoever, become Vomitive : Purges alſo by the 


Mouth are caſt up by Vomit; and I ſuppoſe the exquitite 
and intolerable Pain coming upon this Diſeaſe is only oc- 


r caſion'd by the aforeſaid prepoſterous Motion of the Guts; 
e- for whereas thoſe Folds which the many Circamvolutions 
d, of the Guts make, ate fo formed by Nature, that they 
ec ſhould moſt fitly conduce to the carrying down of the Fe- 
ff ces; when they, I ſay, are forced to give way to à moti- 
le- on contrary to their Fibres, the aforeſaid Pain is occaſion'd 
en trom thence, which is fixed to the Part; and this is like 
to the boaring of an Auger, when either the Valve, which 
re 15 placed at the beginning of the Colon, hinders the going 
nd back of the Excrements to the Jium, or any other Mem- 
u- brane belonging to the Sinus, ſuſtains alone the force of 
be this prepoſterous Impulſe; 5 
ite We may aſlign a twofold cauſe of this Inverſion from 
ly  Vihence the Pain ariſes, v:z. Obſtruction and Irritation. 
re _ Firſt, therefore, whatever violently obſtructs the inte- 
o ſtines, ſo that nothing can paſs downwards, neceſſarily oc- 
ce caſions this contrary Motion in them; among theſe, Au- 
ſt. thors are wont to reckon the Excrements hardened, grols 
le, Wind collected in a great quantity, and ty ing upon as it 
7 were the Guts; the conſtriction of them in a Rupture ; and 
i- laſtly, an Inflammation; and other great Tumors, which 
en, ſtop up the internal Cavity of the Guts. In the mean time. 
at Nhe muſt not deny; that this contrary Motion arifing ſroſſi 
he | titeſe Ctiifes is rafker to be accounted the Motion of the 


es D Things 


_ — - 
- 


— — 


4 
— © ST 
— — — 
- — 
- — 2 * 


10 
* 
) 
Wu - 
, 
AZ 
1 * 
14 
* 
U 
2: 
- 
, 
= 7 
» 
N 
Bt 
1 
1 


32 Continual Fever in the Year 166 I, Kc. 


mention what is to be done if a Looſeneſs come, tho' a 
Vomit has been given, which truly is very rare, unleſs in 
an Inflammatory Fever, Where a Vomit occaſions it, which 
muſt be obſerv'd; therefore in this Caſe the following 
Gliſter is more beneficial than any other Aſtringent what- 
ever. 


Take of the Bark of Pomegranats half an Ounce, of Red 
Roſes two pugils, boil them in a ſufficient Quantity of 
Cows Milk, diſſolve half an Ounce of Diaſcordium in 
half a Pint of the ſtrained Liquor; mingle them, and 
make Gliſter. 


It is not convenient that the quantity of the Gliſter 
ſhould be greater, for tho' it may be naturally aſtringent, 
et there is danger, leaſt it ſnould weary the Guts by its 
Bulk, and ſo provoke the Flux, which we endeavour to 
ſtop. 


But here ſome may object, that it ſeems more proper 
eſpecially at the declination of the Diſeaſe, that the Looſe- 
neſs, if it happens, ſhould rather be let alone than ſtop'd, 
becauſe it is ſometimes critical, and carries off the Diſeaſe : 
I anſwer, that ſometimes indeed the Fever is carried off 
this way, but this ſo ſeldom happens, that we may not de- 
pend upon it: And that account (wherein having ſpoken 
generally of the Cure of all Fevers, we endeavour'd to 
prove the neceſſity of ſtopping this Flux) is alſo here 
much to the Purpoſe; and now this is to be added, and 
I think is worth noting, iz. that for a genuine depu- 
ration of the Blood, it is not only neceſſary that there be 
a ſecretion of ſome Parts by the Feces, but it is requiſite 
alſo, that others like Flowers be ſeparated, which is daily 
ſeen in other rich and heterogeneous Liquors ; wherefore 
if we too much indulge the Looſeneis, the depuration ſo 
much deſired would be only imperfect, and perchance 
that which ſhould be caſt out laſt would be ſecreted firſt. 
Indeed, I contels, that ſeparation by Flowers being made, 
(which by the by is performed gradually and inſenſibly, 

d more frequently by large Perſpiration than by mani- 

eſt Sweat) the Looſeneſs, if it ſhould chance to happen, 

would not be very dangerous; bat it is to be noted, that 
then it only happens, becauſe Purging to carry * the 
: eces 


a. © 
e 


Continual Fever in the Tear 1661, Ne 2 3 
Feces was not ſeaſonably order'd, which by their continu” 


ance, growing Malignant, provoke the Inteſtines to Ex- 
5 cretion, to ſay nothing of the liquid conſiſtence of the 


' Excrements (for ſo they are moſt commonly) which ſuſ- 


ficiently indicates, that it is not to be counted a critical 
Solution of the Diſeaſe. _ 

| ſuppoſe the /liack Paſſion may be reckon'd among the 
Symptoms of Fevers, becauſe violent Vomitings, which 
are wont to appear at the beginning of Fevers, ſometimes 
occaſion it. Pw 

This dreadful Diſeaſe, which has been hitherto actount- 
ed mortal by almoſt all, ariſes from the inverted and pre- 
poſterous Motion of the Guts, the Fibres of them, which 
onght to be contracted from the ſuperior towards the in- 
ferior, are drawn to the ſuperior; ſo that whatever is 
contained in the Guts is vomited up, and Glifters; how 
ſharp ſoever, become Vomitive: Parges alſo by the 


Mouth are caſt up by Vomit; and I ſuppoſe the exquiſite 


and intolerable Pain coming upon this Diſeaſe is only oc- 


| calion'd by the aforeſaid prepoſterous Motion of the Guts; 
for whereas thoſe Folds which the many Circimvolutions 


of the Guts make, ate fo formed by Nature, that they 


ſhould moſt fitly conduce to the carrying down of the Fe- 
ces; when they; I fay, are forced to give way to a moti- 
on contrary to their Fibres, the aforeſaid Pain is occafion'd 


from thence, which is fixed to the Part; and this is like 
the boaring of an Auger, when either the Valve, which 
s placed at the beginning of the Colon, hinders the going 
back of the Excrements to the ium, or any other Mem- 
= brane belonging to the Sinus, ſuſtains alone the force of 


5 1 Impulſe. 
We 


may aſſign a twofold cauſe of this Inverſion from 
vihence the Pain ariſes, viz. Obſtruction and Irritation. 
Firſt, therefore, whatever violently obſtructs the inte- 


ſtines, ſo that nothing can paſs downwards, neceſſarily oc- 
caſions this contrary Motion in them; among theſe; Au- 
thors are wont to reckon the Excrements hardened, grols 


Wind collected in a great quantity, and tying upon as it 
were the Guts; the conſtriction of them in a Rupture; and 
laſtly; an Inflammation; and other great Tumors, which 
ſtop up the internal Cavity of the Guts. In the mean time 


nulſt not deny; that this contrary Motion ariſing frotft3.-- - 


ve 
tiefe Ctiifes; if tither to be accounted the Motion ofthe”: .! 
| D Things 


- << OS + >} % * — 


34 Continual Fever in the Tear 1661, &c. 


Things taken in, than of the Inteſtines: Nor is this an In- 
verſion of the whole duct of the Inteſtines, but only of 
thoſe which are ſituated above the Seat of that Obſtruction; 
wherefore I call an Liacꝶ "7 proceeding from hence, 
ſpurious. Secondly, I ſuppole, that in the Hiacł Paſſion 
the cauſe of the Inverſion of the periſtaltick Motion of the 
Inteſtines, is moſt commonly after this manner, viz. ſharp 
and malignant Humours are caſt upon the Stomach and 
Guts that are next to it, by the Blood raging by reaſon of 
the Fever begun of late, whereby the motion of the Sto- 
mach is firſt inverted, and forced violently to caſt up what 
is contained in it; at length the ſmall Guts that are join'd 
to the Stomach being weaken'd, yield to tne violent Mo- 
tion of it, and with them at laſt the greater follow by 
conſent, the Stomach vomiting, leading as it were the 
Dance; this I call the true Liacꝶł Paſſion, and which is 
treated of now; the Method of curing it has been hither- 
to in a manner unknown, whatever ſome boaſt of the uſe 
of Quickſilver and Bullets, which are very often injurious, 
and ſeldom do much good. I have uſed ſucceſsfully the 
following Method. L 

When it appears by Gliſters vomited up, and other 
Signs, that it is a true lack Paſſion, I endeavour three 
Things; firſt, that the contrary Motion of the Stomach, 
which occaſions the ſame Motion of the Guts, may be 


. hindered : Secondly, That the Inteſtines, being weaken'd 


by the ſharp Humour, may be ſtrengthen'd: Thirdly, 
That the Stomach and Guts be free from thoſe Humours. 
And that I may anſwer theſe Indications, I order the Cure 
after the following manner: Firſt, I preſcribe one Scru- 
ple of Salt of Wormmood in x Spoonful of Juice of Lemons, 
to be taken Morning and Evening; but at other Times of 
the Day I order ſome Spoonfuls of Mint- water, without Su- 
gar, or any Thing elſe, to be taken twice in an Hour, by 
the repeated Uſe whereof alone the Vomiting and the Pain 
proceeding thence will ſoon vaniſh. At the ſame Time I 
order a live Kitling to lie always upon the naked Belly; but 
after the Pain and e has wholly ceaſed for the 
Space of two or three Days, I give one Dram ok the Pill 

och. maj, diſſolv'd in Mint- mater, which I alſo order to be 
uſed very often all the time of the working of the Pills, that 
I may the more certainly hinder the return of the Yomit- 


ung; 


Gl Keef is the Tear 1681, Kc. 35 


ting: Nor is the Kitling to be removed before the Pa- 


tient has zaken the Pills. a | 

I have» taken notice, that it is to no purpoſe to give 
theſe Pills, or any other Purge how ſtrong ſoever, until 
the Stomach is corroborated and reduced to its natural 


Motion, and the Guts to theirs; for otherwiſe all Purges 


taken inwardly will prove a Vomit, and ſo do more hurt 
than good; and therefore I do not uſe purging Medicines, 


until for ſome time I have uſed thoſe Medicines which 


5 reſpe& the Stomach. 


preſcribe a very. thin Diet, for I allow only ſome 


5 Spoonfuls of Chicken-broth to be taken twice or thrice a 


Day; in the mean while I order the Patient to keep his 
Bed all the time of the Sickneſs, till the ſigns of perfect 


; Health appear; and when he is well, Lappoint him to 


perſiſt in the uſe of the aforeſaid Water for a long Time, 


and to keep his Belly warm with Flannels doubled, that 
there may not be a Relapſe, to which this Diſeaſe is more 
bbnoxious than any other. 


My whole Method of curing this Diſeaſe conſiſts of 


4 theſe few Things, which 1 truſt will not be deſpiſed by any 


 ® judicious Perſon, by reaſon of its Simplicity and want of 


* 93 


eiern err be Y 


2 Rhetorick, and pomp of Mediciues. And theſe are the 
Symptoms that are wont to happen in this Fever : There 


not require a peculiar way of Cure; for the Fever bein 
well treated, they go off of themſelves. . And 40 muc 


7 
9 
Pg 
1 * 
% * 


are ſome others which I will not now mention, partly, be- 
cauſe they are of leſs Moment, and partly becauſe they do 


for the Continual Fever of this Conſtitution, and of its 
Symptoms. e 7 


” 
—_ * — 1 "OO 1 1 < 2 — 


tt wy — 


f the AGUES of the Tear 1661, 62, 


635, 64; 


1 * 37 5 | | LOVES + 7 oF * op of. hp 15 F 48 * &* A "AY ; ; ＋ 
ns Foraſnuck as we ſaid before, the Conſtitution of all 


the: forementioned-Years did ſo much favour the pro- 


y encingf Agiies; I wilt here impart thoſe Obſervations * 


36 Of the Agues in the Tear 1661, &c. 


I then carefully collected: I will add moreover thoſe 
Things which I obſerved of ſome few Intermittents, which 
from that Time happen'd ſporadically, that I may not in- 
terrupt the Hiſtory of the following Years. | 
And Firſt, That we may at leaſt make ſome Conjecture 
about the Nature and Genius of Agzes, it is to be obſerv'd, 
that theſe three Seaſons are to be conſider'd in the Fits; 
Firſt, The Time of ſhaking: Secondly, Of Ebullition ; 
Thirdly,OfDeſpumation. To ſpeak briefly of theſe Things, 
I ſuppoſe it proceeds hence, v:z. becauſe the febrile Mat- 
ter, not as yet turgent, was in ſome ſort aſſimilated by the 
Maſs of Blood; and being at length not only uſeleſs, but 
become an Enemy to Nature, does in a manner exagitate 
and provoke it; whence it comes to paſs, that being ſtir- 
red up by a certain natural Senſe, and as it were endea- 
vouring to eſcape, it cauſes a Shivering and Shaking in the 
Body, a true Witneſs of its Averſion, juſt as purging Poti- 
ons taken by ſqueamiſn Perſons, or Poiſons caſually taken, 
uſe preſently to cauſe a Shivering, and other Symptoms of 
that kind. Nature therefore being irritated in this man- 
ner (that I may now come to the time of Ebullition, that 
ſhe may the more eaſily keep this Enemy from her Throat) 
falls upon Fermentation, the uſual Engine which it is 
accuſtomed to make uſe of in Fevers, and ſome other a- 
cute Diſeaſes, when it endeavours to free the Blood from 
inteſtine Enemies; for the disjoined Parts of the peccant 
Matter, which were equally mixed with the Blood, do, 
by the help of this Efferveſcence, begin in ſome ſort to be 
gathered together, and ſo may the more eaſily be wrought 
upon, ſo as to be made fit for Deſpumation : And it ſeems 
very probable that it may be ſo, for they which die of 
Agues, if they die in the Fit, go off at firſt with a Shak- 
ing, or if they reach the hot Fit, they eſcape, atleaſt for 
that Time, and the Patient is worſt at the Time of Shak- 
ing, which being paſt, Deſpumation follows, and then all 
the Symptoms abate, and at length quite ceaſe. By the 
Word Deſpumation, I mean nothing elſe than the expul- 
ſion or ſeparation of the febrile Matter, now brought un- 
der, and, as it were, conquer'd, and what is ſeparated is 
of the Nature of Yeaſt and Lees; as we may obſerve in 
other Liquors. Ne EY 144% 
— Theſe Things being premiſed, let us conſider how it 
happens that the Fit returns, ſeeing the Patient at pre- 
| : at 


_ Y 
* 4 
* 2 LE » 
is lt 
. * — 2 — - 
| * * . | — 
* __ — — . = 
0 js "IS =. 4 - l 
” pe 2m : % » -* 


n wi ww  Y9v.ye4 


f " * = 
- l hg » 2 * — 
n — WK 
r * 1 
2. N * — e * LOT 


we — Boicoon 4a — 


%S ans 


0 NR 
. 
8 . 

ry 
N 


10 þ Of the Apues of the Tear 1661, &c. 37 


ſent ſeems to be well. Indeed the febrile Matter is not 
4 yet wholly gone, but as young Bees grow up leiſurely 
dt ſet Times, ſo this latent Matter, according to the Na- 
ture of the Fits, _ again, and cauſes new Trouble, 
; ourſe a 


running the ſame s before. But if any one ſhould 
ask the reaſon why the hidden Fomes being not throughly 
* ſubdued by the preceding Efferveſcence, and therefore not 
expell'd with the reſt of the peccant Matter, and ſo a- 
bout to cauſe new Troubles ſhould not proceed alike in 
all Agnes, (for ſometimes it requires One Day, ſometimes - 
Three, before it comes to maturity and makes a new Fit. 
I ay, if any one ſhould enquire about this Matter, 
would plainly confeſs, I knew not, nor has any other that 
I I know ſufficiently explicated this hidden Work of Nature. 
I do not covet the Name of a Philoſopher ;, and I admoniſh 
thoſe that reckon they have merited that Title, and per- 
haps blame me, becauſe I have not endeavour'd to dive 
into theſe Secrets of Nature, to try their Faculties in o- 
ther Works of Nature, which are every where tobe ſeen, 
before they cenſure others; for I would fain know why 
a Horſe comes to his growth in Seven Years, and a Man 
at Twenty One; why ſome Plants flower in May, and 
ſome in June, to ſay nothing of other Things. And if 
the moſt learned Men are not aſhamed to confeſs openly 
their Ignorance of theſe Things, I cannot ſee why I ſhould 
be blamed, if I forbear reaſoning about a Thing as diffi- 
cult to the full, and perhaps wholly inexplicable; and 
yetI am perſuaded, that the progreſs of Nature is as cer- 
ra and regular in this Caſe as in any other, and that the 
atter of a Ozartax and Tertian Ague is ſubject to Na- 
ture's Laws, and govern'd by them, as well as any other 
Bodies whatever. | 
All Agues begin with Shivering and Shaking, and are 
preſently ſucceeded by Heat, and then Sweat; the Sick 
moſt commonly Vomits both in the cold and hot Fit, is ve- 
lick, dry and thirſty, and his Tongue is very dry, and 
e like; all which Symptoms retreat by degrees, as the 
Sweat comes on; and when it is very plentiful, the Fit 
ſeems to beatan end, and he that was juſt now ſick ſeems 
to be very well, till the Fit returns at its wonted Time, 
vic. a Quotidian once every natural Day, a Tertian every 
other Bay, "a every third Day, reckoning from the 
beginning of one Fit to th . 2s of the next, tho' of- 
; 0 3 1 


r 


1 Þ a we 
2 . — 3 
r 


38 Of the Agues of the Tear 1661, &c. 


ten the two laſt are doubled; ſo that a Tertian invades 
daily, the Ouartan two whole Days, the third being free 
from a Fit; and ſometimes allo it comes for three Days 
together, when it is a tripple Quartan, the Ague taking 
its Name from the Shape it.firſt aſſumed, which doubling 
of the Fits ſometimes proceeds from the exceſs and too 
great activity of the febrile Matter, in which caſe the 
adventitious Fit comes before the firſt, ſometimes alſo 
from the loſs of Strength, the Patient being much wea- 
ken'd, and the vigour of the Fit broken, either by cooling 
too much, or by evacuation above meaſure. In this Caſe 
the adventitious Fit follows the firſt, and does not laſt ſo 
long: In the former inſtance the Turgeſcency or Fury of 
the Matter does not wait for the return of the Period due 
to it, and performs its Deſpumation ſomewhat ſooner :. In 
the latter the Blood being not vigorous enough tÞ put off 
the febrile Matter at once, preſently ſubſtitutes another 
afreſh, whereby it may expel the Relicks of it: And per- 
haps from theſe two oppoſite Cauſes depend as well the 
anticipation of the Fits, as the flow acceſs of them in an 


ordinary and regular Ague , both whereof frequently 


happen in theſe Fevers, which, as has been ſaid, continue 


a Night and a Day, either coming before the uſual Time 


of the Fit, or after it. 
| Of AGUES; 


Some belong to the Spring, and ſome to the Fall; for 
tho' ſome come betwixt thoſe two Seaſons, yet becauſe 
they are not ſo frequent, they may be reduced to either of 
the two former, viz. to that which is neareſt : Therefore! 
ſhall comprehend them under theſe two Kinds the Seaſons 
whereunto they are for the moſt part to be referred par- 
ticularly, are the Months of January and Auguſt, tho' ſome- 
times they come ſooner, according to the greater or leſſer 
Diſpoſition of the Air to produce them, and conſequently 
they are more or leſs Epidemical, of which we have a clear 
Inſtance in the Agnes of the Year 1661, had which Time I 
remember a Woman, my Neighbour, at the firſt Fit of a 

uartan on St. John's Day, and many others were ſeized 
very early with Agues about that Time, which were after- 
wards very Epidemical; and this ſhews, that there was 
then a great Diſpoſition of the Air to thoſe Diſeaſes; and 
For libs OS Oy fu WT AIAN more: 


Of the Agnes of the Year 1661, &c. 29 


+ moreover, as the Year increaſed they grew more nu- 
merous. 


And this diſtinction of Agnes is ſo neceſſary, that unleſs 


we obſerve it well, we can neither make our Prognoſtich 


a-right, how long they will laſt, nor keep onr Patient's 
Body to a due Regimen, with reſpect to the different Na- 


- ture both of Seaſons and Agues, I confeſs, the Agues of 
each Seaſon are naturally not altogether unlike, whether 


ou conſider the manner of their coming, which firſt 
gins with Shivering, then Heat follows, and at length 
Sweat; or the difference of their Types, in reſpect where- 
of ſome are Tertians both Spring and Fall; yet I do not que- 
ſtion but they are very different in their Nature or Eſ- 
ſence. And to ſpeak firſt of Vernal Agues: They are al- 


moſt all either Quotidians or Tertians, and they come either 


— 


ſooner or later, according to the various Diſpoſitiop of the 
Seaſon; for in the Winter- time the Spirits are co@entra- 
ted, and in their Receſs gather Strength, which being now 
brisk, the Heat of the approaching Sun draws out, and 
being mix'd with the viſcid Humours, (yet they are not ſo 
viſcid as thoſe in the Fall, the Heat foregoing has torre- 
fied) which Nature during Winter had heaped up in the 
Maſs of Blood, while they endeavour to fly away, are as 
it were entangled, and ſo cauſe the Vernal Ebullition, as 
Veſſels full of Beer kept long in a cold Celler, if they 
are ſet near the Fire, preſently begin to work, and the Li- 
quor is apt to fly. The Blood being in this manner affe- 
Qed, ＋ ours the purging it ſelf, and by the help of 
Volatile Spirits, does the Buſineſs ſoon enongh, unleſs it 
chance to be too full of viſcid Juices, which obſtru the 


Fermentation begun; and tho' this happens, yet the Ver- 
nal Efferveſcence is ſeldom continnal and conſtant, but is 
3 uſually divided into ſeveral Fits; for the Blood being now 


turgid with rich Spirits, Nature falls to her Work in haſte, 


and makes Secretion of ſome Parts by particular Fits, in 


the manner of perfect Solution, before ſhe per forms uni- 


* verſal Separation: And this is probably the Reaſon why 


in Spring: time (eſpecially that Part of it which is neareſt 
Summer) we meet with few Continual Fevers, unleſs the 
Conſtitution chance to be Epidemick, for the Fermentati- 
ons that then riſe, are either quickly laid, or haſten to an 
Intermiſſion; or laſtly, part of the Humours being more 
inclin'd to ſeparation, are haſtily, and with ſome violence 

D 4 tranſ- 


go Of the Apues in the Tear 1661, &e. 


tranſlated to another Place, whereby Quinſies, Peripen- 
menies, Pleuriſies, and the like, preſently ariſe, ſhewing 
their Heads, eſpecially at the latter end of the Spring. 

I have obſerv'd, that Spreag- Agues are ſeldom laſting, 
and always beneficial, ſo that the oldeſt Man, or any weak 
Perſon, can ſcarce be deſtroy'd even by the over-offici- 
ouſneſs and deſtructive Nicety of the moſt ignorant, yet I 
have ſeen Spring Tertians protracted to the Time wherein 
Autumnal Agues uſed to come by Bleeding and Purging 
unſeaſonably uſed, together with a Regimen diſagreeable 
to the Diſeaſe; but that Seaſon being very contrary to the 
Nature of it, preſentiy extinguiſh'd it, but the Patient is 
the mean while almoſt ruin'd by the frequent doubling of 
the Fits, and the long continuance of them; ſo that he 
ſeems to be in much danger, yet ſo far as I have obſerv'd 
he has always recover'd: Nor could I perceive thoſe ill 
Sy mpþns in ſuch as recover of this Diſeaſe, as follow long 
Autumnal Agues, as ſhall be faid by and by, I mean a 
deadly Inflammation of the Almonds of the Ears, an 
hard Belly, a Dropfie, and the like. But I have more 
than once obſerved, that when the Sick has been extream- 
ly weaken'd by the length of the Diſeaſe, and doubling of 
the Fits, together with miſchievous Evacuations repeated, 
he has been ſeiz'd with a Mania when he firſt began to 
xecover, but it went off by degrees as Strength return'd. 

But Autumnal Agues are much different : For, Firſt, 
a Tertian, tho' ſometimes it goes of ſoon, and is not ac- 
companied with more Symptoms than Fernal Tertians are 
wont to be when it is not Epidemical, and ſeizes ſound 
People; yet when it is Epidemical, add falls on thoſe that 
are in Years, and of an ill habit of Body, it is dangerous, 
and laſts two or three Months, and ſometimes till the be- 
ginning of next Spring, But Quartans are more dange- 
rous and obſtinate than thoſe we treated laſt of; for when 
they ſeize old People they ſometimes kill them; after they 
have had a few Fits, and when it was fo, they die moſt 
commonly in the cold Fit, as was faid before, but if the 
Patient be not very Ancient, there is not ſuch danger of 
his being diſpatch'd at firſt, yet he will ſcarce recover 
till the next Year, and that Time approaches wherein he 
was firſt ſeiz d; and ſometimes alſo they leave behind 
them ſomething that kills the Patient. A Ouartan ſome- 
times varies the Type and alſo occaſions many Symptoms, 


| 0 
3 5 


RI 
a 
: =— N 


het 


4 \ , \ 
* 
* be. 
A 


1 
4 


Of the Agues of the Tear 1661, &c. 41 


or Example; the Scurvy, an hard Pely, a Dropfie, and 
e like: But young People are able to bear this Diſeaſe; 
et moſt commonly it continues till March, and ſome- 
Times till the next Fall, when they have been Blooded and 
Purged. I have ſeen Infants hold out to admiration for 
Six Months, and they have alſo recovered, 
'7 It is here to be obſerved, that of what Age and Tempe- 
-rament ſoever he be that is ſeized with a Ouartan, it will 
not laſt long os him, if ever he had it before, tho' it 
were long ago, but after a few Fits will go off it ſelf. And 
this is worth taking notice of. | | 
As to the cure of Spring Agues, I ever thought they 
*were to be left to themſelves, without doing any Thing, 
" becauſe I never knew any one deſtroy'd by them; and on 
the contrary, that thoſe that endeavour'd to cure them, 
made them only more obſtinate and laſting: But if the 
Sick earneſtly defire a Phyſician's Help, they may be ſuc- 
4 ceſsfully treated by various Methods, as I have frequently 
3 obſeryed. 
A Vomit given ſo as that it might have done working 
before the Fit, has ſueceeded well, eſpecially if a mode- 
rate Doſe of Diacodium, or any other Anodyne, has 
been given after it has done working, juſt before the fit 
comes. 
* Sometimes Dzaphoeticks perform the Cure by promot- 
ing the Sweat coming at the end of the Fit, the Patient 
being well covered with Clothes, which mutt be continu'd 
zs long as he can bear it, and this does the Buſineſs often 
in Spring Agues, eſpecially in Quotidians, for the Humour 
being not very thick at this Tinre, the Diſeaſe is carried 
quite off, which otherwiſe would return again: But this 
never happens in Autumn. I have ſometimes cur'd Ter- 
tian Agnes by Gliſters given three or four Days of the 
well Days. | 
But if by Bleeding, (to which the Seaſon of the Year 
oon inclines the unwary) or by reaſon of the foregoing 
. 7 Weakneſsof the Patient, the Spirits that ſhould preſently 
© endeavour Deſpumation are ſo much weaken'd, that they 
cannot well perform it, it may happen that theſe $ ing 
Asues may continue as long as Aut iunnals, notwithſtand- 
ing all that can be done, tho' they are not wont to laſt ſo 
long; for either they go off of their own accord, or are 
ion cured by gentle Remedies. But Aguet in the Fall are 
= Te not 


63 7 
+ 


Fw 


<Q (Mou » 


me 


C ˙ f 


. 


* — 0 


42 Of the Agues in the Year 1661, &c. 


not ſo ſoon removed; and therefore I ſhall ſay ſomething 


of theſe. If the Autumnal Conſtitution be Epidemick, 
they are wont to come about June; if not, they do not 
invade till Auguſt or the beginning of September; but 
they ſeldom happen in the Months next following. 

You may obſerve, that a great many of them come to- 
gether; they come moſt commonly in the ſame Day, and 
at the {ame Hour of the Day, the Fits coming ſometimes 
ſooner, ſometimes later, in the ſame Way and Manner, 


unleſs it happen that the Order be PERO or changed 


by Remedies that have a Faculty of 
them in ſome Bodies. 

It is to be obſerv'd, that it is a hard matter at the be- 
ginning of Agnes, (eſpecially of thoſe that are Epidemical 
in the Autumn) to diſtinguiſh them at the firſt Invaſion, 


aſtening or retarding 


for they are at firſt accompanied with a Continual Fever 


Nor is it eaſie for ſome Time afterwards, unleſs you take 
great notice, to perceive any Thing more than a Remil- 
ſion, but by degrees they perfectly intermit, and exactly 
agree with the Seaſon of the Year: | 

They are either Tertians or Quartans, and it may be 
well {aid of 82 that they are the genuine Product 
of the Fall, Theſe Agues are ſo allied to one another, 
that they frequently change from one to the other. But 
Spring-Tertians never aſſume the Shape of Quartans, for 
they differ as much as can be poſſibly imagin'd : More- 


over, | never obſerveda Quotidian in this Seaſon, unleſs 


any one Will have a double Tertian, or a triple Quartan, 
ſo called. | 

Theſe Agues, I ſappoſe, ariſe moſt commonly in the 
manner we ſhall now briefly mention; according to the 
Progreſs of the Year the Blood is proportionably exalted 
(as Vegetables by their Growth 1 Decay ſhew the courſe 
of the Year) till it comes to its height, and then again 
keeping pace with the declining Seaſon of the Vear, it de- 
clines alſo, and more eſpecially when puſh'd down by ſome 
accidental Cauſe, as by immoderate loſs of Blood, by ta- 
king Cold, by crude and excrementitious Meats, by the 
unſecaſonable uſe of Baths, and the like. And when the 
Blood is in this ebbing State, it ſoon receives every mor- 
bifick Impreſſion that any conſtitution of the Air will make 


upon it, which is Epidemical at this Time for Agues; and 
tne Ebullition preſently begun tends hither, which ſei- 
ee y ing 8 


o 


. r p 
- Do ah 418 1 0 , "I . 8 — 
„ pt foi, 4 tout —. — — 


no wonder if they laſt long, becauſe the Order of Nature 


Of the Agues of the Year 1661, &c. 43 


the Blood ſometimes very degenerate, the Fever ariſ— 
from thence, is wont to be untoward, and full of 
alignant and dreadful 1 agen But, however it hap- 
pens, the Blood having loſt a great part of its Spirits, 
and being much torrified by the foregoing Summer, per- 
forms the Ebullition ſlowly, and requires a very long 
riod for its Deſpumation. 

Now, that it may plainly appear how difficult it is to. 
ure theſe Agues, I mean Autumnal, we muſt conſider, 
that the difference betwixt them and the Continual Fever 
h this Seaſon, conſiſts eſpecially in this, viz. Continual 
evers conſtantly carry on the Efferveſcence in one and 
the ſame Order, when it is once begun, and Agues per- 
form the ſame at ſeveral Times; but Fermentation is fi- 
niſu'd in both by Nature's guidance, in 336 Hours, or 
thereabouts; for the Maſs of Blood in an human Body is 
not commonly purged ſooner or later than ſo, if the 
Buſineſs be left to Nature; as Sider, Wine and Beer, have 


each of them their peculiar Period, wherein they are de- 


purated : And tho' in Agues the Blood ſometimes, as it 
3 in a Qwartan, endeavours its deſpumation in the 
ſpace of Six Months, and at length finiſhes it; yet if you 


2 abs right, there is not more Time ſpent in perform- 


Ing it, than what naturally is wont to be ſpent in Conti- 
pual Fevers; for Fourteen Times Twenty Four Hours, or 
Fourteen natural Days make 336 Hours, and allowing 
five Hours and a halt tor every Fit of a Ouartau, you Will 


have in a Quartan the value of Fourteen Days, that is 326 


Hours. Now if any one ſhould fay, that a Quartan, for 


HAinſtance, and the like, is to be underſtood of Trher Agues, 


ſometimes runs beyond the ſpace of Six Months, before it 
finiſnhes its Period; I anſwer, That the ſame is frequently 


ſeen in Continual Fevers of this Conſtitution, which are 


many Times protracted beyond Fourteen Days. But 
gn either Caſe, it you have a care that the Efferveſcence 
Leſpecially towards the end of Fevers) proceed well, and 
In good Order, and be kept up brisk, Deſpumation will 


be finiſh'd within the (pace of Time aforeſaid, that is, in 


14 Days, or 336 Hours , but if at that Time, that is, to- 
wards the declination of the Fever, you unſeaſonably ob- 
ſtruct the Efferveſcence, either by Medicines that cool 
the Fermentation, or by Gliſters, that give a check to it, 


18 


34 Of the Agues of the Tear 1661, &c. 


is diſturb'd. For by this means the Tone of the Blood is in 
2 manner looſen'd, ſo that it cannot betake it ſelf effectu- 
ally to perform Deſpumation; yea, ſometimes in weak 
Bodies the ſame happens of its own accord, unleſs you 
aſſiſt weak Nature by the help of Cordials, that it may 
be enabl'd to perform Deſpumation. 

But here it muſt be obſerv'd, that thoſe Things which 
we have mention'd above concerning the Space and Dura- 
tion of the Fermentation, are only to be underſtood of * * 
thoſe Fevers that have arriv'd to a ſettled State or Habit, 
for there are ſome Fevers both Continual and Intermit- 
tent, whichare of a tranſient and uncertain Nature, and 
do not reach the deſtin'd Periods in their Efferveſcencies. 
Of this kind are thoſe that ſometimes take their Riſe 
from ſome ſmall Error in the fix Non-naturals, as they 
are call'd, as froma Diſorder in Eating and Drinking, or 
of the Air, and the like. They who are ſeiz d with theſe 
Diſeaſes often recover ſoon; and the ſame happens in 
young Men, whoſe Blood is pure, and ſtock'd with many 
Spirits; for their Fevers depending upon a ſpiritual and 
thin Matter, that eaſily flies away, ſoon perform their 4. 
Fermentation, and having ſwiftly run their Race, diſap- 
pear; for this is principally neceſſary to Fermentation, 
vx. that the Matter to be fermented, whether Blood, 
Wine, or any other kind of Liquor, ſhould be ſo clamm y 
and tenaceous, as to retain the entangled Spirits in ſuch | 
a manner, as that they may be ſtired and moved in the 
Liquor, as Birds catched in Birdlime, and Flies in Honey, 
may ſtruggle and buzz, but cannot flie away. But by the 
by, the foremention'd Liquors ought not to be ſo clam- 
my, as to overwhelm and quite oppreſs the Spirits, ſo 
that they cannot move at all. 

Theſe Things being laid down (which in my Opinion 
are reaſonable enough, howeyer they may ſeem to others) 
it will not be ſtrange, if I propoſe no other Method of 
Cure than what ſeems uſeful to perfect the Deſpumation 
in Continual Fevers, for that they do no way differ from 
them, if you conſider the Method whereby Nature is wont 
to expel the Matter of them, viz. by Efferveſcence contain 
ed in a certain Period; tho' I muſt own they differ from 
Continual Fevers, and very much among themſelves with : 
reſpect to the kind of them, and propriety of their Na- 
ture. We mult therefore take an Indication, either by 

: oak | obſerving 


LY nan 


284 29. 


— 


* 


Of the Agnes of the Tear 1661, &c. 45 


obſerving carefully the Method that Nature uſes to free 


er ſelf from this Diſeaſe, and ſo quicken Fermentation 
when begun, and by that means cure our Patient; or by 
enquiring into the ſpecifick Cauſe, we muſt endeavour to 
conquer the Diſeaſe by effectual and ſpecifick Remedies, 
dications muſt be taken from one of theſe two. I have 
ne both ways to work, with great Care and Intention of 
ind, but have not been able to remove Agues in the 


Fall, before they had finiſh'd their ſtated Fermentations we 


ave mention'd before, how troubleſome ſoever this may 
eem to thoſe that have Agues, who are ſo long and un- 
willingly compell'd to wait for Health. But if there be 
any Man who knows how to ſtop the Career of theſe 
Hzues, either by a Method or a Specifick, he is certainly 
oblig'd to diſcover a Thing ſo beneficial to Mankind; but 
if he refuſe to do it, he is neither a good Citizen, nor a 
—_ Man; for it does not become a good Citizen to 
reſerve that for himſelf which may be advantageous to 
Mankind; neither is it the part of a prudent Man to de- 


drive himſelf of that Bleſſing he may reaſonably expect 


From Heaven, if he makes it his Buſineſs to promote the 


(Good of the Publick; and truly, Vertue and Wiſdom are 
more valu'd by good Men, than either Riches or Honour. 
 Buttho' it is hard to cure Agues in the Fall, yet I will 


mention what I have found moſt ſucceſsful in the manage- 
ment of them. 


I have found by frequent Experience, that it is very 


* angerous to attempt the Cure of Agues in the Fall by Pur- 


ing unleſs we proceed in the way to be mention'd by 


Fnd by, but eſpecially by Bleeding; for in Terrians (eſpe- 


Xially if the Conſtitution be very Epidemick) if Bleeding 
Kioes not preſently remove the Diſeaſe, it is prolong” 


thereby, even in young People, and in ſuch as are of a 


rong Conſtitution ; but in old People, after they have 


Peen a long while afflicted with the Ague, Death follows, 


End the deadly Inflammation of the Almonds is commonly 
the Fore-runner of it. Moreover, Bleeding haſtens thoſe 
other Symptoms, Which we ſaid accompanied Autumnal A- 


gues at their latter end, or follow'd preſently after them; 


but Bleeding is ſo very prejudicial in Quartans, that by 


reaſon of it they continue a whole Yearupon young Peo- 
ple, whereas otherwiſe they would go off in half the time. 
And whereas ancient People may be freed from them 


CY 


within 


46 Of the Apues of the Year 1661, &c. 


within a Year, if they do not Bleed, there is danger! 
they do of their continuance beyond their appointe: 
Time, and of their dying of them. What has been fai: 
of Bleeding may eaſily ſuit with Purging, only it is not { 
very prejudicial, unleſs it be often repeated, 


I begin with Tertian Agues in the Fall, in the following. 


manner; the Patient being put to Bed and well cover'd, 
I ſweat him with Sage Poſſet drink, about Four Hours be 
fore the Fit comes; and as ſoon as he begins to Sweat, | 
give him two Scruples of Pill. Coch. maj. diſſolv'd in an 
Ounce of the following mixture. 


Take Aqua Vitz one Pint of Venice Treacle Three Ounces, 
of Engliſh Saffron one Dram; mingle them, keep then 


for we, 


When he has taken theſe Things, let the Sweat be con. 
tinued for ſome Hours after the Time wherein the Fit 
ſhould come, taking great care of thoſe interruptions ol 
Sweating, Which perhaps Stools may occaſion, by reaſon 
of the Purge. I had better Succeſs by the uſe of this Me- 
dicine in the cure of Tertians, than by the common Dc 
coction of the Roots of Gentian, and the tops of Centax- 
ry With a little Sena and Agarick, which aims at the ſame 
Things; for ſeeing it provokes at the ſame Time thoſe 
contrary Motions of Sweating and going to Stool, it has 
the ſame effect as the other by confounding and inter- 
rupting the ordinary courſe of the Fit, and indeed is 
more effectual, and full as ſafe. I have cured a great 
many Tertian Agues in the Fall by this Method ; neither 
could I in theſe Years find a better. 


In a double Tertian, which has varied its Tipe, by rea- ' 


{on the Sick was weakened by Evacuations, or any other 
way, the Sweat muſt be raiſed as before, and at the 
lame diſtance of Time from the next Fit, either by the 
Medicine before mention'd (but the Pill. Coch. muſt be 
omitted, for it is neither ſafe, nor to any purpoſe; to 
weaken the Sick more by Purging, when he hath been 
weaken'd by it already, and ſo by it to further the doubl- 
ings of the Fits) or by ſome other ſtrong Sweat, which 
may be alſo repeated in the genuine Fit next following. 
When the Patient isextreamly weaken'd by the doubling 
of the Fits, I order the following Electuary. T 
1457 7 are 


_Eiſurely with the foreſaid Medicine, and a good while be- 


Of the Agnes of the Year 1661, &c. 47 
* Take of the Conſerve of Flowers of Borrage and Bugloſs, 
* one Ounce, of Conſerve of Roſemary flowers one Ounce, 
4 of candied Citron-peel, of Nutmegs candied, and of 
Venice Treacle, each three Drams, of Confection of 
Alkermes, two Drams:, mingle them and make an 
Fledtuary, whereof let him take the quantity of a ſmall 
Wut Morning and Evening, drinking upon it fix Spoon- 
fuls of the following Fulep. 


* Take of the Waters Meadow-ſweet and Treacle, each three 
© Ounces, of Syrup of Gilliflowers, one Ounce ;, mingle 
them. 


44 


Or inſtead of this I give ſome ſimple Epidemick Wa- 
ters ſweeten'd with Sugar: I forbid the uſe of Gliſters, 
d order the Sick to eat Oatmeal and Chicken-broth, 

d the like: 

As to the Cure of Quartans, I ſuppoſe every one who 
i but little converſant in this Art, knows how unſucceſs- 
f! all the Methods have hitherto been, which are deſign- 

d for the Cure of them, except the Peruvian Bark, which 

deed oftener ſtops it than conquers it; for after it has 
aſed a Fortnight or three Weeks, to the great advan- 
ge of the Patient, who having been ſeverely handled by 


it, has a little breathing-time, it begins again afreſh, tor- 


zenting him as bad as ever; and for the moſt part, how 
ten ſoever the Medicine be repeated, it requires a long 


.Qne before it can be vanquiſh'd ; yet I will mention what 


have obſerv'd concerning the Method of giving it. 
But you muſt take Care not to give the Feſuits Powder 


| to ſoon, before the Diſeaſe has a little waſted it ſelf, un- 


s the weakneſs of the Patient requires it ſhould be giving 
Poner; for the giving of it too ſoon may render it ineffe- 


aal, and endanger the Patient's Life, if a ſudden ſtop be 


t to the Fermentation of the Blood, whilſt it is endea- 
Wuring earneſtly Deſpumation. In the next place, no 
part of the febrile Matter muſt be evacuated by Purging, 
much leſs by Bleeding; for by either of them the Oeco- 
gomy of the Blood is weaken'd, and fo the Fits may more 
Feadily and certainly return as ſoon as the vertue of the 
Fowder is gone. I think it is better to tincture the Blood 


fore 


48 Of the Agnes of the Par 1661, &c. 


fore the Fit, than to endeavour at once to hinder the Fit 
juſt approaching; for by this Means the Remedy has 
more Time to perform its Buſineſs throughly, and then the 
Patient is freed from the danger that might happen by a 
ſudden unſeaſonable ſtop, whereby we endeavour to ſup- 
preſs the Fit that is now about to exert it ſelf with all its 
might. Laſtly, the Powder muſt be repeated at ſuch 
fhort Diſtances of Time, that the vertue of the former 
Doſe be not quite ſpent before the other be given ; ſor by 
the frequent Repetition a good Habit of Body will be re- 
cover'd, and the Diſeaſe wholly vanquiſh'd. And for theſe 
Reaſons I like this Method better than any other; 


Take of the Teſuit's Powder one Ounte, of the Conſerve 
of red Roſes, two Ounces: mingle them. | 


Let the Patient take the quantity of a latge Nutmeg 
Morning and Evening Daily, of thoſe Days the genuine 
Fit does not come, till he has taken all the Confection, 
and let it be repeated once a Fortnight for thrice. 

And perhaps the Bark may be uſed with as good Suc- 
ceſs in Spring and Autumnal Tertians; but to ſpeak the 
Truth, and not to boaſt abſurdly of Art, if the Patient 
feized with any of theſe Agues be either an Infant; or 
Young, it's beſt (as far as I yet underſtand) to uſe no 
Medicine at all, nor to change the Air or Diet; for I ne- 
ver found hitherto any ill from thence, if the Buſineſs be 
wholly left to Nature, which I often obſerved with admi- 
ration, eſpecially in Infants; for the Blood having per- 
formed its Nepuration, theſe Agnes go off of themſelves, 
But on the contrary, if a ſtrict Courſe of Diet be order'd, 
or purging Medicines given (for they uſe to be preſcrib'd 
forſooth to open Obſtruftions, and to carry off the Hu- 
mours lodg'd in the firſt Paſſages; or if eſpecially Bleed- .: 
ing be uſed in an Epidemical 2 it comes to pas 
that the Diſeaſe is much prolonged, and the Patient ex. 
poſed to a Thouſand dangerous Symptoms. But if the Pa. 
tient be ancient, there is great Danger in both Diſeaſes, | 
mean Autumnal Tertians and Quartans, not only of theit 


long continuance, but alſo of Death it ſelf 3 therefore in 
this Caſe the Phyſician ought to act ſo, as that if he can- 


not take off the Diſeaſe, neither by the Bark nor any o- 
ther Method, he ſhould atleaſt aſſiſt Nature; fo that — 
a ma ; 


TU 


LA 
* 
of 


Of the Agues of the Tear 1661, &c. 49 


may be able to perform her own Work; for certainly in 
7 weak Bodies, unleſs the Fermentation be kept up. by the 
g help of Cordials and a ſtrengthening Diet, as with Worm: 
wood-wine, and the like, the Patient will be weaken'd, 
and troubled with uncertain. and fruitleſs Fits, and the 

. Diſeaſe will continue long; fo that Nature being very 

languid, and ſeized with a grievous Fit, cannot reach the 

Time of Ebullition, ſo he dies in the cold Fit. And this 

frequently happens to old Men, that have been weaken'd 

by a long Courſe of Catharticks, and ſometimes. they die 

in the Shaking of the firſt Fits, whereas they might have 

8 up, for ſome Time at leaſt, by ſome ſtrong 
ordial. 

When the Blood has paſſed the Time that is requiſite 
for perfecting its Deſpumation, ancient Patients muſt at. 
that Time remove to another Air very different, or which 

is better, into ſome warmer Country, or at leaſt ſnould 

+ leave the Place where they were firſt ſeized with this Diſ- 
. eaſe. It is indeed ſtrange how much the change of Air 
- prevails for the total extirpation of this Diſeaſe; but the 
change of Air before this Time is not proper; for tho' any 
one ſhonld remove into a hot and ſoutherly Country, yet. 
it is neceſſary that the Blood ſetled in this ſickly Diſpoſiti- 
- On ſhould finiſh, its Depuration: And it will be in vain to. 
expect any Benefit from an unuſual and new Air, till the 
+ motion of the Blood, proceeding and growing perfect, is 
capable of recovering Health; a conſiderable alteration 
of the Air is therefore then to be appointed, when the 
Sick is freed from the Fit: For inſtance, in a Quartar 
+, Which figſt began in Autumn, the Air muſt not be chang d 
till the heginning of February; but if the Patient will nöt, 
or cannot conveniently remove, he ought at this Time to 
ule ſome ſtrong Medicine, ſo powerful, as may be able at 


y 


t perfect it. 


ance to promote the languid Depuration, and if poſſible 


7 Takeof the Electuary of the Egg, or of Venice Treacle, 
one Dram and half, diſſolve it in two Ounces of Aqua 
Cceleſtis, or of common Aqua Vitæ; give it two Hours 


* 


before the Fit. 


1 have uſed this with good Succeſs at the declination of 
lach Diſeaſes but hot Things * ſooner 175 — 
. | doubled 


co Of the Agues of the Tear 1661, &c. 


doubled the Fits, or changed them into a Continual Fever; 
as was long ago obſerved by Galen. The {ame may be 
given with'caution to young People in this Diſeaſe : But! 
have long ago found them prejudicial to Children. 

But before I leave this Argument, I mnſt acquaint you, 
that thoſe things which have been ſpoken of the duration 
of Autumnal Agues, and of the Time requir'd for the De- 
ſpumation of the Blood, are ſo to be underſtood, viz. that 
we reſpect now only that which Nature is wont to perform 
by the Aſſiſtance only of common Medicines; for we have 
not deſignedly diſcourſed of theſe Things to diſcourage 
learned and diligent Phyſicians from ſearching for better 
Methods of Cure, and more effectual Remedies, whereby 
they may haſten the Cure of ſuch Diſeaſes : Indeed I am 
ſo Er from thinking ſo, that I do not deſpair of finding 
out one Day ſuch a'Method or Remedy. ö 
The Diſeaſe being removed, care muſt be taken that 
the Patient be Purged, for it can ſcarce be imagin'd how 
many Diſeaſes are occaſion'd by the omiſſion of Purging 
after Autumnal Agues; and I wonder this is taken fo lit- 
tle notice of, and no more provided for by Phyſicians: 
For whenever I have ſeen theſe Diſeaſes happen to People 
ſomewhat in Years, and Purging was neglected, I could 
certainly foretel that ſome dangerous Diſeaſe would be- 
fall them, tho' they had not the leaſt Thought of it, be- 
ing, as it were, perfectly recover'd. fb eh 

But the Patient muſt not be Purged before the Diſeaſe 
is quite vanquiſh'd« For tho' the natural Parts may ſeem 
by this means to be freed from the Filth which the Ague 
had caſt upon them, yet freſh Matter will ſuddenly ſpring 

being ſupplied by the Fever returning again by reaſon 
oi the-force of the Catharticks, and the Agitation of the 
Humours: And ſo all we gain by Purging is the rendering 
the Diſeaſe more ſtubborn. "And ie find this daily by ex- 
amples of thoſe who (yielding to that Theory, which places 
all tne hope of Cure in opening Obſtructions, and in eva- 
cuating the melancholy Humour, which is vulgarly reck- 
on'd the cauſe of this Diſeaſe) are miſerably puniſh'd by 
Catharticks, repeated at the declination of the Diſeaſe 
And indeed, whatever that Huniour be which is evacuated 
with them, it is apparent that the Fever is more rooted 
thereby, and obſtinately maintains its Ground, by being 


provoked. Wherefore I by no means give a Purge before 


that 


« 
4. s wt $+ = 


— 
f \ 
” . 5 


i; 


7 \ 
4 DE — N — [ 7 528 a N a , 


"Of the Agues of. the Tear 1661, &c. 53 
That Time wherein the perceptible Fits are quite gone, 
and alſo that alteration, how little ſoever it be, that is 
felt on thoſe Days whereon the Fit uſes to come; and 
moreover,” till a Month be paſt 3 after which I preſcribe 
ſome Lenitive Potion, and J order, it ſhould be repeated 
once a Week for two or three Months following, and after 
every Purge an Anodyne at Bed-time, the Nieaicine ba- 
ving done working, to prevent the coming of th- bit 4- 
freſh, which perhaps. might be otherwiſe occafion'd by 
tne Tumult the gentleſt Purges raiſe; Tk. 
Therefore I Purge at ſuch a diſtance of Time as may 
free the Patient from the fear of a Relapſe, which truly 
may be eaſily occafion'd by the agitation of the Humours, 
and too frequent Bleeding. But when this Danger is o- 
ver, the following Apozem may be uſed often. 1 


Take of Monks Rhubarb, two Ountes, of the ' Roots of 
Aſparagus, Batcher's-broom, Parſity, and Polipod of 
the Oak, each one Ounte, of the middle Rind of an A A 
and of Tamarish, each half an Ounce, of the Leaves of 
Agrimony, Ceterach, and Maidenhair, each one hand- 
ful, of Sena cleanſed, one Ounce and half, ſprinkled with 
three Ounces of Mhite- wine; of Doader of Tyme, half 
an Ounce, of Agarick troch:ſcated, two Drais, of Fen- 
nel-ſeeds; four Scruples; let them be boiled in g Pint 
and half of Fountain water; towards the end add three 
Ounces of the Juice of Oranges; mix with the trained 
Liquor of the Syrupof Succory with Rhubarb, and of the 
Magifterial Syrup for Melancholy, each one Ouutt am 

half, make an Apox em, whereof let him take half 
Pint every Morning for three Days, and let rden b. 
repeated as often as there is occaſioon. 1 ah 
997 21 28187 E. of een ene 28090 
And now at length; that we may treat of thoſs e 
toms which accompany A4zues at their declination, we 
muſt take notice, that very few, compar'd with the Au- 
tumnal, belong to Agues in the Spring, becauſe they ate 
not ſo laſting, nor conſiſt of ſach earthly and malignant 
Humours: - 9 9 — 0 is 


* 


A Dropſie now and then occurring, is the chiefeſt, 


wherein the Legs ſwell firſt, and then the Belly alſo 5 it 

s occalion'd by the Blood waſting a great many Spirits, 

tea ſon of frequent b r which the * 
. O 


_—— — 


52 Of the Agues of the Tear 1661, &c. 


of. the Diſeaſe is the cauſe: N, eſpecially in old People; 

ſo that being extreamly weaken'd, it cannot any more 

aſſimilate the Juices taken in with the Nouriſhment, 

whereof a crude and indigeſted Jang | is at length put off 
1 


upon the Legs; and when they are diſtended ſo that they 
can receive no more, upon the Belly alſo, and ſo it be- 
comes a true Dropſie, But this Diſeaſe ſeldom happens to 
oung Men, unleſs it has been fooliſhly brought upon them 
y Purges repeated frequently in the courſe of the Agues. 
But a Dropſie, coming from the Cauſe above-mention'd, 
is ealily cur'd at firſt, by Catharticks, and opening Medi- 
cines. Nor am I concern'd at the Event, when I hear of 


this Diſeaſe proceeding hence, for then I reckon all wil! 


go well. I have cur'd them with the Apozem above-men- 
tion'd, without the mixture of any Thing more appropria- 
ted to the Dropfie., But have obſerv'd it is in vain to en- 
deavour the Cure of ſuch a Droꝑſie by Purging Medicines, 
while the Ague continues, for by this means the Ague is 
more firmly rooted, and beſides, the Dropfie will not be 


taken off. We muſt therefore wait till the Ague is cur'd, 


and then we may ſucceſsfully undertake the Buſineſs. 


Butiif this Symptom be ſo very violent, that. the cure | 


of it cannot be deferr'd till the receſs of the Ague permits 
the uſe of Catharicks, it muſt wholly be manag'd with 
the infuſion of Horſeradiſh-roots, the Tops of Worm- 
wood, and of the leſſer Centaury, of Juniper-berries , 
Broom-aſhes and the like, made in Wine, which not on- 


5 reſiſt the Symptom by reſtoring the weak Blood, but al- 


help Nature juſt about to triumph over the Diſeaſe. 
Infants are ſometimes hectick after Autumnal Fevers, 
both Continual and Intermitting, their Bellies are puffed 
up, ſwell'd and hard, and they have often a Cough and 
other Symptoms that Conſumptive People are troubled 
with, and which plainly reſemble the Rickets, theſe muſt 
be treated in the following manner. Let the Purging Potion 
be prepar'd, which I have order'd to be taken at the end 
of Continual Fevers, whereof let the Child take one or two 
Spoonfuls, more or leſs, according to its Age, in the Moxn- 
ing, for nine Days, omitting a Day or two if there be oc- 
caſion, the Purge being ſo moderated, either by encreaſ- 
ing or decreaſing the Doſe, that it do not exceed five or 


* „ 
* 4 a. * I 1 * 


ſix Stools a Day. After Purging, let the Belly be anoint- * 


ed with ſome opening Lineament for ſome Days. 


ale 


SEES ů¹ðV r ñ I. 2 0% 


Of the Agues of the Tear 1661, &c. 53 


Take Oil of Lillies and Tamarisk, each two Ounces, of the 
Juice of Briony-roots and Smallage, each one Ounce ; 
let them boil to the conſumption of the Juices, add of 
the Ointment of Marſhmallows, and of freſh Butter, 
each one Ounce, of Gum Amoniacum a:ſſolved in Vi- 
negar, half an Ounce, of yellow Wax a ſufficient guan- 
tity; make a Lineament. 


I have cured a great many Children of the true R:ckets 


| by this Method. 


But, as I ſaid before, great care muſt be taken that we 
do not begin to purge till the Ague is quite gone; for tho” 
by this means ſome Part of the Humour caſt upon the na- 


- tural Parts, may probably ſeem to be evacuated, yet ſome- 
— geek quantity of ill Matter is ſapplied by the Fee 


ch does not only make Purging ineſtectual, but the 
Diſeaſe more laſting, for the Reaſons above-mention'd. 

It is worth noting, That when theſe Autumnal Agues 
have a long time moleſted Children, there is no hope of 


4 recovery till the Region of the Belly, eſpecially about the 


Spleen, begins to be harden'd and to ſwell, for the Ague 
goes gradually off as this Symptom comes on; nor per- 
haps can you any other way better prognoſticate the going 
off of the Diſeaſe in a ſnort Time, than by obſerving this 
Symptom, and of the ſwelling of the Legs, which are 
ſometimes ſeen in grown People. 

The ſwelling of the Belly, which comes upon Children 
after-theſe Agues, in theſe Years the Conſtitution of the 
Air is Epidemically determin'd to propagate Autumnal 
Agues, feels to the Finger touching it, as if the Bowels 
contain'd ſome Matter harden'd to a Scyrrhus; whereas 
that which comes in other Years in like Appearance af- 
fects the Touch ſo, as if there were only a Tenſity of the 
Hypoconders by Wind under them; which is worth no- 
ting, the true R:ckers do not often happen, unleſs in thoſe 
Years, wherein Autumnal Agues prevail. 

The Pain and Inflammation of the Almonds, after either 
Continual or Intermitting Fevers, firſt with the Difficulty of 
ſwallowing, and afterwardsalſo withHearſeneſs and hollow 
Eyes, and an hippocratical Face, certainly betoken, that 
Death is at Hand, all hope of Recovery being paſt; and I 


have obſerv'd, That too large Evacuations in Patients 7 
3 mo 


54 Of the Agues of the Tear 1661, &c. 


moſt worn ont, and alſo the long continuance of it, have 
mutually contributed to the production of this fatal 
Symptom. 2 
There are many other Accidents which are wont to fol- 
low theſe Diſeates, by reaſon of Purging not uſed at all, or 
not riglitly uſed, which at preſent we will ſay nothing of, 
ſeeing the way of Cure in all is almoſt the ſame, viz. the 
purging of of the Sediment depoſited by the preceding 
Efferveſcence, hecauſe it has occaſion'd theſe Ills by its 
continuance. But it may be proper to diſcourſe here of a 
Symptom no way contemptible, which will yield neither 
to Purging, nor to any other Evacuation, eſpecially to 
Bleeding, but is heighten'd thereby; it is a certain pecu- 
liar Madneſs waich follows long Agues, eſpecially Quar- 
rans, The common Methods of Cure are no ways benefi- 
cial in this Caſe, for by ſtrong Evacuations the Patiggt be- 
comes a Changling, and continues ſo as long as he hives. I 
have often wonder'd that Authors have not mention'd this, 
ſ:eing I have taken notice of it ſeveral Times. And where- 
as other ſorts of Madneſs are moſt commonly cured by 
large Evacuations, by Bleeding and Purging, this can bear 
either; for when the Patient is in a manner recover'd, 
if a Gliſter only of Milk andSugar be but once injected, it 
will preſently begin again afreſh ; and if we praceed with 
Purging repeated, and Bleeding, ſuch Evacuations may, 
indeed, quell the fury of the Diſeaſe, but they will cer- 
tainly make the Patient a Fool, and render him incurable. 
And it is not ſtrange, if we conſider that other forts of 
Madneſs proceed from the too vivid and exalted Craſis of 
the Blood ! But that this is occaſion'd by the weakneſs of 
the fame, becoming vapid by too long a Fermentation 
carried on by the Fever, ſo that the Spirits are wholy in- 
capable to perform the Animal Function. : 
| nied to manage this Diſeaſe in the following manner. 
] preſcribe a large Doſe of ſome generous Cordial, to be 
taken thrice a Day; for inſtance, Fenice-Treacle, the E- 
ectuary of the Egg, the Counteſſes Powder, Sir Walter 
Kameigbꝰs Powder, or the like, in Epidemick, or Treacle- 
water, or ſome other Cordial Medicines, may be alſo 
given in {ome other Form: The Patient is likewiſe to be 
comforted with ſtrengthening Diet, and generous Li- 
quors; he mult keep within, and lie much a Bed, the Belby 
ill by this means be bound, ſo that a Fever may be 9297 


3 


'S * Pu ITS ws 
_ 3 A a a Al. and ad | a 


Of the Agues of the Year 1661, &c. 55 


dy ſome, eſpecially by reaſon of hot Medicines taken; 
1 but there is really no danger of it, for the Spirits, worn 
out by the foregoing Diſeaſe, are not able to kindle anew 
Fever; after ſome Weeks, he will grow better by little and 
little, and then Cordials may be omitted for ſome Days, 
but the ſtrengthening Diet muſt be conſtantly uſed, and 
the uſe of Cordials muſt be again repeated after a ſhort 
intermiſſion, and continued till he is quite well. 
Ihe foremention'd Method has ſometimes cured Mad- 
+ neſs that has not come upon theſe Agues in thoſe of a cold 
and infirm Conſtitution. Laſt Year I was call'd to Salis- 
# bury, to conſult with the learned and ſagacious Phy ſician, 
> Dr. Thomas, my very good Friend, about a Gentlewoman 
Who was diſtemper'd in Mind, and ſhe was perfectly cur- 
ed by the Remedies above-mention'd, tho' ſhe was then 
with Child. | 
But the common Madneſs which is wont to befal brisk 
1 bas without any Fever going before, is of another 
; kind, and therefore to be treated with a quite contrary 
Method as to Evacuations, tho'in this ſort alſo thoſe Things 
that ſtrengthen the Brain and the Animal Spirits, are not 
to be omitted: I will add the Cure of this by the by to 
the foremention'd kind, tho' it does not properly belon 
to this Place, leaſt any ſhould be deceiy'd by the likenels 
of the Diſeaſes. 8 
In young People of a ſanguine Conſtitution, let eight 
F 1 or nine Qunces of Blood be taken from the Arm twice or 
2 thrice, at three Days diſtance, afterwards Bleed once in 
8 the Neck, Bleeding oftener rather makes the Patient a 
: Changling than cures him, then give half a Dram or two 
Scruples of the Pill. ex duobus, according as it works, on 
a ſet Day: For inſtance, if the Patient takes the Pills firſt 


* 


on a Monday, let them be repeated exactly on the fame 
Day, and not oftener in the 8 Weeks, for a long 
= Time, till he is perfectly recover'd. By this Method the 
Humours which uſe to ſeize the Head, fall gradually on 
the lower Parts, their Courſe being turn'd. 
When de Patient does not Purge, let him take the fol- 
towing Electuary, or the like, thro' the whole Courſe. 


Take of the paar pod of Roman-Wormwood, of Roſemaſy- 
flowers, and of Venice-Treacle, each 0:10 Once, of THe 
Conſerve of yellow Peel of Oranges, of candied \ ngelica. 

| 8 E. 4 ant 


5 


56 Of the Apues of the Tear 1661, &c. 


and of Nutmegs candied, each half an Ounce, make an 
EFlectuary, with a ſufficient 8 of Syrup of Gilli- 
flowers: Let them take the 22 of a Nutmeg 
twice a Day, and drink a ſmall draught of Canary after 
it, wherein Comſlip-flowers have been infuſed cold. 


The Continual Fever and Agues which we have deſcrib'd 
above, were almoſt the only Epidemick Diſeaſes that 
reign'd during the Conſtitution of the Years 61, 62, 63, 64; 
but how many Years they reign'd before, I cannot fay, but 
this I certain'y know, that from the Year 64, to the Year 
67, they very rarely appear'd at all in London. 

I thould ſpeak ſomething alſo of the Small-Pox, namely, 
what thoſe were which then ha 2 Reſpe& being had 
to that Conſtitution ; for, as r ave ſaid, they vary very 
much, according to the various Conſtitutions they come 
in; but having not ſufficiently obſerv'd them at that Time, 
I nowÞpaſs them by: I will only ſay, that this was pecu- © 
Liar to them, that in thoſe Years they raged much about 
the beginning of May, but the Autumnal Epidemicks ſu- 
pervening, they retir'd. Upon the top of the Puſtles 
there were ſmall Pits moſt commonly, about the bigneſs 
of the Head of a ſmall Needle, and in the diſtin kind; 
the Sick was in moſt danger on the Eighth Day, at which 
Time Sweat or Moiſture which flow'd hitherto broke of 


of a ſudden, and the external Parts were dry: Nor could | 


Sweat be recall'd by any Cordials, the Sick was ſeiz'd with 
a Phrenfie, and great Anxiety, with great Pain and Sick- 
neſs; he made Water often, but little at a time; and 
within a few Hours, contrary to Expectation, died, 


S ECT. II. C HAP. I. 
Of the Epidemical Conſtitution of the Tear 
1665, and 1666, at London. 


T HE foregoing Winter being extreamly cold, and 
the Froſt continuing without any intermiſſion till 
Spring, it thaw'd ſaddenly at the end of March, in the 
Year 1665, and Inflammations of the Lungs, Pluriſies, Qu:n- 
Hes, and ſuch like inflammatory Diſeaſes, made great 
. e Slaughter 


—_— 
_— 


3 4. 2 


Of the Epidemick Conſtitution, &c: 57 


my Slaughter on a ſudden, and at the ſame Time a continual 
Epidemick Fever appear'd. It was very different from the 
'8 ature of the Continual Fevers that reigned in the forego- 
ing Conſtitution, whereof ſcafce any were wont to in- 
vade at that Time of the Year. The Pain of the Head 

54 was more violent, and the Vomiting more ſevere than in 
the former; and the Looſeneſs, which was moſt common- 
ly prevented in the other Fever by taking a Vomit, was 
43 now heighten'd by the ſame, and yet the Vomiting did 
not ceaſe : The outward Parts were dry, as in the Fevers 
of the preceding Conſtitution; but after Bleeding the Pa- 

| tient could Sweat, and the Symptoms were preſently 
* abated thereby. And this might be done at any Time 
of the Diſeaſes, whereas in the former Fever you could 

ly © not attempt it ſafely, nor, indeed, could eaſily obtain 
= your Deſire before the Thirteenth or Fourteenth Day. 
e, The Blood was often like the Blood of thoſe that have a 
u Plweuriſie, or a Rheumatiſm, only it had not ſo white a 
ut Jelly upon it. Theſe were at firſt the Diagnoſtick Phe- 
nomena of this Diſeaſe, but in Progreſs of the Year, the 
Plague broke out, accompanied with a great number of 
Pathognomonick Symptoms, as Carbuncles, Buboes, and 
the like: It encreaſed daily more and more, and came to 
its heighth about the Tenth of September, at which Time 
about Eight Thoufand died of it in the ſpace of a Week, 
= tho' two Thirds at leaſt of the Citizens went into the 
Country for fear of Infection. Afterwards it began to 
decreaſe, and by reaſon of the cold of Winter, almoſt 

id 4 ceaſed; only here and there One had it all the Winter, 
and towards the following Spring, at the approach where- 
of it quite vaniſhed ; yet a Fever remained, tho' not ſo 
2 Epidemick, the whole following Year, and even till the 
| beginning of the Spring 1667. Of theſe I will now treat. 


* 
7 * 
ii! 


1 4 C HA P. 


. 
Of the Peſtilential Fever and Plague of 
the Tears 1665, and 66. 


| | 7 
1 Have heretofore hinted by the by, that ſome Fever: & 

are commonly reckoned malignant, whereas the ex- 
tream Violence of the Symptoms, which ſeems to counte- x 


nance this Opinion, proceeds not from any venomous Diſ- 
poſition of the Diſeaſe, but from the ill Management of 
the Cure, for when we do not duly attend to the Solution 
of the Diſeaſe, appointed by Nature, but raſhly begin 
fome other Method, we very much diſturb the Oeconomy 
of the whole Body, and turn all Things topſie turvey : 


And for this Reaſon the Diſeaſe, contrary to its own Na- 


ture, has an woful Aſpect, is different from it ſelf, and 
accompanied with irregular Symptoms, ſo that indeed 
it ſeems of another kind. But a Fever truly malignant, 
does not happen every Day, and wholly differs from 
other kinds, that are ſo called, by reaſon of the Irregu- 
larities of the Symptoms; and is truly of the ſame Spe- 
cies with the Plague, only it is a Degree below it ; 


wherefore I will treat of the Riſe and Cure of both in the 
{ame Chapter, 


That ſuch a Diſpoſition or Texture happens to the 
Maſs of the Air, as occaſions various Diſeaſes at different 


Times, is manifeſt to every one that but conſiders, that 
one and the {ame Diſeaſe kills an infinite number of Men 
t ſome certain Seaſons, and at another Time ſeizes only 


lere and there a Man, and goes nagfurther ; And this is 


very apparent in the Small-Pox; eſpecially in the Plague, 
the Argument of this Chapter. 

But what that Diſpaſition of Air is from whence this 
morbiſick Furniture proceeds, we know not, nor many 
other Things, which the doting and arrogant Crew of Phi- 
::ſophers trifle about; whatever it be, upon this account 


at leait, the Clemency and Goodneſs of Almighty God is 


to be reverenc'd; becauſe peſtilential Conſtitutions of the 
Air producing the Plague (the greateſt of all Miſeries, 2 
moſt 


55 
yet 


E 


C] 


and Plague in the Tear 1665, and 66. 59 


it deſt ructive to Mankind) ſeldomer happen than thoſe 

at cauſe leſs deadly Diſeaſes; ſo that the Plague rarely 

es violently in England oftener than once in the ſpace 

Thirty or Forty Years. Some, here and there, die of 

the Plague for ſome Years after a notable Peſtilence, and 

of is wont to go off gradually, by reaſon the peſtilential 

nſtitution of the Air continues ſtill in part, and is not 

yet wholly changed to another more wholeſome ; and 

erefore it ought to be counted only as the Gleanings of 

ke laſt Harveſt. And alſo the Fevers, that reign a Year 

1% 2 of two after a deadly Plague, are wont to be Peſtilential 

yr the ſame Reaſon. And tho' ſome have not the To- 

te. Hens of the Plague, yet are the Fevers much of the ſame 

il. Nature, and require the like Method of Cure, as we ſhall 
of Make appear hereafter. 

on hut beſides the Conſtitution of the Air, as a more com- 


n mon Cauſe, there ought alſo to be another Procatartick, 
ny M. the reception of the Infection, either immediately by 
Y * *agcompanying ſome plaguy Perſon, or mediately trans- 
Ja. "mitte by Fomes from ſome other Place; or elſe if it 
nd Ronde happen while there is ſuch a Diſpoſition of the Air, 


we have mention'd, a dreadful Fire will preſently be 


it, Kndled by a ſmall Spark, and the whole Air through that 
'm ract of Earth, would ſuddenly be infected with the 
SU Mague, by reaſon of the Breath of the Sick, and Carcaſſes 
pe- gt the Dead; ſo that there will be no more need of a 
t z mes, or perſonal Intercourſe, to propagate this dread- 
he | Diſeaſe, but the very Air paſſing in with the Breath, 
Will be able to deſtroy a Man of it ſelf, tho' he were care- 
che lly removed from the Infected, if he has a Body fur- 
nt ſ'd with Humours diſpoſed to receive the Infection. 
ut This Diſeaſe, when it is only Sporadical, afflicts ſome 
en , fow promiſcuoully at any Time, the Infection being, as it 
ily gere, handed from one to another: But when there is alſo 
15 ' In Epidemick Conſtitution of the Air, it begins betwixt 
ue, Fpring and Summer, that being a Seaſon moſt fit to pro- 


uce a Diſeaſe, whoſe Eſſence chiefly conſiſts of an Inflam- 
his mation, as we ſhall ſhew hereafter. Moreover it has its 
ny Time of Increaſe and Declination like other kinds of natu- 
hi- "mal Things. It begins at the Time we ſaid, as the Year 


mt creaſes, it ſpreads, and as that declines, it decreaſes, till 
1 is length the Winter has changed the Air into a Diſpoſi- 
ny en contrary to this Diſeaſe, 
n 5 | | 


For 


* 

* 
R y 

pi 
1 


60 Of the Peſtilential Fever 


For if the changes of the Seaſons of the Year have no 
Power over this Diſeaſe, but the Peſtilential Seeds being 
untameable by any alteration of the Air, are tranſmitted 
from one to another in a continual Series, it could not be, 
but that when it has once entered into any great City, it 
Mould ſtill encreaſe the Funerals more and more, till by ß 
a continued Deſtruction, none will at laſt remain, to 
whom it might impart its Venom. But that the contrary . 
often happens is plain from the number of the Dead, which 
increaſed to ſome Thouſands in one Week in Auguſt, but . 
much decreaſed, and almoſt quite ſtop'd at the latter end "MF, 
of November. But Ido not deny but that it may be, and MF 
which alſo ſome Authors have affirmed, that the Plague "i, 
has broke out at other Seaſons of the Year; yet is it rare, Þ,, 
nor is ſuch a Plague very raging ; beſides, I very much 
ſuſpect that the Diſpoſition of the Air, tho! it be Peſti- © 4 
lential, is not ſufficient of it ſelf to cauſe the Plague, but KR, 
that always being in ſome Place or other, it is convey'd by 
a Fomes, or by the coming of ſome Plaguy Perſon from 
an infected Place to another, and is not Epidemick there, 4 
unleſs alſo the Diſpoſition of the Air incline to it; for 0 % 
therwiſe I cannot underſtand how it comes to paſs, that 
in the ſame Tract of Heaven, when ſome one Town is 
grievouſly afflicted with.the Plague, another not far di- 
ſtant, by warily prohibiting any Commerce with the in- 
fected Place, ſhould keep clear of it; as not long ago, 
when the Plague raged violently almoſt over all Italy, it 
was kept out of the Confines of Tuſcany, by the Care and 
Prudence of the Great Duke. I 

Its firſt Approach is almoſt always accompanied with, 
Shaking and Shivering, like the Fits of an Ague, preſently 3 
violent Vomitings, a Pain about the Region of the Heart, 
as if it were preſs'd, a burning Fever, with the uſual con- 
courſe of Symptoms N afflict the Sick, till ei- 
ther Death it El, or an happy Eruption of a Bubo or Pa | 
rot is diſcharges the morbifick Matter, and ſo frees them 
from that deplorable Condition. It does now and then 
happen, tho' ſeldom, that it comes without any ſenſe of 
a Fever before, and ſuddenly kills Men, the Purple Spots, 
which are the fore-runners of Death, breaking out as they 
are about their Buſineſs. But this ſudden Death, which is 
to be noted, ſcarce ever happens, but at the beginning ol 
a dreadful Plague, and is never, when it remits and is * 

weaken'd, 


1 


and Plague in the Tear 1665, and 66, 61 


Aexken'd, or in Years wherein it is not Epidemical. It 
pmetimes alſo happens that Swellings appear, when net- 
Sher a Fever, nor any other violent Symptom went be- 
ore. But I ſuppoſe that ſome little Shaking or Shivering, 
= Rho! leſs preceptible, always precedes. They that are 
After this manner, may ſafely walk about the Streets at 
tb Pleaſure, and do their Buſineſs, as if they were well, not 
minding any Regimen. 


ich As to the Efſence of this Diſeaſe, I do not pretend to 
but Aeſine it exquiſitely ; and perhaps he would ſeem as im- 
end pertinent to wiſe Men, who ſhoutd ask me what conſtitutes 
and this or that kind of Sickneſs, as I ſhould, if I -ſhonld ask 
ge him the ſame Queſtion concerning an Horſe, for inſtance, 
pu among Animals, or Betony among Plants. For, Parent 


Nature accompliſhes the Generation of all Things, Which 
lti- any Time ſhe brings to light from the Boſom of Cauſes, by 

moſt certain Rules only known to her ſelf, and hides their 
Eſſence, Quiddities, and conſtitutive Differences in the 
com Erekateſt Obſcurity. Hence every Species of Diſeaſes, no 


ere, Meſs than of Aninals or Vegetables, is always allotted Af- 
* ſfections peculiar to its ſelf, and univocal, flowing from its 
a 


Eſſence; and yet notwithſtanding that Queſtion will not 
e very conſiderable, viz. How we ſhould cure Diſeaſes, 


| di Bvhen we know not their Cauſes; becaufe the cure of moſt 
in: Piſeaſes is performed, not by the knowledge of the Cauſes, 
ago, put by a proper Method approved by Experience. But 
„n Mo return to the Bufineſs, becauſe we are wont to deduce 
and the ariſe of all ſimilar Diſeaſes, from a Fault of the firſt or 
„ WFecond Qualities (which we can only do by reaſon of our 
vith, WEreat ignorance of Things) it is probable, that the Plague 
ntly sa peculiar Fever of its own kind, proceeding from an 
art, Inflammation of the moſt ſpirituous Particles of the Blood: 
con- Porafmuch as they ſeem moſt adequate to its ſubtle Na- 
ei. ure, and if it exert the greateſt Subtlety wherewith it is 
"aha _Fnduedit ſuddenly diſſipates the native Heat, and fo kills 
em ; 


the Sick, as is ſeen at the beginning, and ſtate of an Epide- 
then mick Conſtitution, the Corps of thoſe who are ſo ſudden- 
e of ly deſtroy'd by the violence of this Diſeaſe, are all over 


pots, Aisfigured with the Purple Spots, the Fibres of the Blood 
they peing broken in pieces, by reaſon of the violence of the 
chi; Wnward Conflict, and the Frame of it quite diſſolved: And 
8 of his Tragedy may be acted by reaſon of the great ſubtlety 
d 15 pf its Flame, even without any febrile Ebullition of the 
N d, 8 BY | uf Blood, 


62 Of the Peſtilential Fever 
Blood, or Senſe before of any other Sickneſs, otherwik 
than that it moſt commonly happens, when the morbitic} 
Cauſe is not fo ſubtile, and the Weapon more obtuſ: 
wherewith itaſſaults Life. The manner of the Difference 
may be thus repreſented: For inſtance, if a Needle. or *. 
any other like Thing be put under a Pillow, and forcibly 
8 it does not lift it up, as ſome Things of a duller 
*oint would do, but perforates it: But this kind of ſud: 
den Death ſeldom happens, and only, as uid before, 
at the beginning or increaſe of the Plague. For moſt com 
monly as in other Feve#s, Shaking and Shivering firſt in 
vide, and Heat preſently ſucceeds, which continues till 
the inflamed Particles of the Blood are banithed to th: © * 
Emunctories, by the provident conduct of Nature, and , 
they are turned to Matter after the manner of common th 
Phlegmons: But if the Inflammation be leſs, it is wont to qu 
produce thoſe Fevers, which are commonly call'd Peſti- 
zential, and that often happen at the end of a Peſtilentia | 
Conſtitution, and perhaps a Year or two after, till that . 
Species of Fevers quite 1 ok — Fe: 
I ſuppoſe that Inflammation which is call'd an Eryfipela, N. 
? 
bi 


is much like the Plague; for it is reckon'd by the beſt 
Phyticians, a continual Fever, proceeding from the thin 
ner part of the Blood; from which, that Nature may free 
her ſelf, ſhe expels it to ſome outward Part, whereon 2 Rt 
Tumour, or rather red broad Spots, diſperſed (for a very ft 
viſible Tumour does not often appear) ariſe; which they Fe 
call an Eryſipelas. But the Fever goes off critically by this An 
Swelling, after it has afflicted the Sick a Day or two: Mf 
And moreover, there is ſometimes a pain in the Glandules A 
of the Arm-pit, or Groin, as in the Plague, and it be-. F1 
gins alſo almoſt like it with a Shaking and Shivering, and a 
2 febrile Heat following; ſo that they who have not had Mc 
this Diſeaſe before, think they are ſeiz'd with the Plague, . 
till at length it ſhews it ſelf in the Leg, or ſome other , Wt 
Parts. And truly ſome Authors have ſuppoſed, that there | 
was ſomewhat of Malignity in this Diſeaſe ; and there- Wh 
fore have proceeded in the Cure of it with Sweats and Yu 
Alexipharmicks. This Flame ſoon goes out of it ſelf, and : 

he 

! 


does no further Miſchief, when by means of the Ebullition 
the torrid Particles of the Blood are caſt out. | 
But the Plague far exceeds an Eryſipelas; for, by reaſon 
of the great Tenuity of its Subſtance, it is fitted 20 7 
1 5 throug“ 


viſe 
ack 
uſe 
net 


Ot 


bly 
ler 
ud. 
Ire, 
On: 
in. 
til 
the 
and 
non 
t to 
eſti- 
tial 
that 


beſt 
hin- 
free 
on 2 


ere- 
and 


"M 


7 


and Plague of the Tear 1655, and 66 63 


through the innermoſt Receſſes of the Body like Lighten- 
g, and ſuddenly deſtroys the Spirits of the Blood, and 
oe its Frame, before oppreſſed Nature can raiſe a 
Sdrile Ebullition, the uſual Means whereby ſhe endea- 
Fours to remove whatever is offenſive to the Blood. 

If any one be diſſatisfied with my Opinion, viz. That 
this Diſeafe is occaſioned by an Inflammation, let him 
onſider, that not only the Preſence of a Fever, but alſo 
12ny other Things favour this Opinion : For inſtance, The 
golour of the Blood taken away, which is like that of thoſe 
ho have a Pleuriſie or Rheumatiſm, the aduſt Appearance 


2 a Curbuncle, not unlike the Impreſſion of an atFual Cau- 


ry, the Bubos which are as much inclined to an Inflamma- 
ton as other Swellings of any other fort, and they end in 
AHbſceſles, as moſt I are wont to do; and alſo 
the Seaſon of the Year wherein an Epidemick Plague breaks 


gut, moſt commonly ſeems to confirm the ſame ; for at 


e ſame time, v:z, betwixt Spring and Summer, Pleuriſies, 
Prinſies, and other Diſeaſes that proceed from an Inflam- 
1 of the Blood are wont to be Epidemical; and I ne- 


Fer knew them more common than they were {ome Weeks 
las, 


fore the beginning of the London Plague; but it is of no 
1portance that that very Year, ſo dreadful, by reaſon of 
e Deſtruction of many Thouſands, was otherwiſe very 
Mild and healthy, and that all that eſcaped the Plague were 


Etter in Health; and al ſo, that thoſe who recover'd it were 


erwards freed from ill Habits, and other ill Diſpoſitions 
Fequently occaſion'd by the Relicks of former Diſeaſes. 
And moreover, that the ImpofthumatedCarbuncles after the 
flamed Particles were carried off by the Matter, were 
lily cured by ordinary Chirurgical means. 
But perhaps ſome one may ask how it comes to paſs, 
at hot Medicines, ſuch are almoſt all Alexipharmicks, 
ould be uſed with good Succeſs, both for the Cure of the 
ague, and for Preſervation from it, if it conſiſts of an 
flammation? To this I anſwer, Theſe Things do good 
ly by Accident, viz. by the benefit of Sweat they produce, 
ereby the inflamed Particles of the Blood are ejected. 


But if they do not cauſe Sweat when they are taken, as it 


ry often happens, the flame of the Blood encreaſed by 
eir adventitious Heat, ſoon proclaims openly the miſchief 
them. In ſhort, as to Preſeryation, I know, that the 


le of kot Antidotes is alſo every where commended, = 
Wit. 


| 
1 
. 
|; 
i 
| 


64 Of the Peſtilential Fever ? 4 
with what Succeſs, is not yet proved. Indeed it is ati? 
robable, that Wine drunk too freely, and other Rron ol 
Paier taken daily at ſet Hours, have caſt many in- 
to this Diſeaſe, who otherwiſe might not have had it. 
As to the Cure of theſe Fevers, ſome perhaps may count 8p 
me raſh and arrogant, for pretending to write of this Di- 
eſe, being ſeveral Miles diſtant from the City, the great. 
eſt part of the Time the Plague reign'd, and lo not ſuff. 5 
ciently furniſh'd with Obſervations: But ſeeing more ski- 
ful Phyſicians, who bravely ventur'd to continue, durinz 8 
ſo very dangerous a Time, have not yet publiſh'd tho 3&0 
Things they frequently obſerv'd concerning the Nature of ®W@ 
this Diſeaſe, I hope all good Men will pardon me for pub 
liſhing my Opinion concerning this dreadful Diſeaſe, rait t 
ed from my own Obſervations, It 
As to the Cure of theſe Fevers, the Curative Indicati 
ons are firſt to be minded, which in genetal are ſo to be 
directed, that either exactly following the Guidance off 
Nature, we aſſiſt her in expelling the Diſeaſes; or not truſt- M 
ing to the Method ſhe is wont to uſe in vanquiſhing thi; 
inteſtine Enemy, we ſubſtitute by Art in the room of it: FW 
contrary and more ſafe. But here perhaps ſome will ſay, | 
that the Cure of the Plague may be pe rform'd well enoug\ t. 
by Alexipharmicks, great Numbers whereof may be founl 
in the Practical Authors. But indeed it is very diſputable, 
whether the Help theſe Medicines yield, does not rather 
roceed from the manifeſt Qualities, whereby procuring Þ 
weat plentifully, they procure a way, at the ſame tim: 
for the excluſion of the morbifick Matter, than from amy 
certain occult Vertue allotted them by Nature to.expel th: 
Venom of the Peſtilential Malignity: Nor may We only b 
doubt of theſe, but alſo of the Alexipharmicks of dthet 1 
Diſeaſes, viz; Whether they do not relieve the Sick rate: 10 
by promoting ſome Evacuation, than by a Specifick Ve- n 
tue. For inſtance, in the French-Pox; he that, ſays, that 
Mercury and Sarſaparilla are Alexiphary..:ks, for thę Ve.“ ba £ 
nom in that Diſeaſe, muſt produce ſome Examples of Cures, 8 
wherein that did ſometimes reſtore Health without Sal 
vation or Stools, and this without Sweat; which I betjeve. 
will be very difficult for him to do. But to me it ſeems 
probable, that the peculiar Remedy, and proper Alexi, 
pharmjcks of the Plague yet lies hid in Nature's Boſom; nor- 
can it de taken thence, but only by a Mechanick Reaſon. 


Bu? 


a 
= 


FF HOOD <L © & 


and Plague of the Tears 166 5, and 66. 65 


But that we may a little more fully conſider the former 
ntention, which requires, that we ſhould aſſiſt Nature 
fter her own Way and Manner, in expelling the Morbifick 

atter, it is to be noted, That in a true Plague Nature 
Meerforms her Buſineſs by ſome Abſceſs, breaking out in the 


Wclination. But in the true Plague it is not yet known by 
th Norhat fit and certain kind of Remedies the ejection of the 
it: morbifick Matter, that is, the Eruption of the Impoſt- 
a5 thumes, may be promoted : Perhaps ſome may ſuppoſe, 
ugh © Wt i at a corroborating Diet and Cordials may conducè torit: 
un! But indeed 1 ſhould very much doubt, leſt the Heat of the 
ble, Patient ſhould thereby be increaſed, that is too much al- 


ready: And as to Sweats, I am well ſatisfied, by Experi- 
Wence, that they ſignifie nothing in this Caſe; though I 


i do not deny, that after great Sweats, continu'd for the 
an} pace of 3 or 4 Hours, and then ſuddenly ſtop'd, the Swel. 


| the ling ſhews it ſelf; but I do not think it is at all occaſion'd 
by the SwEat, becauſe when it is at height, there appears 
Ino ſign of its Eruption: When it is over indeed, it may fol- 


Cl. 2 P 2 * * 
the; low, as it were, by accident, to wit, when the Sweat has 
Ver. removed part of that Burden, by which Nature was too 


thu much oppreſſed, and the Body violently heated by Cordi- 
Ve. fals taken to raiſe it. But how fallacious and uncertain 
res this Ejection of the peccant Matter is by Impoſthumes, 
li. occaſion'd by Sweat, the lamentable End of thoſe teſtifies, 

q who have been treated after this manner; of which ſcarce 


ieve . ter 
— Jone in three (to ſpeak within Bounds) eſcapes the danger i 
oxi. of the Diſeaſe and Cure: But on the contrary, many on | 
nor whom the Swellings broke out in the right manner, even 


n. when they were intent upon their Buſineſs, and without 
Bi 8 F any 


+ =4% 
© 
X * 


66 Of the Peſtilential Fever | 


any ſenſible Hurt of any Natural, Vital, or Animal Facyl- ' 1 


ty, recover'd in a ſhort Time, except thoſe who unfortu- 
nately falling into the Hands of an ignorant Phyfician, and 


compoſing themſelves to Sweat by his Advice, tho' they 
were very well in Body and Mind, began from that Time 
to grow worſe, and their Sickneſs encreaſing, they ſuffi- 
ciently demonſtrated the Injury of this unlucky Counſel 1 
by their own Death. But the uncertain 2 of this 

at ſometimes a 
Bubo, which comes out at firſt well, and with an abate- i 
ment of the Symptoms, afterwards diſappears of a ſadden, . 
and inſtead of ir Purple Spots, certain Tokens of Death 
ſucceed. The Cauſe of the going in of the Tumor, 
ſeems of right to be attributed to thoſe Sweats, which were 
deſign'd to further its Eruption, becauſe they diſſipated 8M 
other ways, through the habit of the Body, the chief part 


Diſeaſe by Swellings is manifeſt ; for t 


of the Matter, which ſhould have ſerv'd to have kept up the 
Swelling. However it be, this at leaſt plainly appears, 


L. 8 
Py . ue 
* # i! 1 

* , 5 


1 . 
93 
* 


1 E Aber Ge foi os r . / . acc aac 2” A en a= 


that by the Benignity of Almighty God, certain ways of um 


ejecting the morbiſick Matter are appointed in other Di-. 
eaſes, but for this Scourge of heinous Iniquity, only a very 
uncertain one. And perchance the Cauſe and Original of 
this great Deſtruction may be as properly deduced from 
hence, as from Nlalignity; for in the Gout, and other Di- 
eaſes that are not thought to be malignant, the ſtriking in 
of the Morbifick Matter is full as deſtructive. From all 


which it plainly follows, that the Phyſician who is oblig'd 


to follow exactly the guidance and inclination of Nature 
in curing other Diſeaſes, muſt here renounce her Conduct; 


the Truth whereof, becauſe few have hitherto ſufficient- 


ly underſtood ; therefore the Number of thoſe Whom the bo 


Plague deſtroy'd, was not a little encreaſed. 

Wherefore it being not at all ſafe to follow the Foot- 
ſteps of Nature in eje&ing this Diſeaſe, we muſt conſider 
in the next Place by what means we may fatisfie that In- 


tention, Which we- call the ſecond, viz. By inſtituting a | 


Solution of this Diſeaſe, contrary to that of Nature; and 
this, I think, can only be done by theſe two ways; either 
by Bleeding or Sweat. As to the firſt, I know very well 
that Bleeding is much diſliked by moſt in this Diſeaſe ; 
but being little concern'd at the Prejudice of the Vulgar, 
I will fairly diſcourſe the validity of the Reaſons in this 
Queſtion, And firſt J appeal to thoſe Phyſicians who 
Con- 


and Plague of the Years 166 5, and 66. 67 
& continued in Town when the late Plagues raged, whether 
they ever obſerv'd, that large Bleeding, and often repoats 
ed, defore any Tumour appear'd, was the cauſe of any 
one's Death that had the Plague. But 'tis no ſtrange thing, 
that Bleeding ſparingly, or after the Swelling is come cut, 
"YN ſhould be always hurtful, for when only a moderate quan- 
"KT tity of Blood is taken away, the Adminiſtration of At- 
© fairs is forced out of Nature's Hand, who endeavour'd all 
W ſhe could to cauſe a Swelling ; and yet in the mean while 
another Method is not ſubſtituted that is ſtrong enough to 
evacuate the morbiſick Matter, and Bleeding, uſed after 
the Tumour appears, becauſe it draws from the Circum- 
IM ference to the Center, induces a Motion quite contrary 
to that of Nature, which is from the Center to the Cir- 
cumference; and yet nothing is more commonly urged, as 
& a great Argument, by thoſe of the contrary Opinion againſt 
W Bleeding in general in this Diſeaſe, than the Injuries of 
= Bleeding uſed after this perverſe manner; as may be ſeen 
in Diemerbrock, and other Writers of Obſervations : As for 
my ſelf, I cannot agree with their Arguments, till I un- 
derſtand what they anſwer to the Queſtions above propos d 
for many Authors, and thoſe of the beſt Reputation too, 
& have thought Bleeding proper in the Plague, the chief of 
hom are, Ludovicus Mercatus, foaanes Coſtens, Nicholaus 
= 1aſſa, Ludovitus Se pt al ius, Trincavellizs, Foreſtus, Mercu- 
= 7:alis, Altomarus, Paſchalins, Andernachzis, Pereda, Zac u- 
tus Luſitanus, Fonſeca,and others: But there is but one that 
I know of, who places the whole Buſineſs of the Cure in as 
large Bleeding as we require, viz.Zeonardes Botallus,one of 
the moſt famous Phyſicians in the former Age, whom I will 
quote, leſt I ſhould be thought ſingular in this Practice. 
In a Word, ſays he, I think there is no Plague in which 
t this may not be better than all other Remedies, ſo it be 
* © uſed opportanely, and in a convenient quantity; for I 
In- 4 © ſuppoſe it is found unprofitable ſometimes : For that ei- 
 * * theritis uſed too late, or leſs is taken away than ought to 

nd be, or an Erroris committed in the uſing of it both ways. 
1er = Aud alittle while afterwards he adds, But in ſo great Ti- 
ell + © midity, and ſparing Phlebotomy, how can it be that any 


ſe; & © ſhould judge exactly how much Good or Harm it may do 
ar, bin the Plague? For if a Diſeaſe (for the cure of which the 
his taking away of four Pounds of Blood was requir'd, and 
ho but ene Pound was taken away) kill a Man, it does not 
Don- F 92 £ there=- 


68 Of the Peſtilential Fever 


therefore deſtroy him, becauſe he was blooded, but be- 
cauſe it was not done in a due manner, nor perchance 
ſeaſonably : But ſloathful wicked Villains always endea- 
vour to put the Fault on that, not for that it did hurt, 
but becauſe they baſely deſire to have it diſlik'd by all: 
Or if they do not do it wickedly, they do it ignorante- 
© ly by a perverſe Cuſtom ;, both certainly are pernicious, 
© but that moſt of all. All which being about to confirm 
by Experience, a little after he thus proceeds: © Theſe 
© Things being obſerv'd, no reaſonable Man can well diſ- 
* praiſe Bleeding in theſe Diſeaſes, but rather wonderfully 
© commend it, and confidently uſe; which indeed I have 
© done for theſe ſeveral Years, and in Peſtilential Diſeaſes 
© at the Siege of XKychell, and four Years ago at the Moun- 
© tains of Hainalt, and for theſe two Years at Paris, and 
© the laſt Year at Cambray. I found no Remedy ſpeedier 
© and ſafer in all my Patients, which were innumerable, 
© than large and ſeaſonable Bleeding. 

And afterwards he delivers ſome Obſervations, which 
for brevity fake J here omit, but will relate a very rare 
Caſe, and ſuitable to our Purpoſe, of a Buſineſs perform'd 
in England many Years ago; when among the other Ca- 
lamities of the Civil War, that miſerably aMi&ed this 
our Country, the Plague alfo raged in many places; it 


„ RR 6 "..0 


chanc'd to be brought from another Place to the Caſtle of 


Dunſter in Sumerjet ſhire, and ſome of the Soldiers dying 


fattenty with an eruption of Spots, it ſeiz d many others, 
at vrhich Time a Surgeon, that had been a great Traveller, 


veas 3 common Soldier there, who humbly entreated the 
Governor of the Caſtle to permit him to do all he could 
for the Relief of his Fellow-Soldiers, that were afflicted 
with this dreadfal Diſeaſe ; and having obtain'd leave, he 
took away a vait quantity of Blood from every ſick Per- 
n at firſt coming of the Diſeaſe, before there was any 
ſign of 3 Swelling; he bled them till they were like to 


drop down, for he bled them all ſtanding, and in the 


open Air, nor had he any Porringer to meaſure the Blood 
atterviards he order'd them to lie in their Tents; and 
tho' he gave no Medicine at all after Bleeding, yet, which 
is very ſtrange, of thoſe very many which he treated af- 
rer this manner, not one died. Mr. Francis Windham 
save me this Account who was then Governor of the 
Cuſtle,andeis indeed a Gentleman, and remarkably Wagen 
an 


* 
— 
* * 
2 . * * es; 
bara on EN +4 «Wb 


a o 
* * 1 3. 
1 ; <5 2 
" ts, "I - * " 0 27 4 « * * 
„5353 


4% 


and Plague of the Tears 166 5, and 656, 6g 


and is now living, ſo that any one may be ſatisfied that 
Wdoubts the Truth of it. 


« will mention what [ have obſerved worth Note, con- 
FF ccrning this Thing, when I come to treat of thoſe fe Re- 
warks I made by my own Experience, while the late Lan- 


don Plague raged. 


But tho', in my Judgment, I approve of this Practice, 


and have experimentally found the uſefulneſs of it long a- 
go, yet the diſſipation of the Peſtilental Ferment by Sweat 


pleaſes me better, upon many accounts, than the Evacua- 
tion of it by Bleeding, becaule it does not weaken the Pa- 

tient ſo much, nor hazard the Phyſician's Reputation: But 
this has alſo its Inconveniencies; for firſt many, efpecially 


= young Men of a hot Conſtitution, ſiveat difficultly ; and 


in ſuch, the more you endeavour to force Sweat by ſtrong 
DiaphGeticks, and by heaping on a great many Cloaths, 


ſo much the more are they in danger of falling into a Phren- 


ſie; or which is yet worle, after having been entertain'd 
a while with vain Hopes, the Tekepzs are drawn out in- 


ſtead of it, for the chief Venom reſiding in the moſt ſpi- 


0 5 = l » 
\ 2 wad * \ 10 K. * 
2 FS. a - J J 2 o bo 
' ' * 


& 
4 _ 1 1 * 
3 - - I 4 8 * " * 
wn eee 


o 


rituous part of the Blood (the motion of the groſſer Par- 
ticles being on this account ſomewhat more weak than is 
uſual in other Inflammations) that tender Portion becomes 
very furious by the acceſſion of this new hear, and at length 
breaks in pieces all the Fibres of the Blood diſtended be- 
yond the bounds of their Texture; which diſſolution of 
the languineous Fibres, I ſuppoſe, is the cauſe of the Peti- 
lential Tokens, for they are firſt intenſely red, and ſoon 
after livid or black, like ſtripes inflicted by a violent 
Blow on ſome fleſhly Part of the Body. 

And then in thoſe Bodies wWhiclr are eaſie ro Sweat, if it 
be ſtop'd too ſoon, viz. before the morbifick Matter is 
wholly diſpers'd, the condition of the Bubocs is afterwards 
worle, which began to come out well at the latter end of 
the Sweat; for that part of the Matter being ſubtracted 
which ſhould ſerve to elevate them, they either ſoon ſtrike 
in, or at laſt never come to true Abſceſſes (as is wont to 
happen in the Small-Pox, when the Sick has feat vio- 
lently at the beginning of the Diſeaſe) but the dreadful 
Enemy, being again taken in, a commotion is ſtirred up 
in the Blood, whereby the Purple Spots, the Tokens of a 
ſudden Death, are often driven out in the manner we have 
mention'd above. 

F 3 But 


ö 
; 
; 
4 
: 
þ 
1 


70 Of the Peſtilential Fever 


But that it may more clearly appear by what means we 
may obviate theſe and the like Difficulties, I will faithfully 
ſet down what has been done and obſerv'd by me, fo far 
as I was able in this Diſeaſe, beginning from the riſe of 
the late Plague. 

t the beginning of May 1665, I viſited a Noble Lady 
about 21 Years of Age, of a ſanguine Complexion ; be- 
{ides the burning Fever, which began a little before, fre- 
quent Vomitings, and other febrile Symptoms troubl'd her. 
I began the Cure with Bleeding; and the next Day, to 
prevent a Looſeneſs (which, as I mention'd in the begin- 
ning of this Treatiſe, was wont to come at the latter end 
of the Fever, when a Vomit was omitted, which the incli- 
nation to Vomiting at the beginning of the Diſeaſe requir- 
ed) 1 order'd a Vomit that cleanſed her Stomach very 


well, the Day after viſiting her again, I found ſh@had a a 


Looleneſs, which being very unuſual for ſome Years, did 
not a little perplex me; but thereby I perceived this was 


no common Fever, as the Event ſhew'd, and therefore re- 
quir'd another Method of Cure, different from that I de- 


liver'd in another place, which I had hitherto uſed with 
continued Succeſs; wherefore, another elder Phyſician be- 
ing call'd in to aſſiſt me, Bleeding was repeated by our 


joiut Conſent, which the Age and Conſtitution of the Sick, 1 
and the violent Ebullition of the Blood ſeem'd to require; 


and allo moderate cooling Cordials were order'd, and Gli- 
fters injected every other Day. At the latter end of the 
Diſcaſe we preſcrib'd ſome ſtronger Alexipharmicks, be- 
caule very unuſual and irregular Symptoms invaded, com- 
monly acconnted the Signs of a great Malignity, But all 
doing no good, The died about the fourteenth Day. I had 
many Thoughts for ſome Days after about the odd Diſpoſi- 
tion of this Fever, and at length remembring the violent 
Heat which continu'd, even after repeating Bleeding, thai 
there was a redneſs in the Cheeks, and ſome Drops of 
Blood ,flow'd from her Noftrils a little before her Death, 
and that alio the Blood, when it was cold in the Porrin- 
gers, was like that which is taken from thoſe that have a 
Pleuriſie;, moreover, that the had a Cough and obſcure 
Pains in the Vital Parts; beſides, that Seaſon of the Year 
approached, which contains the end of the Spring and be- 
ginning of Summer, and which is leſs diſpoſed for the pro- 
duction of Continual Fevers, (for theſe, of their own of 
| C02 


7 4 ? mY 
_ P 


and Plague of the Tears 1665, and 66. 71 


ord, at this Time, either turn to Agues, or ſuddenly 
bange to Pleuriſies, or other Inflammations of the like 
ind z) and laſtly, that Pleuriſies at that Time were Epi- 
demical. All theſe Things, I fay, being duly weigh, I 
was of the Opinion, that this Fever, tho? it wanted the 
Pathonomonick Signs of a Pleuriſie, had the importance 
of a Symptom, on the account of a certain Inflammation 
Jllurking about the Vital Parts, tho' there was no Pain of 


the Side, and no conſiderable difficulty of breathing. In a 


word, I was at length perſuaded, that I ought wholly to 
have proceeded in the aforeſaid Caſe with the ſame Me- 


3 thod1 had often uſed with good Succels in a Pleuriſie. And 


truly afterwards it ſucceeded as well as could be wiſh'd 3 
for, being call'd a little while afterwards to a Man that 


| 5 was ill exactly after the ſame manner, I began and finiſh'd 


the Cure by repeated Bleeding, as is commended in a Pleu- 


"++ 7:fe. About the latter end of May, and the beginning of 


June, very many deſiring my Aſſiſtance, were recover'd 
from this Fever (which was then very Epidemical) by the 
foreſaid Method. From this Time that dreadful Plague 
began to rage cruelly, which at length was fo very Mor- 
tal, that in the ſpace of ſeven Days it deſtroy d io many 
2} Thouſands in this one City. 

But whether the Fever, of which we have now diſcourſ- 
ed, deſerve the Name of the Plague, I dare not confident- 
” ly affirm; but this I know experimentally, that all that 
were ſeiz d with the true Plague, at that Time, and ſome- 
time after in my Neighbourhood, with all the Symptoms 
peculiar to it, had the ſame concourſe of Symptoms, both 
at the firſt coming of the Diſeaſe, and in the whole courſe 
of it: But when I was endanger'd by the near Approach 
of the Plague to my own Houle, at length, by perſuaſion 
of Friends, I accompanied the vaſt Numbeas of thoſe tnat 
left the City, and remov'd my Famiiy ſome Miles from 
thence; yet ] return'd fo very ſoon, and when the Plague 
continu'd ſo very violent, that it could not be, but, by 
reaſon of ſcarcity of better Phyſicians, I ſhould be call'd in 
to the Aſſiſtance of thoſe that had the Plague And not 
long after J viſited many that had Fevers, which I per- 
ceiv'd, not without great Admiration, was the lame that! 
manag'd ſo ſucceſsfully before my Departure; and there- 
fore confiding in my own Experience, asa Guide to be pre 
fer'd before all idle Precepts, I did not doubt ta order 

F 4 Bleeding 


2 . ke - OE ae — 


—— «2 


25 O/ 45e Peſtilential Fever 


Blesding again. I continned this courſe of Bleeding pten- 
tifaily, together with the uſe of a Ptiſan, and ſuch like 
cooling Diet in many Patients, with very great Succeſs, 


till at length I miſcarried in the Management of ſome, 


by rexfon of the frowardneſs of the By-ſtanders, who be- 
ing potlois'd with vain Prejudices, would not ſuffer me to 
take away a due quantity of Blood, (to the great damage 
of the Sick, from whom a ſufficient quantity, or none at 
, mould have been taken away, ſeeing the ſtreſs of the 
Cure depended on it) and perceiving a great Obſtruction 


to my Delignus, I therefore thought the finding out of 1 
Jome other Method in curing this Diſeaſe, beſides that of 
Bleeding, would be of great ule. I will inſtance an Injury 


L once did, but without Guilt; not becauſe I let Blood, 


but becauſe 1 was not ſuffered to take away ſo much as was 


hs 


neceT.ry, Being {ent for to a young Man of a ſanguine 
Complexionand ſtrong Conſtitution, who was ſeiz d with 
a violent Fever two Days before, with giddy Pains of the 
Lead, violent Vomirings, and ſuch like Symptoms, and 
finding upon enquiry that he had no ſign of a Swelling, I 
preſently order'd that a large quantity of Blood ſhould be 
taken away, the Superfices whereof, when it was cold, 
repre{ented the corrupted Blood of Pleuriticks; and ! 
preſcribed alſo a Ptiſin, with cooling ſuleps and Broaths: 


in the Afternoon he bled the ſame quantity, and ſo the 


next Morning, and towards the Evening of this Day | 
viſited him, and found him much better; yet notwith- 
ſtanding I perceived his Friends violently oppoſed the ta- 
king away any more Blood ; but I earneſtly contended 
that it ſhould be repeated again, ſaying, he need be 
blooded but this Time only, and then he would be out ol 
danger; but that if they ſhould continue obitinate, it had 
becn better that no Blood had been taken away, and that 
the Care had been carried on by Sweat; and, in ſhort, 
that the Patient would moſt certainly die. The Event 
confirmed the Prognoſtication; for while we were diſpu- 
ting about tne Thing, we loſt the Opportunity oi doing it, 
for the next Day the purple Spots broke out, vi. the re- 


licks of the peccant Matter, which ought to have been 


waolly evacuated, (becauſe Bleeding fo often repeated had 
taken away all hopes of an Abſceſs) by delay perverted 
the whole Maſs of Blood, and broke the Texture of it by 
its great ſubtlety, and the Patient died in a few Hours. 

Therefore 


, 
9 


ESS; 28 * 


"As 
— 


PL, ” 


- 
a «2, 


Tate of Venice Treacle, half a Dram, of the Electuary of 


f and Plague of the Tears 1665, and 66. 73 


Therefore when I had often met with ſuch Obſtacles, [ 
rneſtly endeavour'd to find out, it poſſible, ſome method 


Cure that might be as effectual, and not ſo diſpleaſing; 


4 having much and long conſider'd of theſe Things, at 


ſength 1 fell upon this Method, which I found afterwards 


to be perfect in all reſpects, and always beneſicial. 

ut, If the Swelling has not yet appear'd, 1 Bleed mo- 
dc rately, with reſpect to the Strength and Conſtitution of 
che Sick, and afterwards the Sweat is eaſily and ſoon raiſ- 
ied, (vhereas otherwiſe it is not only Difficulty procur'd 
in ſome Bodies, but there is allo danger leſt the In famma- 


tion ſhould be heighten'd thereby, and ſo the Tokens forc'd 
Zout) and the benefit of the Sweat immediately following, 


abundantly compenſates the loſs of Blood, which, how 


little ſoever it be, would otherwiſe be very injurious. AF- 
ter Bleeding (which muſt be perform'd in Bed, when all 


Things are in a readineſs to promote Sweat) without any 
manner of delay, I order'd the Patient to be cover'd quite 


220 with Clothes, and that a piece of Flannel be bound 


o the fore-part of his Head; and indeed this covering of 
he Head conduces more to the procuring Sweat than any 
ne would ealily imagine. Afterwards, if the Patient 
goes not Vomit, I give theſe and the like Sudorificks. 


. the Eggs, one Scruple, of compound Powder of Crube— 
15 eyes, twelve Grains, of Cochinele, eight Grains, of 
= Saffron, four Grains, with a ſufficient quantity of the 
Juice of Kermes ;, make n Bolus, which let him tale 
every ſixth Hour, drinking after it jix Spoonfuls of the 
following Fulep, 


Tate of Carduus-Mater, and compound Scordium-water,eat! 
three Ounces, of fycacle-water, two Ounces, of Syrup of 
2 y ® * 5 2 

1 SGilliflowers, one Qunce; mingle them, aud make a Julcp. 


9 * x 
But if the Patient be tronbled with Vomiting, as he is 
very often in the Plague, and other Peſtilcutial- He vers, I de- 
er the giving Sudorificks till he begins to ſweat by means 
of the Covering only, excepting that ſometimes I put part 
of the Sheet over the Face; tor, which is well worth ob- 
ervation, when the Rays of the morbifick Matter extend 
nemſelves to the Circumference of the Body, the Looſe- 
nels 


74 Of the Peſtilential Fever 


neſs and Vomiting, which were occaſion'd by their being 
inwardly reflected, and caſt upon the Stomack and Bow. i 
els, ceaſe preſently of their own accord; fo that how 
great ſoever the preceding Subverſion of the Stomach is 
the Medicines that are taken afterwards are eafily retain Ml 
ed, and procure Sweat as well as can be wiſh'd. 5.4 
I remember, that being once call'd by an Apothecar; WW 
to viſit his Brother who was very ill of a Peſtilential Fever, 8 
and ſpeaking of giving him a Sudorifick, he told me, Thu 
he had taken various and ſtrong Medicines to procur: 
Sweat, but all in vain, for that he had vomited them a 
up: I anſwer'd, That he ſhonld prepare the moſt loat 
ſome and ungrateful of all that before he had given, and 
that I would take care that he ſhould not vomit it up any 3#Þ 
more. The Event confirmed what I promiſed; for whe 
the Patient had ſweat a little, only by the weight of tlie 
Clothes, he retain'd a large Bolus of Venice Treacle, where. 
by ſweating plentifully, he recover'd. But to return u 
the Buſineſs; I order, that the Sweat ſhould be continue! WE 
for the ſpace of a natural Day, by Sage-Poſſet-drink, op 
Mace-Ale, now and then taken; and I ftrialy forbid thi WF 
the Patient ſhould be any way cleanſed, neither indeed 4 
I permit that the Shirt, how moiſt or foul ſoever it b 
ſhould be changed within twenty four Hours from the ent 
of the Sweat; which I wonld have obſerv'd with the grer 
teſt Caution; for if the Sweat does not continue ſo lons, 
the violence of the Symptoms ſoon returns, and the Healti 
of the Patient is left very uncertain, which a longer c 
tinuance of the Sweat would have put out of danger. An! 
indeed I much wonder at Diemerhbroek, and others, Wher 
{ conſider upon how {light a Pretence they are induc'd to 
break off the Sweat, viz. That they may preſerve th. 
Strength of the Sick; for, firſt, every one that is bu 
very little acquainted with the Cuyg of this Diſeaſe, know | 
that the Patient, while he Sweats, is ſtronger than he ws 
before: What e and Experience hath taught in this Caf; 
I willnot fear to defend and declare openly. Many that 
have been ſeated by my Advice, for the ſpace of twent! 
four Hours, have been fo far from complaining of theit  ? 
being weakened thereby, that they have profeſſed, that 53 
much as the uſeleſs Humour was carried off, ſo much ne" 
Strength they receiv'd : And towards the latter end, | 
have often obſerved with Admiration a Sweat break or! 
mots 


—_ . - 
ere would be in refreſhing the Patient with comfortable 


and Plague of the Years 1665, and 66. 75 


Ire natural, genuine, and copious than the former, 


ich was forc'd out by the Medicine, and gave more re- 
f as if it were truly critical, and did eradicate the whole 
Moreover, I cannot fee what Inconvenience 


dop and Broath, when the Sweat is at height, and then 


FS: Objection concerning want of Strength to bear long 
cats would ſignifie nothing. If therefore any Dete&ion 


perceived towards the latter end, I permit him to take 


itde Chicken Broth, the Volk of an Egg, or the like, 


ty oaths dry of themſelves on the Body, and that all Drinks 


2d 40 F 


t by ing continued twenty four Hours after the Sweat. The 
> en ext Morning I gave a Purge of the infuſion of Tamarinds, 
gre the Leaves of Sena, of Rhubarb, Manna, and the Sy- 
ons up of Roſes Solutive ; and by this Method I car'd many 
ealti ad Peſtilential Fevers the next Year after the Plague, ſo 
com at not one died of this Diſeaſe, that was under my Care, 
Ani ter I began the uſe of the ſame. 
hen But when there has been a Swelling, I have not yet da- 


ts ed to Bleed, tho' in a Body unapt to Sweat, left the ſud- 
e the, Wen Death of the Patient ſhould prevent the Sweat deſign- 
- by: , the morbifick Matter flowing back to the empty Veins. 


now, 


Het perhaps Bleeding may be very ſafely uſed, if without 


ews ny manner of delay Sweat be procured que /ergg it, 
Caſe, 8 rhich being continued to the ſpace above mention'd, may 
r that 8 able to diſperſe, and — by degrees the whole 
vent! Hulk of the Humour, and with much leſs danger than when 
their legitimate maturation of the Impoſthume, which is very 
hat 3 acertain in ſo very acute a Diſeaſe, is long waited for. 

1 ne To conclude, If the Reader ſhall find that J have any 
nd, 1.3 here erred about the Theory, I beg his Pardon; but as 
K or: e Practice, I declare J have faithfully deliver'd all Things 


moe 


and 


— 


— 


— — 8 — 
— = 


MD 
l 


76 Of the Peſtilential Fever 


and that I never propos'd any Thing before I had through. 
ly try'd it. Indeed when I come to die, I truſt I ſhall hae 
a chearful Witneſs in my Breaſt, that I have not only with ll 
the greateſt Diligence and Honeſty endeavour'd the Rec- 
very of the Health of all that have committed themſclve; 
to my Care, of what Condition ſoever they have been, of 
whom none was otherwiſe treated by me, that I deſire ty 
be, it I ſhould happen to have the ſame Diſeaſes; but that 
allo I have labour'd to the utmoſt of my Power (if by any 
means it might be) that the Cure of Diſeaſes may be m-- 
naged after I am Dead with greater certainty, eſteeming 5 
any Progreſs in this kind of Knowledge, how ſmall ſo 
ever it be, tho it teach no more than the Cure of the 
Toothach, or of Corns, to be more valued than the vain i 
Pomp of nice Speculations, which are no more uſeful to 
Phyſician in the Care of Diſeaſes, than Skill in Muſick ty 
a Carpenter in Building. 9 

In the laſt Place, I will add only this ſhort Note, leſt ue 
yerchance any one ſhould wreſt my Opinion by a ſiniſtet 
interpretation, or at leaſt, not thoroughly underſtand it, Wt 
v:2, That in the preceding Diſcourſe I often uſe the Word 
Nature, and attribute various Effects to her, as if I woul! 8 
repreſent under this Title ſome one Thing ſubſiſting of i. 
ſelf, and ſpread every where through the whole Machine 
of the World, which being endued with Reaſon, govern: WW: 
all Bodies, ſuch a Thing as ſome of the Philoſophers ſeen 
ed to think was the Soul of the World. But as I do no! 
affect novelty df Things, ſo neither of Words; and there 
fore I uie in theſe Pages the ancient Word indeed, but 
in a ſenſe, unleſs I am deceiv'd, both ſober, and not on 
underſtood, but alſo uſed by the beſt Men; for as often 
I mention Nature, I mean a certain complex of natur 
Cauies, which are govern'd by the beſt Counſel in per 
forming their Operations, and accompliſhing their Effec + 
tho' they are without Reaſon, and deſtitute of all Skill 
Viz. the ſupream Deity, by whoſe Power all Things e BM 
produced, hath ſo diipoled gll Things by his infinite VII. 
dom, that they betake themſelves to their appointed Fur W 
ct ions, doing nothing that is vain, but that which is b-ii 
and fitteſt for the whole Fabrick of Things, and their o 
private Nature, and fo are moved like Engines, not b 
their own Skill, but by that of the Artificer, - 


SECT} 


77 


Ser. HE EEA. L 


the Epidemich Conſtitution of the Years 
1667, 68, and part of the Tear 1669, 
, London. 


Dx on, they decreaſed ; but the next Spring they return- 


" + yy 


let , an continu'd till they were reſtrain'd as before by the 
iſter 
di 
Ford“ "1 
ould 


but 3 ew Fever aroſe, not much unlike the Small-Pox, if you 
Ou 
Eel 23 bs 
tural ad 4 
p 
ec 
Skill, Y 
s «tt: In this manner the Dominion of Epidemicks of this Con- 


Fur Mimes, till at length in Auguſt, 1669, the Small-Pox and 
. Oe 
ot b 7 the laſt Summer, which the ſaid Conſtitution 


But however 
theie 


78 Of the Regular Small- Pox. 


theſe Things were, it was manifeſt, that this Diſeaſe Wa: 
nothing elle but the Fever turn'd inward upon the Bowels. Wy 
L will treat particularly of theſe Three Diſeaſes, Which 
were the only Epidemicks of this Conſtitution, 1 begin i 
with the Small-Pox, and will treat largely of them, be- in 
cauſe thoſe of theſe Years ſeem more regular than others, H 
the Phenomena being the ſame, and accompanied with the ec 
fame Symptoms in all that were ſeiz d; ſo that they be- th 
ing moſt perfect of their kind, a true Hiſtory of the Diſ 14 
eaſe, and the Method of Cure may be beſt taken from 
them. But it is to be noted, that not only a proper and 4 ar 
peculiar Fever belongs to every peculiar Conſtitution, but re 
alſo a peculiar ſort of Small. Pox, which reſembles this Spe- F 19 
cies, during this Series of Years, but another in the fol“ 
lowing Years, tho' they may ſeem to agree among them- 
ſelves, as to certain Phenomena common to them all, {ok 
does Nature vary in the Generation of Epidemick Diſeaſes. FY 
But to return to the Buſineſs, I will firſt ſet down the 
Hiſtory of the S-mall-Poz of this kind, which I call regu- 


* 


lar, todiſtinguiſh them from theſe that were irregular in 


the following Years; I will alſo add the Method of Cure, þ gl 
which ſucceeded as well as I conld wiſh. £ - 
_— 1 ca 
| OV 

CHAP MM .E 

= th 
Of the Regular Small-Pox in the Tears 
1667, 68, and part of 69. 1 

; to 

N thoſe Years the Small. Pox are Epidemical, if they be Þ © 
alſo regular and gentle, they begin about March, as 1 


theſe did, whereof we now treat : But when they do not 
only ſpread Epidemically, but are alſo irregular, and ofa | Pe 


more dangerous Sort, they break out ſometimes earlier, Ba 
v. in January, infecting whole Families, and ſparing none | E 
of what Age ſoever they be, if they have not had this Diſ- | 11 
eaſe 11 nor are they excepted that have a Baſtard | th 
Small-Pox before. There are two Sorts of them, as of hs 


the Small-Pox, that invade in all Years ; for either they | _ 
are diſtinct, or confluent, which, tho' they differ not E 28 
Eſſentially, as they ſay, yet by ſome remarkable Symp- | 

tome 


in the Tears 1667, 61, and part of 69. 79 


*& toms which attend the one, and not the other, it is no 
hard Matter to diſtinguiſh them. 
The diſtinct begin with Shivering and Coldneſs, which 
= is preſently follow'd by exceſive Heat, and a violent Pain 
„in the Head and Back, Vomiting a great propenſity ta 
2& Sweat, (I mean in grown Perſons; tor I never yet obſerv- 
ec ed any ſuch Diſpoſition in Children, either before or after 
.. they came out) a Pain at the Cavity of the Breaſt beneath 
N b the Region of the Heart, if it be preſſed with the Hand, 
n Duineſs and Sleepineſs, and ſometimes Couvulſive Fits; 
4X and if theſe happen to thoſe that have all their Teeth, L 


1 
i 
* 


it reckon the Small-Pox are at hand, which moſt common- 
ey coming out a few Hours after, ſufficiently anſwer the 
1-1 X Prognoſtication : For inſtance; if the Child has a Con- 


1-8 vulfive Fit in the Evening, as it uſually append, the Small- 
o Po appear next Morning, and moreover J have often ob- 
|S ſerved, that when they come out immediately after thoſe 
e Fits, they ariſe in large Puſtles, and are mild and favour- 
u- able, and ſeldom Flux; and theſe, for the moſt part, were 
in the Symptoms which accompanied this Diſeaſe at its be- 
ginning, and preceded the eruption of the Puſtles. But 
here it is hr to acquaint you, that ſometimes it hap- 
pens ſo, that in a looſer Texture of the Blood, which is 
eaſily changed, the courſe of Separation may be paſſed 
over gradually, without any violent Sickneſs before the 
expulſion of the Matter diſcover jt ſelf by the eruption of 
the Puſtles. 2 
mM The diſt inct Sma/l-Pox uſually come out on the fourth 
Day incluſively, and ſometimes a little later, but very 
rarely before, at which time, for the moſt part, the Symp- 
*23 toms are very much abated, or quite vaniſh, and the Pa- 
tient thinks himſelf very well, only grown People are ſo 
7 diſpoſed to Sweat, that they can ſcarce be kept from it, 
| tho” they have little or no Cloaths on them, which Diſ- 
poſition does not leave them, till the Puſtles begin to ri- 
pen, and then it vaniſhes of its own accord. The eruption 
is after this manner; firſt Pimples as big as ſmall Pins 
Heads here and there ſhew themſelves, and firſt of all in 
the Face, or Neck and Breaſt, and afterwards in the whole 
Body. At this Time the Jaws are affected with a Pain that 
encreaſes as the Puſtles riſe, which growing daily bigger 
and higher, inflame the Neighbouring Skin and Fleſh. 


For 


80 Of the Regular Small-Pox, 


For about the Eighth Day, from the firſt approach of the 
Sickneſs, which J always diligently obſerve in this Dif: 
eaſe) the Spaces between, that before were ſomewhat 
white, now begin to be red, and ſwell'd more or lels, ac. 


cording to the number of the Paſtics, with a tenſtve and 


launcing Pain of thoſe Parts, which encreafing Hourly, oc- 


cations the Inflammation and Swelling above-mention'd; 


to that inthe Progreſsof the Diſtemper, the Eye-lids are 


fo fill'd up andextended, that the Patient is ſometimes de- 
priv'd of Sight, and waen they are thus tumified, they 


ſuine, an l are like a Bladder blown up. And if a greater 


number of the Paſtles Beſiege the Eyes at the firſt Ernp- 
tion, they ſooner retire to their dark Manſions. Next aß 
ter the Face, the Hands and Fingers ſwell more or leſs, 
according to the number of the Puſtles; the Puſtles that 
are ſmooth and red till this Dav, are now grown roughand | 


ſomewhat white, which is indeed their firſt ſign of com- 


ing to maturity. Moreover they caſt out by degrees 1 | 


certain yellowiſh Matter, in colour like an Honey-comb, 


and the Inflammation of the Hands and Face, when it is | 


at height, cauſes a very florid Colonr in the Spaces be- 
tween the Sml-Pox, not unlike a Damask-Roſe; and 
truly the milder and more genuine the Suall-Poæ are, ſo 
much the more do the Paſtles, and the Skin between, re- 
preſent to the Life the Colour before defcrib'd; and as the 
Puſtles in the Face grow roagher and yellower as they 
ripen; ſo on the contrary, thoſe on the Hands and other 
Parts of the Body, daily appear ſmoother. 

On the Eleventh Day, the Tumor and Inflammation of 
the Face manifeſtly diminiſh, and the Puſtles of the Face 
and Body, having arriv'd at their Maturity, and juſt Mag- 
nitude, (which in theſe Years equall'd a large Pea) dry 
away and fall off: And in this fort of Small Pox, moſt com- 
monly vaniſh on the fourteenth or fifteenth Day; but the 
Puſtles of the Hands are many times more obſtinate, for 
being freſh and white, they ſtay a Day or two behind 
the other; and whereas thoſe of the Face and Body ſcale 
off, theſe break and run away. Scurfis Scales ſucceed the 
Paſtles of the Face, and ſometimes Pock-holes follow 
them; for when the Puſties fall oft, there is no inequality 
to be perceiv'd in the Skin : But after the Scales the Pits 
appear, and are to be ſeen a long Time after the Patient's 
well: Yet the diſtin S-ail-Pox ſeldom leave any Marks 


b-hind 


in the Tears 1667, 68, and part of 69. 81 


behind, and they were almoſt all that pitted, which inva- 


ded the laſt ſix Months of the Lear; for thoſe that pre- 
ceded them made no Impreſſion on the Skin, unleſs they 
fluxed, as ſhall be ſaid hereafter. Thro' the whole courſe 
of this Diſeaſe the Patient was either bound altogether, 
or went to Stool very ſeldom. And ſo much for the di- 
ctinct Small- Pon. 

That ſort of Small- Poꝶ which we call the Flux, has the 
ſame Symptoms with the diſtinct, only they are more 
violent, the Sickneſs, Vomiting, Fever, and the Reſtleſ- 
neſs, rage more cruelly, by which they are known to a 
Skilful Phyſician before they come out; only the Sick is 
not ſo apt to Sweat in this ſort as in the other abovedeſcri- 
bed; and where there is a great Inclination to it, it moſt 
commonly ſignifies, that the Small-Pox which are coming 
out will not flux. Moreover a Looſeneſs ſometimes pre- 
cedes the Eruption, and continues a Day or two after it, 


5 x which I never obſerv'd in the diſt inct Small-Pox. 


This Sort comes out generally on the third Day, ſome- 
times before, ſcarce ever after it; whereas the diſt inct ſhew 
themſelves the very fourthDay incluſively from the firſt be- 
ing taken, or after, very ſeldom before; and by how much 
ſooner they come ont before the fourth Day, ſo much more 
will they Flux. And tho”, to ſpeak in general, the Flux-pox 
ſcarce ever tarries till the fourth Day, yet it may ſo hap- 


pen, tho' very rarely, that the Eruption may be deferr d 
do the Fourth or Fifth, by reaſon of ſome grievous Symp- 


tom which afflicts the Patient before the Eruption, as a 


moſt violent Pain, ſometimes in the Region of the Loins, 

like a Fit of the Stone; ſometimes in the Side, like a 
Pleureſie; ſometimes in the Limbs, like a Rheumatiſin; 
* laſtly, in the Stomach with violent Sickneſs and Vomit- 
ing: In theſe Caſes [I have obſerv'd the Small-Pox to come 
out later than ordinary, becauſe they were reſtrained 
and hinder'd by the extream Violence of the {aid Symp- 
z toms; which Symptoms being more violent than uſually 
they are wont to be, when they lead the Van, plainly in- 
dicate to me, that the following Small Poæ will be of the 
| confluent kind, and not without danger. 


But in the next Place I muſt acquaint you, that tho 


in the diſtin Small-Pox, the Symptoms that accompany 
the beginning of this Dileaſe, ceaſe, as I ſaid before, im- 
mediately after the Eruption. It is quite different in the 
ES ö 8 


Fluxy 


— 2 —— oozes 
0 * * 
— * „ 


— " " $4 
4 | - 
— "3 i . b <a ' 
_— — — o >. — = 2 
8 RES — ” pe x4 . - . 1 
N 98 1 ** — ks — —_—_ 


Wn WO ” 4 — 
— = — 
© * = = 


 —A—_— eo tee — 
- a» - a 


— 


11 


82 Of the Regular Small-Pox. 


Flux, for the Fever and other Symptoms moleſt the Sick 
many Days after the coming out of the Puſtles. This ſort 
comes forth ſometimes like an Eryfipelas ;, ſometimes like 
the Meaſles; and as to the outward appearance, they can- 


not be diſtinguiſh'd by any but thoſe that are very con- 
verſant in this Diſeaſe, at leaſt as to the external Appear- 


ance; yet he that ſhall diligently conſider the great differ- 


ence, as to the Time of Eruption in theſe Diſeaſes, and o- 
ther Circumſtances, which he may gather from the Hiſto- "MM 
ry of each of them, will eaſily be able to diſtinguiſh them. 


As the Diſeaſe encreaſes theſe do not riſe ſo high as the 
diſtinct, eſpecially thoſe in the Face; but being entang1'd *# 
one with another, firſt they repreſent a red Bladder that 


covers the whole Face, which they ſooner tumifie than 
the diſtin are wont to do, and afterwards they are like 
a white Skin glu'd as it were to the Face, which does not 
riſe much higher than the common Superficies of the Skin. 


After the eighth Day, the white Skin by degrees grows 
daily rougher, as 7 e by touching, and begins to be 

Colour, not a yellow, as in the o- 
ther Sort, the roughneſs and colour of the Skin encreaſes © 
daily, till at length it falls off in large Scales. But if the [3 
Diſeaſe has been very ſevere, it does not ſcale in ſome Pla- 
ces of the Face till after the twentieth Day; and the ſe- | 
verer the Small-Pox are, ſo much the more do the Puſtles- 
as they ripen, incline to a duskiſh Colour, and they are the 


changed into a duski 


longer a going away, if they are left to their own Genius; 
on the contrary, the leſs they flux, ſo much the more they 


wax Yellow, and the ſooner they go off. When firſt the |. 
ſcabby Skin that covers the whole Face, ſcales away, it | 


leaves no ruggedneſs behind; but preſently ſcurfie Scales 


ſucceed it, that are indeed very corroſive; for they do not 
only pit, as the diſtin& Small-Pox uſed to do, but imprint 
thy Scars on the Face; and if the Flux-Pox have 


allo 
teen very violent, the Skin of the Shoulders and Back is 


alſo ſometimes marked, as would appear, if they were | 


naked and expoſed to Sighr. 


You muſt take notice, that this Diſeaſe is not to be e. 


ſteemed dangerous, becauſe the Body is full of the Small- 
Pox, but by reaſon of the number of them in the Face; 
for if that be very full, tho' there be few, and thoſe very 
diſtinct too, in the reſt of the Body, yet the Sick is in as 


much Danger as if every Member were crouded with 


them 5 


- o $4 
* - i 2 2 » 4 ER. * 5 1 


kf 
* 
* 


2 


— 2 


hal © 


EEͤ!!!?“ oe we ai. oe th ace , ROS 9 AY. p23 


0 WW 


C OT FT , ̃Üͤ⁰ůwͤ;Ü CC 0-2 


in the Tears 1667, 68, and part of 69. 8 3 


them; and on the contrary, tho' the Trunk and Mem- 
bers are very full, if there be but few in the Face, there 
is leſs danger. And what has been faid of their Number, 
may be likewiſe affirm'd of the kind of them; for the Face 
plainly indicates whether they are mild or otherwiſe. 

[ have always obſery'd, that in the Flux the Puſtles of 
the Hands and Feet were larger than thoſe of the Body, 
and that they were leſs and leſs the nearer they approach's 
to the Trunk. And fo much for the Puſtles. 

There are two other Symptoms that attend the Huæ- poæ, 


which are as conſiderable as the Puſt les or Swelling, or any 


other of the fore mentioned, to wit, Salivation in grown 
People, and a Looſeneſs in Children: The firſt of theſe 
is ſo perpetual a Concomitant, that I never knew but one 
that had the confluent kind, and was free from it: But 
the latter, to wit, the Looſeneſs, does not ſo certainly vex 
Children that have this ſort. But whether provident Na- 
ture has therefore ſubſtituted theſe Evacuations, becauſe in- 
this low and ſmall Sort the morbifick Matter cannot be ſo 
fully diſcharged, as by the larger and higher Puſtles of 
the diſtinct, I do not determine; for I only write a Hiſtory, 
and do not pretend to ſolve Problems. This I certainly 
know, that they did not only moſt commoaly accompany 
the confluent Small- Pax, but evacuation by them is as ne- 


ceſſary as either the Puſtles or ſwelling of the Face and 


Hands. Sometimes Salivation diſcovers it ſelf at their firſt 
coming ont; ſometimes not till a Day or two after. Firſt 
the Matter is thin, and eaſily ſpit up, fo that the Sick foul a 
great many Cloaths in a Nights time: And truly it is not 
much unlike a Mercurial Salivation, only it does not ſtink 
{o much; but moſt commonly about the eleventh Day it 
is more clammy, ſo that it is difficultly hawked up; the 
Sick is thirſty, and now and then Coughs as he Ain and 
the Liquor flies out at his Noſtrils; and after this Day Sa- 
livation moſt commonly ceaſes, tho' ſometimes (hut rare- 
ly) after it has ceaſed a Day or two, it returns again, as the 
Tumor of the Face, together with the Salivation, begins to 
decline on the eleventh Day, ſo at the ſame time, inſtead 
of it, the Hands are wont to ſwell, or ought to do fo. 
A Looſeneſs does not invade Children {o ſoon as Spit- 
ting does grown People; but at what time ſoever it comes, 
if it be not ſtop'd by Art, it continues through the whole 
Courſe of the Diese; | N 

& 2 1 


84 Of the Regular Small-Pox, 


In both kinds of the Small-Pox, the Fever is higheſt 
from the beginning to the Eruption, after which it is 
more moderate, till the Puſtles begin to ripen, and after- 
wards it totally vaniſhes. | 

L have always obſerv'd, That when the Diſeaſe was vio- 
nt, the Sick had as it were a Fit in the Evening, and 
then the Symptoms raged more cruelly, 


And now I have given you an exact Account of this ſort 


of Small-Pox, as it is of its own Nature, and of the true 


and natural Phenomena of it. In the next Place Iwill 
treat of the irregular Symptoms that happen in this Diſ- 


eaſe when it is unskilfully handled. 
., It is to be noted therefore, that the irregular Symptoms 
that occur on the eighth Day in the diſtinct Small-Pox, and 


A 


e firſt approach of the Diſeaſe, are of great 


thoſe that 1 1 on the Eleventh in the Flux, always rec- 


koning from t 


Moment, with reſpe& to the Life or Death of the Patient; 
and therefore they ought to be exactly weighed ; for it is 
manifeſt, that the greateſt part of thoſe that die of either 
Sort, die of the Days above-mention'd ; for he that hatn 
the diſtin& Small-Pox hopes all is well, if he Sweats freely 3 

Rid before, is common in grown |=? 
People) for he believes that by this means the Venom of 
the Diſeaſe will be expell'd through the Pores of the Skin, 


at firſt (which, as we 


and therefore thinks it highly reaſonable to promote the 
Sweat, as much as poſſible he can, by Cordials, and an 
hot Regimen, and he is encouraged to proceed in this 
Method, becauſe at firſt he fancies ſome Relief thereby: 
And beſides it is agreeable to the erroneous Opinion of the 


By-ſtanders : But at length thoſe Particles being elimina- 


ted by Sweat, which ſhould have ſerved to elevate the 
Puſtles, and to ſwell the Face. On the eighth Day the Face, 
which ought to have been ſwell'd, and inflamed between 
the Puſtles, on the contrary appears flaccid and white, 
yet fhe Puſtles continue red and elevated, even when th. 
Patient is Dead, and the Sweat, which follow'd freely to 
this Dry, now ceaſes of a ſudden of its own accord; n0! 
can it be raiſed again by the hotteſt Cordials. The Pati 
ent is taken light-headed of a ſudden, with Anxiety, violent 
Sickneſs and Reſtleſſneſs; he makes Water often, but: 
little at a time, ard in the ſpace of a few Hours takes leave 
of his Friends, ard repairs to his long Home. But her? 


we muſt take notice, that if the Small-Pox are few, it it 


* 


„ 


0 jd 2 2 — 4 . 


yang hen — 8 


A © 


bs 


Oy Xt 1 


2 ww ((3;Tﬀx wh 


TY ++ 


K Fy 


in the Tears 1667, 68, and part of 60, 85 


be Winter, or if the Patient be Aged, or if Bleeding has 


been uſed, -then this hot Method, whereof we have now 


= diſcourſed, does not fo certainly hinder the Swelling: of 
the Face; nor is it ſo deſtructive as when the Small-Pox 
are thick, or when it is Spring or Summer, or the Patient 
is in the Flower of his Age, and has not been blooded. 


But in the Hu the Sick is in greater Danger, and moſt 


| ; commonly dies on the Eleventh Day; for the Salivation, 


which hitherto preſerv'd the Patient, is wont to ceaſe of 


its own accord at this Time; therefore unleſs the Swel- 


ling of the Face perſiſts a little longer, and that of the 


| = Hands, now manifeſtly beginning, ſupplies its Place, the 
Sick muſt neceſſarily die: For it is to be conſider'd, that 
in this Sort the Puſtles being ſo very ſmall, not only Sali- 


vation, but the ſwelling of the Hands and Face is likewiſe 


2 abſolutely requiſite for the diſcharge of the morbifick Mat- 
ter; and if either of them be abſent, or recede before their 
due Time, the Patient is preſently dying: But it 1 
too too often in this hot Diſeaſe, that the Craſis of 


the 
Blood is ſo weaken'd and broke by an over-hot Regimen, 
and ſo highly inflam'd, that it is no longer able to eject 
leiſurely the inflammatory Particles (to ſay nothing at 
preſent of thoſe Miſchiefs that are occaſion'd by Sweats 
unſeaſonably forc'd,) ſo that either the Face or the Hands 


do not ſwell at all, or the Tumor vaniſhes with the Sali- 
> vation, for tho' the Swelling of the Face ought to abate a 


little on this Day, yet it ſhould not totally dilappear till 


2 Day or two after, the Tumor of the Hands in the mean 


while encreaſing, than which, as there is no ſurer ſign of 


** Recovery, ſo the contrary certainly indicates imminent 
Danger: But however it be, the Matter of the Salivation, 


which was crude and thin, and eaſily hawked up till this 
Day, is now viſcid and tough, ſo that the Sick is in dan- 


L ger of being choak'd, and his Drink is like to ſtrangle 


him, ſo that it is forced back through his Noſtrils with 
a violent Cough; he is Hoarſe, and ſeized with a great 
Dulneſs, being wholly opprefſed by the violence of the 
Diſeaſe, and moſt commonly dies in ſuch an Agony on the 
Day 1 {aid before. 

There are yet other Symptoms that happen at any Time 
” ws Diſeaſe, and belong as well to diſtinct Small-Pox as 
the Flux. 


G 3 For 


88 Df the Regular Small-Pox. 


For inſtance; a Phrenſie ſometimes ſeizes the Sick, by 
reaſon of too great an Ebullition of the Blood, and he is 
ſo unable to bear the Heat, that he endeavours with all his 
might to free himſeH from thoſe that confine him to his 
Bed; and ſometimes the ſame Cauſe produces adifferent, 
or rather contrary Effect, a Coma, ſo that the Patient 
ſcarce ever wakes, unleſs he be continually ſtirr'd up. 

And ſometimes alſo in this Diſeaſe, in like manner as in 
the Plague, the Texture of the Blood being looſened by 
the violence of the Inflammation, Purple Spots appear a- 
mong the Puſtles, and are moſt commonly the fore-run- 
ners of Death. This is moſt frequent whea the Conſtitn- 
tion of the Air favours moſt this Epidemical Diſeaſe. 
Sometimes black {mall Spots icarce ſo bis as Pins Heads, 
flat in the middle, ſhew themſelves at the top of the Puſt- 
les.in divers Places, and as they take their Riſe from too 
great Heat, ſo at length, by the help of a temperate Regi- 
men, they area quite Brown, and wands y little and 
little of a yellowiſh Colour; which properly belongs to 


the gennine and regular Smal-Pox. And this is very mani- 
feſt to thoſe that are converſant in this Diſeaſe, wherein all 


the Symptoms are ſo much the more gentle, by how much 
the more the Puſtles, when they are ripe, repreſent the 
foreſaid Colour; and fo on the contrary. 


Moreover, the Blood of young People, and of thoſe | J 
that are in the Flower of their Age, rages ſometimes ſo | 4 


. 
. . — 

— us * 3 ig *. * hk . * 

* » * - PP Ax oma w 7 

* wu. 4, —__ L - ES CRATE * N A 4 = : N * * = 
ht 2 Ton no, dS 2 „ * 


ev 


violently, and is ſo mightily inflamed (eſpecially if they A 


have debauch'd themſelves with Wine or other ſpirituous 1 
Liquors) that it breaks out of the Arteries into the Bladj- 
der, and ſo is evacuated by the urinary Paſſages : And in- 


deed there is ſcarce a worle Symptom than a bloody Urine 
in the whole Tragedy of this Diſeaſe, and ſometimes from 
the ſame Cauſe, tho' ſeldomer, Blood is caſt up from the 


Lungs. But theſe Hemorrhages happen moſt commonly 
at the beginning of the Diſcaſe, before the Puſtles come 


out; or if they do appear in ſome Places, yet in moi 
other Parts they lie hid thick under the Skin, and are that 
Kind Which would flux moſt ; unleſs the Symptom kill the 
Patient, and fo put an end to the Diſeaſe, 
Sometimes allo there is a total ſuppreſſion of Urine, 
eſpecially in-yc2ng Men at the ſtate or declination of the 
diſtinct Sort. Lhere are alſo other Symptoms, that ſome- 
times ariſe irom 2Cauſe contrary to thoſe abgve-mention'2, 


. 


T4 :——̃ — ̃ ] — . uu nd av ru [oa 0 


1 7 

hi. en. th 
19 = 5 * ” 
. — > 


in the Tears 1667, 68, and part of 69. 87 


to wit, when the Patient has been injur'd by violent Cold, 
or exceſſive Bleeding without Reaſon, or by being over- 

urged, the Puſtles ſometimes flat on a ſudden, and a 

ooſeneſs ſupervenes, ſo that the Patient, if he be adult, 
as we have hinted before, is in great danger, for the va- 
riolous Matter being ſtruck in, Nature is altogether un- 
able to eje& them as ſhe ought by the Pores of the Skin, 


Moreover, the Tumor of the Face and Hands is repell'd 
upon this account, which is as much for the ſafety of the 


Patient as the very Eruption of the Puſtles, unleſs they 
are very few; but the Symptoms that proceed from ta- 


> king Cold very rarely occur; for this Diſeaſe being de- 
= ſervedly reckon'd among the hotteſt, an Error on this 
Hand is much leſs than on the other. 


[ ingenuouſly acknowledge, that by reaſon of a defect 


in the Underſtanding, which is common to me and the 
= reſt of Mankind, I know not the Eflence of this Diſeaſe z 
but the above-mention'd Symptoms being ſeriouſly con- 
» fider'd, ſeem to indicate, that it is an Inflammation di- 


ſtin& in ſpeice from other Inflammations of the Blood, 
and other Humours, in removing whereof it is Nature's 
Buſineſs, for two or three of the firſt Days, to digeſt and 
concoct the inflamed Particles, which afterwards being 
diſcharged upon the habit of the Body, ſhe ſtill ripens, and 
at length expels out of her Territories in the form of lit- 
tle Abſceſſes: Wherefore, that the Method of Cure may 
be built upon: ſome Foundation, we muſt take notice of 
two different Seaſons in this Diſeaſe, the one of Separa- 
tion, the other of Expulſion. . The firſt for the moſt part 
is paſſed through with a febrile Ebullition, and is wont to 
be finiſh'd in the firſt three or four Days, in which Time 
Nature is buſied in gathering together the inflamed Par- 
ticles which moleſt the Blood, and in thruſting them out 
to the fleſhy Parts. 

The Blood by this means is now quieted, and ſepara- 
tion being thus finiſh'd by the help of the Ebullition of the 
Blood, Expulſion now takes place, which is perform'd all 
the reſt of the Time of the Diſeaſe, by means of thoſe lit- 
tle Abſceſſes in the Fleſh ; for as they do not differ from 
the Nature of Abſceſſes, ſo they run through the ſame 
ſtate of Crudity and Maturation, and dry up asothersdo; 
all which, if they perform right, Things go well, for the 
Chiefeſt part of the Cure depends on theſe, And truly 

| | G 4 this 


2 „ 


_ = 
4 2 
—— ——— — —ů—ů — 0 
2 — . a 980 8 
— - - — 


— 


4; 
v4 
„ 
[L 
* 
1 
= 


88 Of the Irregular Small- Pox 


this laſt Buſineſs requires ſo much more Time than the 
former of Separation, becauſe that was tranſacted in 
thin and fluid Body, and, as I may ſay, in Nature's Bo- 
ſom; whereas the latter is perform'd in a denſe and thick 
Subſtance, and more remote from the Fountain of Life. 
Theſe Things being premiſed, theſe Indications ariſe : 

Firſt, That ſuch an equality be kept in the Ebullition of 
the Blood, that it may not, by exceſſiive Violence, per- 
form Separation too haſtly, nor yet by too torpid a Mo- 
tion retard the ſame, or not perform it ſufficiently. Se- 
condly, That the Abſceſſes or Puſtles may be kept up with 
the greateſt Care, that as they run over their due Times, 
they may at length wholly carry off the matter contain'd _ 
in them, and they themſelves may alſo fade away. 

And to ſpeak a few Things of the firſt > We muſt be 
ſollicitouſſy careful, eſpecially at this Time, that the Ebui- 

jition rile not too high, either by heaping too many 
_ Cloaths on, or from the Air of the Place where the Pa- 
tient lies, being over-heated by the Fire, or by the uſe of 


hot Medicines or Cordials. And we muſt eſpecially be- 


ware of theſe Things, if the Patient be in the Flower of 
his Age, or has his Blood too much exalted by generous | 


Liquors, or if it be the Spring- time, or but the beginning | 


of Summer; for hence it would ſo fall out, that Separa- 
tion, Which ought to be perform'd leiſurely, ſo as it may 
more opportunely perform an univerſal Deſpumation, 
would be precipitated, and ſo either not a ſufficient num- 
ber of Particles would be gathered, or, as it may chance 
to happen, ſome Particles may be condemn'd to Secreti- 
on, which Nature otherwiſe would not have them under- 
go, but that being forced beyond her Bounds, ſhe creates 
this Miſchief to her ſelf; for when they are ſeparated 
which are not fit for ſeparation, the Motion of others 
that have an inclination to it, is hinder'd by their mixing 
together, and fo are render'd leſs fit for Expulſion. To 
me indeed it ſeems agreeable to Reaſon, that the longer 
Nature is in working and perfecting Separation, ſo the 
Ebullition be not quite torpid, ſo much more certainly 
and univerſally the Separation is perform'd; and upon its 
being fo finiſh'd, it is neceſſary that the Succeſs of the fol- 
lowing Cure miſt eſpecially depend, as from the contra- 
ry Method, the Event of the Buſineſs muſt be quite con- 
trary ; for from that hot Regimen no good . as 
N wh „ rom 


in the the Tears 1667, 68, and part of 69. 89 


from over-haſty Fruit no Advantage, ſeeing it frequently 
"2 4 happens that the Patient falls either down-right into a 
)- *2ZPhrenſie, or, which is worſe, great Sweats ariie, where- 
k _©® by Particles not fit for Separation, nor anſwering the Na- 
ture of Pus (which very Pus notwithſtanding is the ge- 
' *Znuine Product of this Separation) are ejected, or the 
f © Small-Pox being too much forced out, by giving Cordials, 
and by a hot Regimen run all into one, a foul Spectacle, 
and one that threatens a ſad Event: And theſe and the 
like Symptoms, are uſually occaſion'd by theſe Errors; 
h © whereas I never obſerv'd any Miſchief from the other Me- 
thod; for Nature, left to her ſelf, does her Work in her 
d on Time, and ſeparates, and then expels the Matter in 
the right Way and Manner; fo that in the younger Sort, 
> eſpecially in thoſe of a brisk i ſhe needs not our 
Uielp, being furniſh'd with Strength ſufficient of her own ; 
for neither have I ſeen nor heard of any that miſcarried, 
* becauſe the Small-Pox came not out at firſt ; but too many 
have periſh'd in whom the Small-Pox appear'd well, but 
3 afterwards upon ſtriking in of the Puſtles, have fallen be- 
fore they were ripe. 
And as it is unadvis'd and hazardous to advance too high 
the Ebullition once begun, either by means of an hot Re- 
2 gimen, or by Cordials; ſo on the contrary, there is no 
lels danger in diminiſhing the ſame by Vomits, Purges, 
2 Gliſters,.or the like, ſeeing by this means the proper Se- 
2 cretion of the ſeparable Particles is much hinder'd, tho' 
23 tht vulgar Argument which Men nſe againſt Bleeding, 
and other Evacuations, viz. that we muſt not move the 
"Ftinmours from the Circumference to the Center, ſince 
Nature ſeems to affect the contrary in this Diſeaſe, be of 
d Ino Force at all, becauſe upon uſing theſe Means, a quite 
rs contrary Effect has often been obſerv'd to follow, to wit, 


g | Ja ſudden Eruption of the Small-Pox, Yet there are other 
o | JRealons in readineſs, which ſtrongly perſuade, that if by 
xr | any Means it may be avoided, we meddle not with this 
e | Practice, for (briefly to touch on the chief of them) by 
y Þ| © theſe Evacuations not only the Ebullition is too much leſ- 
ts T ſened, by means whereof the Particles to be Deſpumated 
]- F! onght accurately to be ſeparated: But that alſo is ſubſtract- 
ed, which ſhould continually, as it were, afford Fuel to 
che Secretion begun; whence it often happens that the 


s Small- Pox coming out at firſt with a laudable Progreſs, and 
Wy OY 5 perhaps 


90 Of the Irregular Small-Pox 


perhaps ſo much the better, becauſe the ſaid Evacuation 


preceded, do a little after ſtrike in and flatten of a ſudden; 
and for this Reaſon chiefiy, becauſe their wants Matter to 
follow that which went before, and to bring up the Rear, 
Notwithſtanding what has been ſaid, if there be the leaſt 
Suſpicion that the Small- Por which are coming out, will 
flux, it will be very advantageous, not only preſently to 


Bleed, but alſo to give a Vomit, for Reaſons to be men- 


tion'd at large in another Place. 


As to the ſecond Indication, which concerns the Time 


of Expulſion, at which Time the ſeparated Matter is ex- 


pelled by the help of the Puſtles, we muſt take care that 


they beduly kept up, ſo that they may orderly attain their 
appointed Period. 

And as we have ſufficiently demonſtrated how very dan- 
gerous it is for the Patient to be kept over hot in the time 
of the Secretion, when there is a Fever, and the Puſtles 
ſcarce yet appear; ſo alſo is there no leſs danger, if the 


ſame be done at any Time of the Diſeaſe, and eſpecially at f 


that Time, which is towards the beginning of Expulſion, 


while the Puſtles are yet crude ; for tho the Blood be ina 


great meaſure free from the inteſtine Tumult, by reaſon 


the Separation is finiſh'd, and the Matter diſcharg'd to the 
fleſhy Parts, yet it being at preſent tender and young, 
and having got ſcarce Induction into a new State and Tex- | 
ture, it is apt to ſuffer, and to be eaſily affected with im- 


moderate Heat coming from all Parts; and fo being irrit-- 
ted, it takes fire upon the leaſt Occaſiqn, and is inclinable 
to a new Ebullition, which does not as the former, en- 
deavour to promote Separation (for we {ſuppoſe that alrea- FR 
dy finiſh'd) but inſtead thereof, it not only heightens the 


above-mention'd Symptoms, but diſturbs Expulſion be. 
gun by the Puſtles, and does harm by exagitating the 


contained Matter : Either therefore the Particles now 
ſeparated and depoſited in the habit of the Body, being 


hurried away by the violent and rapid Courſe of the boil- 


ing Blood, are drawn again into its Maſs, or the fleſhy 


Parts being heated beyond the degree due to Separation, | 


do not fo well perform it: Or, laſtly, perhaps upon the 


coming of this new Sickneſs, the Oeconomy of the Blood 
and Tone of the Fleſh is perverted, ſo that it cannot o- 
vercome the Matter expell'd, and concoct it after the 


uſual manner of Abſceſſes. 


But 


i: the Tears 1667, 68, and part of 69. 91 


But we muſt not be ſo intent upon prevening too great 
| 'S Ebullition in the Blood, as to hinder the Eruption of 
the Pnitles, y expoſing the Patient to the Injuries of the 
Cold. The degree of Heat moſt proper to promote their 
Ipulſion muſt be natural, and ſuch as is agreeable to the 
Melnper of the carnous Parts; and whatſoever exceeds or 
„ comes ſhort of this, is dangerous on either Hand. 
Now it manifeſtly appears from what has been faid, 
that this Diſeaſe, and alſo the Method of Cure accommo- 
je dated to it, ſtands on very ſlippery Ground; and I dare 
. bold affirm, that his Reputation will be often queſtion- 
ed, who frequently applies himſelf to the Cure of it; for 
iv not only the Vulgar are ready to ſay, they are Phyfick d 
to Death, but Phyſicians themſelves haſely take occaſion 
from hence to calumniate, and eaſily wheedle the Ignorant 
ne into an ill Opinion, that by this means they may gain the 
more Eſteem, and raiſe themſelves by ruining others; 
le. wich is very much below a Man of Learning, and indeed 
at 'Y an honeſt Mechanick abhors ſuch Practices. Moreover, 


* 


hence we may obſerve, which is leſs ſtrange, that over - offi- 


bs cious Nurſes are moſt commonly very unſucceſsful in this 
dn Diſeaſe; for it is difficult, and above the Reach of ondi- 
he. nary Women, to find out the degree of Heat requiſite in 


this Caſe, eſpecially when the Seaſon of the Year, the 
Age of the Patient, and his manner of living, and the 

like, are to be weigh'd at once, which truly require a skil- 
ful Phyſician. 

BB HIf the Puſtles chance to ftrike in, or the ſwelling of the 
P:ce and Hands fall upon Bleeding unſeaſonably, or catch- 
ing of Cold, we muſt aſe Cordials; but we mult have a 
care of being too laviſh in giving them; for tho' you have 
taken away Blood, yet it may ſo fall out, that while you 

are afraid of loſs of Strength thereby, and uſe Cordials, 
either ſtrong ones, or often repeated, you cauſe a new E- 
bullition on a ſudden ; for the Blood is yet tender, and 
2 eaſily ſenſible of the ſtrength of a hot Provocative; whence 
it comes to paſs, that often repeated Ebullitions ariſe in 
the ſame, to which the Patient's Death may rather be at- 
tributed, than to the foregoing Blood-letting. And fo 
®: much may ſuffice to be ſpoken in general of thoſe Things, 

: which may ſatisfie the firſt Intentions. | 
Nov to come nearer Practice; as ſoon as the Signs of 
| this Diſeaſe ſhew themſelves, I keep the Sick from the * 


ir, 


92 Of the Irregular Small- Pox 


Air, and forbid them the uſe of Wine and Fleſh, and a. 
low them Small-beer gently warm'd with a Toaſt, for 
their ordinary Drink; and now and then I permit then 
to drink as much of it as they will. I order them for their 


Victuals Oatmeal and Barley-broath, and roaſted Apples, 


and other Things which are neither too hot nor too cold, 
nor of too hard a Digeſtion ; neither do I much diſlike the 
ruſtick Diet, to wit, that they are fed with Milk and roaſt 


ed Apples ſqueez d into it, provided they uſe it moderate- 


ly, and but now and then, and when it is warm'd; J 
forthwith prohibit an hotter Regimen, and the uſe of all 


manner of Cordial Medicines)whereby ſome raſhly endea- 
vour to force out the Small-Pox before the fourth Day, 


which is the natural and proper Time for their Eruption; 
for I certainly know, that the ſlower they come out, the 
more univerſal will be the ſeparation of the Pocky Mat- 
ter, and the better will the Po ripen, and the leſs danger 


will there be of their ſtriking in; whereas if they are f 


driven out before their due Time, the Matter being as 
yet crude and indigeſted, is precipitated, and deceives our 
Hopes, like over-haſty Fruit: And beſides there is great 
danger, by reaſon of this over-diligence, eſpecially in flo- 
rid and hot Conftitutions, whoſe active b 

more than enough ſupply the room of Cordials, leſt Na- 
ture, being too much incited and forc'd, ſhould over- run 
the whole Body with the Snall. Poæ, and that by this over- 
haſte they ſnould flux, which otherwiſe would have been 
a moderate diſtinct Pox. Moreover, the Small- Poæ my 
not therefore be immediately forc'd out as ſoon as an 
ſuſpicion of the Diſeaſe ariſes, becauſe, for ſooth, the Pa- 
tient is uſually very fick and reſtleſs before their comeing 
out, for there cannot ſo much as one Inſtance be ſhewn, 
that ever any one died, how grievous fick ſoever he was, 
becauſe the Small-Pox came not preſently out, or that Na- 
ture was wanting in forcing them out ſooner or later, 
unleſs at any Time ſhe was hinder'd bv too hot a Regimen, 
and Cordials unſeaſonably preſcrib' ; for I have more 
than once obſerv'd in young People of 2 ſinguines Com- 


plexion, that a hot Regimen #nd Cordial i on pur— 
oſe to force out the Small-Pox befor © thi dug Time, 
have ſo little promoted their coming ont, on rhe 


contrary, they have given a check to it ;, {or thu Flood 
being heated by theſe means, and put into violent 
Motion 


rinciples do þ 


tin ys 2 


Xe QYBusL AD nocnmYy www 


— 


in the Tears 1667, 68, and part of 69. 93 


a 1 Motion than is fit to perform aright the ſeparation of the 
n Pocky Matter, only ſome certain Tokens of the Diſeaſe 

ir new themſelves, while the Puſtles lie within the Skin, 
„ and do not raiſe themſelves further by what Cordials ſo- 
ever they are ſollicited to it, till at length the Blood be- 
Ba F 5 ing reduc'd to its moderate and due Temper, that is, by 
t. 2? allowing Small-beer, and taking off part of the load of 


- 4 


>. 2 Cleiths wherewith he was roaſted, I have made a con- 

j] © venijent way for the Puſtles to go out, and ſo I nave put 
11 tte Patient out of danger, by God's Aſſiſtance. 1 
Vor have they any more Reaſon on their Side, if I am 1 
„ able to judge, who ſo obſtinately confine the Patient to 
1; his Bed, before the fourth Day, provided he keeps his 1 
je Chamber, than they who over- early and unſeaſonably pour i} 
t- © down Cordials; for bloody Urine, purple Spots, and other 1 
r mortal Symptoms, as aboveſaid, come upon People in the 1 
re 4 lower of their Age, meerly becauſe they are too ſoon i: 

confined to their Beds: But on the fourth Day I commit 55 


the Sick to his Bed, and then if they come not out well 
ſlome gentle Cordial may be properly preſcrib'd, at leaſt 4 
for once, to drive out the Puſtles. Among Medicines for . 
this purpoſe, thoſe they call Paregor:cks, ſuch as Liquid | 
* Landanum, Diaſeordium, and the like, if they be mixed | 
in a ſmall quantity with ſome proper Cordial-water, ex- i 
cel the reft; for when theſe give a check to the boiling KN 
Blood, Nature more ſeaſonably and freely caſts out the | 
> morbifick Matter. But I would not adviſe that a Cordial | 
ſhould be uſed before this Day, tho' there be a Looſeneſs, 
and that, as it ſeems, indicates the ſame : For tho', as we | 
ment7on'd before, a Looſeneſs does ſometimes precede the 
Erupton of the Flux-Pox, which is occaſion'd by inflam- # 
matory Vapours, or Humours emptied into the Inteſtines 4 
from the Maſs of Blood, enraged and violently hurried 1 
the firſt Days, yet Nature will be no more wanting in 6 
expelling the Vapours of the Pocky Matter, which being <> 
done, the Looſeneſs ſtops of its own accord, than ſhe is * 
wont to be in ejecting and caſting forth of theſe Vapours; ne 
which, waen they are inverted to the Stomach at the be- * 
ginning of the Diſeaſe, provoke Vomiting. | 'þ 
Bur 'tis to be noted, that if I am call'd to a ſtrong 
young Man, who has beſides given occaſion to the Diſeaſe 
by exceſlive drinking of Wine, or any ſpirituous Liquor 
whatever, I reckon it not ſufficient for the dans > 
| The 


94 Of the Vrregular Small- Pox Fi 


the Ebullition of the Blood that he abſtain from his Bei 1 
and Cordials, unleſs moreover he be let Blood in the A 

But if this cannot be granted by reaſon of the prev“ ö 1 
Prejudice of the Vulgar, yet I think T ought at lea 5 
urge Bleeding; for when that Inflammation which ba, 
heat of the ſpirituous Liquors impreſs on the Blool, is 11 


ded to the intenſe Heat that naturally attends this DUH? 
eaſe, the Blood fo rages, that ſometimes, by the duct of | 
the Veſſels, it breaks into the Bladder, or cauſes pure? 
Spots, and other ſuch Symptoms, as through the Wage 
Cour ſe of the Diſeaſe ſtand in the Phyſician's way, and car q be 
ry the Patient off. And ſo much for thoſe Things Which? 
are to be perform'd before the Eruption of thy Puitles - 
When the Puſtles firſt come out, I then 4ilizently cn WET 
ſider whether they be of the diſtinct or confluent Ki 0% t 
becauſe they differ extreamly the one from the other, | 4; 
tho' they agree as to ſome Symptoms © If therefore fromþy 
the bigneſs and paucity of the Puſtles, and the - flownes þ WM; 
of their coming out, and from the vaniſhing of the Sick 
neſs, and other Symptoms, which tire the Patient after 
the Eruption of the Flux-Pox, it appears they are th: 
Jiſtinct Sort, I take care that the Sick be refreſh'd witi 
Small-beer, Oatmeal and Barly-gruel, and the like, “ 
above-deſcrib'd ; and if the Sma//-Pox be but few, and i: 
Summer-time, and that very hot, I ſee no Reaſon why 
the Patient ſhould be kept ſtifled up in Bed, and why he 
may not rather riſe a fe Hours every Day, provided tie! 
Inconveniencies of too much Cold or Heat may be pre 
vented, by the Place and Cloathing; for when the Pr“ 
tient keeps up ſometimes from his Bed, the Diſeaſe runs 
its. Courſe with leſs Trouble, and in a ſhorter Time, 
than if he had been continualy faſtened to it; which not 
only makes the Sickneſs more tedious, but encreaſes the 
febrile Heat, and when the Bliſters riſe, cauſes a pait- 
ful Inflammation. But if either the cold Seaſon of the 
Year, or a large Eruption of the Puſtles, put the Patient 
under a neceſſity of keeping his Bed continually, I tale 
care that he lie not hotter, nor with more Cloaths 0: Þ 
him, than when he was in Health, and that he have 
Fire kindled only Morning and Evening, unleſs it be 
Winter. Nor do I require that he ſhould be alway: F 
fixed to one Place, leſt he Sweat, which I do conf: | 


dently affirm, as well by Reaſons above-mention'd, : 
; | . 7 , 


7 in the Tears 1667, 68, and part of 69. 95 


by Experience it ſelf, cannot be promoted without great 
Danger. 
1 When the Diſeaſe is going off, it is proper to give three 
or four Spoonfuls of Canary Wine hot, or ſome other 
{temperate Cordial-Medicine, becauſe the Eruption of the 
Vapours that proceed from the Matter now turn'd to 
pus, is hinder'd by the Puſtles, which are at length grown 
Rcruſty and hard; and there is danger, leſt the putrid Ex- 
„ Fhalations return again into the Maſs of Blood : And truly 
% now, and not ſooner, is the time for Cordials; at 
': fame time alſo a little hotter and more Cordial- Diet may 
wo * be allow'd; for inſtance, Sugar-Sops, and Oatmeal-Can- 
2 ale, and the like; nor is there need of any other Thing 
aa t all that is in the diſtinct and gentle ſort, if the Patient 
„ v ill but ſuffer himſelf to be treated moderately in this Me- 
i *thod and Diet, unleſs by chance, Reſtleſneſs, or Watch- 
gings, or other Symptoms threatening a Phrenſie, ſhould 
Snow and then perſuade the uſe of a Paregorick. And this 
is indeed the true Method in curing this fort of Small- 
Po, and which will prevail when I am Dead, notwith- 
ſtanding the great Prejudices Men have taken againſt it, by 


tie reaſon of an erroneous Opinion; tho' I do not deny but 
they that have been treated with a quite contrary Regi- 
© Fmen have recovered, yet it muſt be acknowledg'd (and 
tis truly to be lamented, if we conſider, that this diſtin& 
KEkind is no way dangerous in its own Nature) nevertheleſs 
e many die, and many more alſo would yield to Fate, but 
tie that they are ſaved by the cold Seaſon, wherein the Diſ- 
e ſeaſe happens, or by Blood- letting, (otherwiſe unneceſſary 
Pe fand uſeleſs) lately celebrated, upon which account, if ei- 
Uns ther the Obſtinacy of Friends, or the diffidence of the Pa- 
me, tient hinder the foreſaid Regimen, I reckon it ſafeſt to let 
not Blood; which indeed, tho? of it ſelf it does hurt, becauſe 
th Fit diſturbs and confounds Separation, and moreover ſub- 
ans #ltrats the Suſtenance deſigned to keep up the Puſtles and 
5 Swelling, yet it makes compenſation 4 the hot Regi- 


men which will follow within a while, and therefore ren- 


tale ders this Method, which we ſhould not uſe but againſt 
on our Will, not ſo dangerous and doubtful. 

By the way, it appears from what has been ſaid, why 
| be ſo few of the common People die of this Diſeaſe, com- 
Yay? EY with the Rich that are kill'd by it; which indeed can 
py hardly be aſcrib'd to any other Cauſe, than that by * 
93 5 0 


96 Of the Regular Small-Pox 


of their Poverty and Country-way of living, they hay: 8 


not Power to hurt themſelves by a more accurate and de. 
licate Regimen: But this Diſeaſe has deſtroy'd more g 
the common People ſince they knew the uſe of Mithridate, 7 
Diaſcordium, and of the Decoction of Hartſborn, and the 
like, than in Ages more unlearned, but far wiſer; for now 
there is ſcarce a Houle wherein there is not a pragmatica! WK 
Woman, who practiſes that Art to Man's Deſtruction, 1 


which ſhe never learnt. And ſo much for the Cure 6 w © 


the diſtinct Small Pox. 


But if the Small-Pox flux, the Caſe is very hazardous, I it 
for I reckon this Sort is no leſs different from the other ®* Þ} ( 


than tne Plague is from this, tho' among the Vulgar, who 


take Names and Words for Things, the Cure of both is} 4 v 
ſaid to be the ſame. In this ſort of Diſeaſe, ſince it is the t. 
Product of a greater Inflammation of the Blood, more ae ? 


mult be taken that the Patient be not heated, as we fail. 
in the Cure of the former: But tho' this kind in its own |® 
Nature requires greater cooling than the other, yet, to| 
promote the Swelling of the Hands and Face, (without! 
which the Patient is loſt) and the riſing and encreaſe of 
Paſtles, and becauſe the Patient, by reaſon of the painful 
Exu'ceration, cannot keep from his Bed, it is expedient |* 
that he keep both himſelf and Hands in it, ſo he have not] 
too many Cloaths on, and have the liberty of turning hi 
Body to any part of the Bed, as he pleaſe, as we mention 
in the diſtin kind, eſpecially towards the latter end 0f 
the Diſeaſe, when the Fever of Maturation is at hand, the. 
patient may not only be depriv'd of this Liberty, but he 
muſt be admoniſh'd to uſe it, and he muſt be turn'd Night 
and Day frequently, that the great Heat may be qualify d, 
and Sweats may be avoided, by which the gentle Humour 
is carried off, wherewith the Small-Pox ſhould be diluted, þ 
that they may grow mild. '2 
Seeing therefore, as we ſaid, Salivation conſtantly ac- 
companies this ſort; and whereas *tis one of Nature's 
principal Evacuations, and ſerves inſtead of that which 
ought to have been made by Puſtles (for the evacuation ? 
by Puſtles in this low and depreſſed Sort, proceeds noi Þ 
to well as in the other) we muſt earneſtly endeavour to 
continue it, and to keep it up in its Vigour, that it be 
not ſtop'd before its Time, either by the uſe of hot Me- 


dicines, or by forbidding the Patient to drink freely of 
Small- 


F in the Tears 1667, 68, and part of 69. 97 


ve * Small- beer, or ſome ſuch Liquor. Now, ſince Salivation, 
l.. according to Nature, is to begin with the firſt Eruption o 


ol them, and to abate on the Eleventh Day, but not to give 
te, Hover altogether as yet for a Day or two; if it wholly ccaſe 
he before that Day, the Patient's Caſe is dangerous; for ſeeing 
u te Swelling of the Face (whereby a little of the morhi%c 
cal latter is evacuated) ever diſfappears on that Day, it Sali— 
on, © tion alſo withdraws it ſelf at the fame Time, the Patient 
of M5: 50ifon'd by the Pocky Matter, now growing putrid or 


a8 venomous; and whereas now there is no way left by which 
ws, Af it may be evacuate l, he is at Death's Noor, unleſs perhaps 
le! (s ſometimsés it falls out) the {welling 0! the Hands, (Which 
ho as it ſhews it felt later than that of the Face, fo it goes a- 
1 1 1 way more ſlowly) beof that Momentas to ſnatch him from 
the) the Jaws of Death. Salivation, which is here ſo valuable, 
and fo neceſſary, is very much promoted, if the Patient 
drinks good ſtore of Small-beer, or {ome ſuch Liquor, as 
may neither heat him nor provoke him to Sweat, 

Beſides, that this violent Ebullition of the Blood may 
be quieted, wherein this ſort of S Po far exceeds the 
other, and that Salivation may be kept up, (the neceſſary 
Evacuation of this Diſeaſe) Narcoticks are more proper 
than any other Things whatever; which, tho' upon the ac- 
count of their incraflating Vertue, they may ſeem to hin- 
der the bringing up of the Phlegm, yet I have long ſince 
quitted my ſelf of that Prejudice, and have made uſe of 
them in this Diſeaſe with excellent Succeſs, when the Pa- 
tient was beyond Pabeſcency : For whereas the Blood of 
infants and Children (who for the moſt part,fleep well e- 
nough through the whole Covrie ot this Diſeaſe) terments 
more gently, it leſs wants fuct a Rexzora 5 And moreover, 
the Looſeneſs which Nature has appointed to be an Evacua- 
tion for Children in this ſort of Diſeaſe, is by the uſe of 
them ſtop'd, to the Patient's Damage But Paregoricks, if 
they be frequently adminiſter'd to grown People, bring 


7 moderately, they reſtrain and prevent the violent Ebulliti- 
on of the Blood, and conſequently hinder a Phrenſie; ſe- 
condly, by the uſe of them the Swelling of the Hands and 
Face, which is very requiſite, proceeds the better; third- 
* ly, the Swelling, by means of Narcotichs, is kept up and 
2 protracted to Nature's due Term, which conduces much to 
er Patient's Safety, ſeeing oftentimes the Swelling on the 
14 ace 


theſe Advantages with them; firſt, by procuring Sleep 


98 Of the Regular Small-Pox 


Face falls ſooner, to the endangering of the Patient; for 
when the heat of the Blood is qualified, the inflam'd Par- 
ticles are opportunely carried to the Hands, and all the du. 
perficies 0 the Body, according to the Nature of the Dit- 
eaſe ; and then Salivation is promoted by them, which, 
tho” it may be ſtop'd in ſome for a few Hours, by vertue 
of ſo ſtrong an incraſſating Medicine, yet Strength being 
preſently encreaſed by this new Aid, Nature rouſes her ſelf, 
and finiſhes the Work begun wits good Succeſs. Nay, | 
have obJerv'd, that Saliuation,- v-hich uſnally abates about 
the Eleventh Day, and ſometimes ſooner, to the Patient's 
great hazard, has, upon giving Paregoricks, more than 
once been renew'd atreſh, and has not ceaſed before the 
Fourtcenth Day, and ſometimes after it. TI uſually give 


either about fourteen Drops of Liquid Landanum, or one 


Ounce of Diacodium in Cowſlip- Water, or ſome other 
ſuch diſtill'd Water, which, it they be given to grow Per- 
ſons after the Small-Poxare all come out, every Night, till 
the end of the Diſeaſe, I have found by Experience, that 
not only no Inconvenience, but great Benefit will accrue to 
them from thence: But 'tis expedient, as I think, to give 
Paregoricks a little ſooner than otherwiſe is uſual ; for you 


may eaſily obſerve, that in the worſt Small-Pox the Fit of | 


Heat, asI may call it, nſually torments the Patient in the 
Evening with reſtleſneſs and other Symptoms, which, if 
the Paregrricks be taken about fix or ſeven a Clock at 
Night, may be in ſome meaſure prevented. 
In the next Place, whereas in the Confluent Small-Pox 
a Looſeneſs as certainly follows Children as Salivation 
does the Adult, Nature always appointing one or the other 
of theſe Evacuations to carry of the moabifick Matter; ſo 
on the one Hand I never check Salivation, nor on the other 
{top the Looſeneſs, ſince both are equally abſurd : And ' tis 
to be noted, that the ill-beſtow'd Pains of ſeveral impudent 
Goſſips have murder'd many Thouſands of Infants, while 
they falſely reckon with themſelves, that a Looſeneſs is as 
dangerous in this fort of Small-Pox as in the other that is 
diſt inet; not knowing that in the diſtin a Looſeneſs does 
hurt, where Evacuation is made by the Puſtles, but that 
here it is Nature's Work, ſeeking a paſs for the Diſzaſe, and 
therefore meddling not with the Looſeneſs, but co-operat- 
ing with Nature, according to the Precept of the divine 
Old Man, I proceed as I begin, and adviſe them to lay the 
Children 


- : =: 
: , £ % As : 8 as . * © i 
+ "dC oe Ic=>< iow 3 r #-. <2 


— — 


mk wed Io . din, pro. »— — ry 75. — — oy — 2 AS 


@ 


0 


— — 


= 


. 49D > TY ww TY M7 + x, Þ 


— @ © 


: 


| 


| 


| 
of 


j the Tears 1667, 68, and part of 69. 99 


Children ſometimes in the Cradle, ſometimes to take them 
up: And if they be wean'd, I order them the ſame Diet as 
did grown Perſons before. At the end of the Diſeaſe, 
* when the Face grows ſtiff by reaſon of the cruſty Puſtles 
that are hard and dry, I anoint it very often with the Oyl 
of Sweet Almonds, which mitigates the pain ariſing from 


the ſtiffneſs, and makes the hot Effluvia exhale the eaſier. 


do nothing to the Face to keep it from pitting, becauſe 
Oyls, Liniments, and the like, only make the white Scurty 


longer a coming off, which falls oft, and comes again after 


the Patient is up, and pretty well, and the foul Scurf ſuc- 
ceedes it by degrees; but the Patient needs not much fear, 
Z when by reaſon of a moderate Regimen, the Puſtles not 
having been much exaſperated, have contracted no cauſtick 
Quality. | 
No, tho' this Method (if cautionſly and prudently ae- 
: commodated to particular Circumitances) will prevent 


the aforeſaid dangerous Symptoms that are diſagreeable 


to Nature, and will render the Diſeaſe very benign and 
: fafe, yet I am forced to proceed in another manner with 
+ ſome of thoſe Symptoms I am about to mention (from 
2 what Cauſe ſoever they ariſe, before I am call'd in) that I 
$ may be the better able to remove them. 

* Tirſt therefore, in the diſtin& kind, by reaſon of an 
? over-hot Regimen and continual Sweats, the Face does not 
* ſwell on the Eighth Day, but is flaccid; and tho' the Pu- 


| ſtles appear thick, yet the Spaces betwixt them are pale : 


In this Caſe, becauſe I wodld do my utmoſt for a more 
$ temperate Regimen, and to check the fury of the Blood, 
I immediately order ſome Pagerock to be given, which, 
indeed, (unleſs the Brain be heated) by gently cauſing . 
; Sleep, and thereby checking the violent Rage of the 
Blood, ſeaſonably determines it, together with the Heat, 
to the Face, as the nature of the Diſeaſe requires; But 
if the Miſchief coming from this Cauſe proceed ſo far, as 
that Sweat, which flow'd hitherto plentifully, ceaſes of it 
* ſelf. If the Patient fall into a Phrenſie, complains of vio- 
lent Sickneſs, and makes little Water, and often, Death 
is at Hand, and I think he can be reliev'd by no other means 
than by giving Narcoticks freely, or by taking away a 
great quantity of Blood from his Arm, and expoſing his 
Body to the open Air. And indeed, what I have now pro- 
pos di ſeenis fot to be taſkand unreaſonable, if we con voor 
| H 2 ow 


_ —— - Is 
, — IS*.X „ — 
—— WS — 3 aAh-. 
_- * * 
— = _ —_ 


I 00 Of the Reoulay Small- Pox 


how ſome have been deliver'd from Death by bleedin- 
plentifally at the Noſe : This, moreover, is to be con. 
der'd, that in this extream Agony, they are not in dan 
ger ol Death, becauſe the Puſtles go in; (for they are out, 
and very red when the Patient is at his laſt Gaſp) but be. 
cauſe tne Face does not ſwell : Now Whatever conduces to 
temper the Blood, (and I ſuppoſe none will deny that Bleed. 
ing and moderate Refrigeration has this Vertue) mult of 
nec ſſity do good in promoting the Swelling of the Face, 
as well as the uſe of Paregoricks, and for the ſame Reaſon, 

| would not have this ſo underſtood, as if in every 
trenſie coming upon tae Small-Pox (fleeing no Symptom 15 
more frequent than this) I would a1viſe Bleeding imme— 
diately, but in that only which therefore happens because 
the Face does not Swell, that is in the diitiact kind, and 
venere Puſt les appear plentiful enough, or when by reaſon 


of a very hot Regimen and nle of Cordials, the Blood i; | 


ſo fierce, and above meaſure exalted, that it will not give 
time till it may be xe luc'd to a due Temper by Paregorick 
Medicines, and other Medicines conducing to the fame. 
When the Cale ſtands thus, the Phyſician governing him- 


ſelf rather by Conicicace than uncertain Fame, ought ei- 


ther torike away Blood, as is ſaid before, or order his Pa- 
tient tobe refreſſ'd wita the open Air; to effect which, i: 
tems to me ſuKcient, that the Patient rite a little while 
from Bed, when he is light-headed, by which means I have 
{aved ſeveral from Death. Beſides thoſe Things I have teen 
my ſelt, there are many innumerable Inſtances of Men, 


vino by theſe means have been deliver'd from the Jaws of | 


Death: For ſome Franticks, having eſcap'd their Nurſes 
„guard, (and Men ſo afflicted uſe wonderful ſhifts) have 
got out of their Bed, and been expoſed to the cold Air in 


the Night; Others by ſtealth, Or ſnatching, or by entre: | 
ty, have got cold Water of their Narſes and drank it, and 
lo by an happy miſtake have obtain'd their Health when 


deſpared of. 
will add only one Obſervation, which was told me by 
the Party concern'd, which is this; That when he was a 
young Man, and-in the Flower of his Age, he traveil'd to 
Briſtol, and was ſeiz'd with the Small-Pox there, about the 
middle of Summer, and a little after with a Frenſie, and 
his Nurſe having occaſion at that Time to go into the City, 
left him in charge with ſome others, intending to return 
| preſently : 


r ferred es + 


75 
C 
* 
4 
% 
: 


— 0 © 


— — — 5 


wah Yared (ff — — 


A———B ——ͤ 


in the Tears 1661, 68, and part of 69, 101 


reſently; but while ſhe tarried tome ] ime he died, as the 
Byeſtanders thought; and conſidering both the Time of 


"i 


le Year, and the Habit of his Body, hic was groſs and 
. # Corpulent, that the Body might not ſtink, they lift it out 


4 


}f the Bed, and laid it naked on the Table, throwing on- 
va Sheet over it: The Nurſe at length coming back, and 
Hearing the {ad News, enters the Room, to dehold the 
ad Spettacle ; the preſently threw ofi the Sheet, and look- 
1 on his Face, and thinking the diſcover'd tome obſcure 
Piens of Lite, pretzntly laid him in Bed again, and he re- 
cover'd in few Days. 
* But to return to the Buſineſs: In the next Place, if in 
the confluent Se Po the Spittle be ſo baked and tough 
by the preceding eat, that the Patient is almoſt ſtrangl- 
ed (which is not unumal, 45 we jaid, on the Eleventh Day) 
a Gargariſm muſt neceflarily de uſed, and order muſt be 
ęiven to ſyringe the Throat with it often, Night and Day; 
let it be made either of Small-beer, or Barley water, wit! 
Ioney of Roſes; or the following may be uſed. 


Take of the Bark of the Elm, fix Drams, of the Roots of 
Liquoriſh, half an Ounce, of Raifins toned number twen- 
ty, of Red Roſes two Pugils, boil them in a ſufficient 
guantity of Water to one Pint aud an halt, ftrain it, and 
diſſolve in it of Honey of Roſes and ſimple Oxyncl, each 
two Ounces, mingle them, and make a Gargariſ:, 


But if the Patient has been treated as he ought, Saliva- 
tion, even when it begins to abate, will do its Othce ſo 
well, that there will be no need of this Remedy : And 
truly when it comes to this, that the Patient is in danger 
of being choaked every Moment, quite dull'd, and his 
Breath almoſt gone, we can not ſafely truſt to this Remedy, 
Wen therefore the Patient is thus at his laſt Gaip, I have 
2 ſometimes very ſeaſonably and ſucceſsfully given a Vomit 
of the infuſion of Cyocus Mietallorium, but in a large Dose, 
dix. one Ounce and an half, becauiz of tie extraordinary 
$ ſtupidity which the Patient labours under; a les Dole will 
not work at all; and in the mean time by diſturbing the 
; Hamonrs which it cannot carry off, will put the Patient in 
great danger of his Life: Nor can we well depend on this 
: Remedy, and, indeed, (which is much to be lamented) 
lome ether ſurer Medicine is wantiag,. that may vanquiſh 
H 3 this 


* 
7 alia. 4 „ 8 p l bs. Pe) 
wo Oo fe or Mes + -- Ho 


. 


102 Of the Regular Small- Pox 4 


this cruel Symptom, which alone deſtroys almoſt all thaz _ 
die on the Eleventh Day of this ſort of Pox. 1 

And as thoſe Symptoms which happen in this Diſecaſe, 7 4 
are prevented by the help of a temperate Regimen; {9 - 
are alſo moſt of them cured by the ſame, For inſtance, 1 
as the aforemention'd Frenſie ariſes from too great an heat } | 
of the Brain, fo tis cured by cooling the Blood any way; T 
and by the fame means, a Coma is eaſily remedied, which 0 
ſeems to be a Symptom quite contrary to the other. lt 1 
takes its Riſe from an Obſtruction of the Cortex of te 
Brain, while hot Steams, occaſion'd by the Blood being 
attenuated by reaſon of an hot Regimen, and hot Medi- 
cines are forc'd thither in great quantities: By this tem. 
paring of the Blood I have ſeen Purple Spots remov'd; 

ut neither by this, or any other Method, could I ever 
ſee either piſſing of Blood, or a violent Eruption of it 
from the Lungs ſtop'd as yet: But both theſe Hæmorr ha. 
555 x far as I have hitherto obſerv'd, undoubtedly preſage 

eatn. 
In a ſuppreſſion of Urine, which ſometimes affficts the 
younger and brisker Sort (occafion'd by the great confu- 
{ion and diſorder of the Spirits which ſerve for the void- 
ing of it, by reaſon the Blood and Humours are diſturb'd 3 
with too great Heat) I have taken all the Tribes of Din- 7 
reticks to my Aſſiſtance ; but nothing ſucceeded ſo well 
with me, as to take the Patient out of his Bed, who be- 
ing ſupported by ſome that were by, when he had walked © 
twice or thrice croſs the Room, preſently made ſtore of 
Urine, to his great Relief. I could here produce ſome  Þ? 
Phyſicians of my Acquaintance for Witneſſes, who, by 
my Advice, have order'd the ſame Thing in this Caſe, and 
it ſucceeded well. 

But the Symptoms which proceed from the repercuſſion 
of the Pocky Matter by extream Cold, or Evacuation un- 
duly made, muſt be remov'd by the uſe of Cordials, and 
1 ſuitable Regimen, which yet muſt not be continu'd be- 
yond the Time that the Symptoms continue. The chief of 
them are a depreſſion or falling of the Puſtles, and a Looſe- 
neſs in the diſtin Small-Pox : For in the Flux neither de- 
preſſion of the Puſtles forebodes any ill, becauſe tis the 
Nature of the Diſeaſe; nor a Looſeneſs in Children that ; 
are ſick of them, becauſe 'tis in order to Health. In both ' 


* 
Th 
e 


li 
theſe Caſes a Cordial Potion of ſome proper diſtilld Wa. 1 
1 1 ters 


in the Tears 1667, 68, and part of 69. 103 


ters, with Diaſcordium, liguid Laudamum, and the like, 
may very well be given, and that not only to remove the 

% atoreſaid Symptoms but at any Time of the Diſeaſe, if the 
Patient complain of a Pain at his Heart, and of Sickneſs. 


But to ſpeak the Truth, the Symptoms of this kind are ve- 


e . 5 ; 
xg ry rare, if they are compar'd with thoſe that owe their 
in Original to the other Extream, which is more fatal, tho 


1 1 jeſs blamed; and, indeed, I think that the Rumour which 


the has fo much prevail'd concerning the frequent ſtriking in 
"of hief 4s from a Miſtake of thoſt 

ing Hof the Puſtles, chiefly proceeds from a Miſtake of thoſe 

di. that have obſerv'd their Depreſſion in the confluent kind 

em. hich they took to be a ſtriking in of the variolous Mat- 

„d: ter by reaſon of taking Cold, whereas 'tis nothing elſe 
7 


but the Nature of the Diſeaſe; and they ſuſpect the ſame 
fit n the diſtinct kind, becauſe they expect the Eruption and 
*Encreaſe of the Puſtles before their due Time, having not 


= ſufficiently taken notice of the Time when Nature uſes to 
bring this Fruit to maturity, 
the When the Patient is upon Recovery, and the Puſtles are 
nu. Walling off, and he has eaten Fleſh a few Days, viz. about 
did. the one and Twentieth Day, I reckon he may be bled in the 
by Arm, if the Diſeaſe has been violent; for the Inflanimation 
Jin hich the Small-Pox has impreſſed upon the Blood, whe- 
rell Ther the Patient be Old or Young, no leſs indicates Blood- 
"ha 7 Netting, than the Filth that has been gather'd together, does 
ed Purging: Which is evident enough both from the colour 
- of | pf the Blood that is taken away after the Small-Pox have 
zme deen ſevere, which is like that of Pleuriticks, and alſo from 
by 4 hoſe 2 Inflammations that fall on the Eyes after this 
n! Diſeaſe, as alſo from other ill Effects of the Blood over- 
heated, and deprav'd by this Diſeaſe; which is the reaſon 
Hon | hat they who were very healthy all their Lives before, do 
un. fall their Life-time after conflict with ſharp hot Humours 
ang falling on the Lungs, or ſome other Part. But if the Pu- 


ſtles have been but few, there will be no need of Bleed- 


175 ing: After Bleeding I give three or four Purges. More- 
ofe- er; whengthe Patient has been freed a while from the 
de- Flux-Pox, and riſes daily, it ſometimes ſo happens, that 
the he is cruelly troubled with a Swelling of his Legs, which 
that either goes off of its own accord after Bleeding and Purg- 
oth | n S- OF 15 eaſily aſſwaged by the uſe of diſcuſſing and emol- 


Wa- lient Herbs boil'd in Milk, (ſuch as are Mallows, the 
Leaves of Mullein, Elder, Lawrel, with the Flowers of 


H 4 Camomile 


—— — — 
2 832. - * — 2212 *s 4 — 
* _ — s 


— — 
—— Sz os 
* >. — — - 
- — a 
— - 


104 Of the Continual Fever 


Camomile and Melilote.) And fo much for the Hiſtory 
and Cure of the Small-Pox, which prevail'd for theſe two 
Years; and that I may diſtinguiſh them from the other 
Kinds which follow, I term them legitimate. 


Cc v-4A-$:- 20, 


Of the Continual Fever in the Teais 
1657, 68, and part of 69. 


OW, that J may ſpeak of the Fever that reign'd dur. 

ing this Pocky Conſtitution, and that begun and end. 
ed with the Small-Pox ;, it afflicted the Sick in the follow. 
ing manner : He had a Pain in the Region, which is under 
the Scrohiculus Cordis, and could not bear the touching of 
it, which I do not remember I obſerv'd in any other Dif. 
e:(e befides this Fever, and this kind of Small-Pox ; the 


Piia of the Head, and the Heat of the whole Body, and 


” —, a 4 — — 


alſo the Spots were very manifeſt; but the Sick was not 


Thirſty, the Tongue was often like the Tongue of a wel! 


Perſon, only it was ſometimes whitiſh, ſeldom dry, but | 


never black, The Sick was much diſpoſed to large ſpor- 
tansous Sweats, from the very beginning of the Diſeaſe 
but was not reliev'd thereby; yea, when they were pro- 
vok'd by hot Medicines and an hot Regimen, there was 
danger of a Phrexfie : Moreover, the number of the Spot: 


were encreas'd, and all other Symptoms were rendered 
more violent; the ſeparation of the Urine, which ſeem'd 


very laudableeven from the beginning, promis'd well, and 
yet the Patient was not more reliev'd thereby, than by the 


Sweat Which we mention'd before. It this Diſeaſe was ill 


manag'd, it continu'd moſt commonly a long while, and 


did not go off critically, or of its own accord like other 


Fevers, bat afield the Sick with violent Symptoms fix or 
eight Weeks, unlets Death had diſpatched 


cooling Juleps, the Diſeaſe went off thereby beyond ex 


Pectation, if it were not ſtop'd by Evacuations, or hot 


Medicines, And as this Fever depended on that Epidemic! 
Conſtitution 


e Buſineſs 
FORT. At the latter end the Sick pit much, if no conſi- |. 
derable Evacuation went before, and if the Sick took | 


* 


— „ 1 * 
o 


* 8 


. E ; 
— — 2 — as 
1 __ 


5) : 4 n 
a «4 — — %Y | ne — 4 


became 


Ur- 
1d- 
. 
ler 
of 

i 

the 

ind 
10 
ell 


hut 


vs 


| 
ſe, þ 


in the Tears 1667, 68, and part of 69. 105 


Conſtitution of Air; which at the ſame Time produc'd the 
4 ul, Poæ ; ſo indeed if it was not plainly the fame, it was 
& moſt exactly of the ſæme Nature and Genius, excepting 
only thoſe Symptoms which were the neceflary Conſe— 

ng of the Eruption: For both Dileaſes began in the 


me manner; there was the ſame Pain in thoſe Parts 


Ax hich are under the Scrobiculus Cordis, if the Hand touch'd 
them; the colour ol the Tongue, the conſiſtence of the U- 
Wine, and the like, were the {ſame in both: So were the 
$rcat ſpontaneous Sweats that ariſe at the begjuning ; and 
the Diſpoſition of this Diſeaſe to Salivation when the heat 


was violent, was the very {ame as in theſe Po when 


they flux'd. Moreover, ſeeing this Fever raged chiefly at 
that Time, when the Small-Pox were more Epidemick than 
I ever knew them at any other Time, none can doubt but 
that they were both of the ſame Family. This 1 certainly 
know, all the practical Phenomena which reſpect the Cure, 
were plainly the ſame in both Diſeaſes, excepting thoſe 
Things which the Eruption of the Small-Pox, and the Ef- 
# fects of them indicated, which, becauſe there was none in 
this Fever, they could not therefore be indicated; which 


was indeed very clear to me from the Obſervation | made 
in thoſe that had both Dileaſes. Wherefore I muſt be al- 
low'd to call this a variolous Fever, upon the account of 
the likeneſs it has to this kind oi S-rall-Pox, tho'l as littie 
affect to give Things new Names as any one, only I do it 


to diſtinguiſh this Fever from the reſt. 


Bat how much ſoever the fail Fever reſembles the Small- 
Pox, no ſober Marewill he eafiiy perſuaded, that it ought 
to be cured by the ſame Method; becauſe in theſe the in- 
flamed Particles, by the help of the Puſtles, are caſt upon 
the Habit of the Body; but in this Fever they are ejected 
by Spittle; For the Sweats that flow'd at the beginning 
ol the Diſeaſe were Sympthmatical, not Critical, Nature 
{ceming to have defign'd no other Evacuation in this Diſ- 
eaſe than Salivation, tho' ſhe her ſelf moſt commonly 
perverts it, either by a Lookneis, which moſt commonly 
ariſes from inflammatory Rays,convey'd thronghithe Me- 
ſenterick Arteries to the Inteſiines, and ſolliciting them 
to Excretion (Which is uſuad in Pleurifies and other in- 


flammatory Fevers, by reaſon of the Fury of the Blood, and 
hot Particles that endeavour to be cooled) or by violent 


Sweats, Which always accompanied this Dileate, as well 


as 


* — - 
—— —ͤ— B — 
- — 
1 . 


106 Of the Continual Fever 


as the Small-Pox, by Nature's Appointment 5 which he. 
ing Symptomatical, the Salivation was turn'd another 


way, that otherwiſe would have been Critical; fo that 


£ 


unleſs Art ſuggeſted another Evacuation, the Diſeaſe con. "2 : 


tinu'd for ſomeWeeks,and would not come to Concoction 


like other Fevers, 
But to proceed a little further, that we may the better 


underſtand the Nature of this Fever, and make a good | 


Foundation for the curative In lication, we muſt take no- 


tice, that in the Fever which reigned in the Epidemick | 


Conſtitution for Agues, the Matter which was to be ſepa- 


rated from the Blood was ſo thick, that it could not be ſe. 


parated without previous Digeſtion, ſo as to be diſpos'd for 


W 


a due Evacuation at an appointed Time, either by a large 


Tranſpiration, or by a critical Evacuation by Stool; ſo 
that the whole Bvſineſs of the Phyſician was to accommo- 
date himſelf to the Genius of the Diſeaſe, fo that it did not 
riſe too high on the one Hand, and cauſe dangerous Sy mp- 
toms, nor on the other Hand fink ſo low, as not to be a- 
ble to eje& the offenſive Matter, a Fever being Nature's 
Inſtrument to perform this Secretion : And alſo in the 
Plague there is ſome Matter that muſt be ſeparated from 
the Blood; but it conſiſting of very fine Parts that are very 
inflammable (ſuch as ſometimes 6d 805 they are exaſperated 

xs through the Blood like Lightning, and do not cauſe an 

bullition in it) paſſes through in the twinkling of an Eye, 
and ftops only in ſome Glandule, or ſome external Part, 
where being entangled, it firſt inflames the Part, and at- 
terwards canſes an Impaſthume, and an Impoſthume is 
Nature's Machine, whereby ſhe frees the Fleſh from ſuch 
Things as are offenſive to it; as a Fever is her Inſtrument, 
whereby ſhe removes that which diſorders the Blood, in 
which Caſe*tis the Phyſician's Duty to govern the Evacua- 
tion of the peſtilent Matter, which Nature attempts by 
theſe Abſceſſes, unleſs any one ſhould think it more adviſe- 
able to ſubſtitute ſome other Evacuation, which is more in 
his Power, and which he can govern better than that of 
Nature. In the ſame manner Nature proceeds in expel- 
ling the Matter of the Small- Pox, which is a groſſer ſort of 
Inflammation, that is caſt out by Puſtles, diſpers'd every 
where inſtead of Carbuncles and Bubos, and the like: And 
in this Caſe alſo the curative Indications are to be fo direct- 
ed, that the natural Evacuation by the Puſtles may go on 


well: 


P— 
. 


RYE. ann dna — 


of the Tears 1667, 68, and part of 69. 107 


be. well. But now in this kind of inflammatory Fever, of 
her which we now treat, ſuch a groſs Matter is not to be 
hi found that requires previous Digeſtion before it be ejected, 
on. Nas in the Fever above deſcrib d; and therefore we endea- 
n i your in vain to obtain ſuch a Digeſtion, by leaving the Bu- 

ſimneſs to Ebullition. And moreover, on the contrary, there 


is danger in proceeding this way of heightening the Diſ- 


ter . a a : 
%! eaſe, its Eſſence conſiſting of a violent Inflammation. And 
19. + moreover becauſe Nature has > 56a ted no Evacuation for 

we ſee in Peftilential Fe- 


ick this Fever by Eruptions, whic 
pa. 4 vers, and the SmaIHPoæ, tho' as to other Things it agrees 
with the latter Diſeaſe. The ſum of all is the quieting the 
Inflammation by Evacuation and attemperating Medi- 
cines; and therefore I proceed accordingly to the Cure 


10 ofit in the following manner. 

0. © Hheing call d to a Patient, I order'd him preſently to be 
ot | _ Blooded in the Arm, if great Weakneſs, or eſpecially old 
o- | | Age, did not forbid, and that it ſhould be repeated every 


other Day for twice, unleſs the ſigns of Recovery ſhould ap- 

„„ | » pear. On the Day between, a Gliſter of Milk and Sugar, 
or the like, was injected, and the following Julep, or the 
like, was uſed through the whole Courſe of the Diſeaſe. 


K | 4 
7 > Takeof Watersof Purſtain, Lettice, and of Com/lip-flowers, 
Ps IX each four Ounces ;, of Syrup of Lemons, one Ounce and 
24 „ an half, of Syrup of Violets, one Ounce, let him take 


2 
. | three Ounces four or five times in a Day, as often as 
{ he will, 


And Iallow'd him Whey, Barley-water, and the like, for 
his ordinary Drink, and for his Diet Broths of Barley, 
| ? Oat-meal, Panada, roaſted Apples, and the like : But 1 
+ forbid Chicken-broth, and any other kind of Broth of Fleſh. 
Above all I order'd he ſhould not lie continually in Bed, 
but ſhould keep up good part of the Day, and that daily; 
| 0 for I obſerve in this Fever (as in a Pleuriſie, Rheumatiſm 
| 

| 


and other Inflammatory Diſeaſes, in the Cure whereo 

Bleeding and cooling are the chief Remedies) that the moſt 
cooling Medicines, and Bleeding often repeated, do no 
ood, when the Patient keeps his Bed continually,and is in- 
am'd by its Heat, eſpecially in the Summer; wherefore the 
Sweat which now and then flow'd, did not fright me from 


this cooling Method and Medicines, and from forbidding 


the 


108 Of the Continual Fever 


the continual keeping in Bed; for tho' one might ren. 

ſonably think, that great Benefit may be receiv'd from a 
Indication taken from thoſe Things, which generally 4; | 
good; yet I have found by Experience, that the Patient; t 
not only not reliev'd, but is more heated thereby, ſo tha: | 
often a Frenſie and Spots, and other ill Symptoms preſently þ 
follow thoſe Sweats, which do not ſeem to proceed ſo miucy * 
from Malignity of the Diſeaſe as from ill Management. 

It any one ſhould object, that the Method propos'd for | # 
curing Fevers is quite contrary to the Theory of Authors, |, &#'1 
who all with one Conſent declare, That a Fever is beſt ant 
molt naturally cared by Sweats; have this to ſay for my | 
{elf (beſides the certain and conſtant Teſtimony of Expe- | 
rience, Which always ſides with me in the Cure of this par 
ticular Fever) I ſuppoſe that learn'd Men, who inſiſt 90 
earneſtly for the provocation of Sweat in the Cure of 
Fever, mean thoſe Sweats which are evacuated after the 
previous Digeſtion of ſome Humour lodg'd in the Blood; 
in preparing of which Humour, Nature has been a certain 
Time baſed that it might be ejected by Sweat: But the 
Caſe is quite different here; for the Sick ſweats plentiful- 
ly preſently, at the very beginning, and Sweats are a great 
part of the Diſeaſe ; and it we may judge by all the PH. 
nomena, this Diſeaſe proceeds rather from meer heat of 
the Blood, than from any Humour lurking within, and 
to be expell'd from the Blood after due Concoction by 
Sweat. But if we ſhould ſuppoſe ſuch an Humour, as is 
ripened by Digeſtion, is found in this Fever, as in many 
other, to what pur poſe is it to aſſiſt Nature (whereas tis 
our Buſineſs to reduce to order her irregular attempts) 
who is over-officious already, by forcing Sweat, with Cor- 
dials and an hot Regimen, ſeeing the well known Axiom, 
diz. Things concocted, not crude, are to me medicated, re- 
ſpects Sweating as well as Purging. 

During this Conſtitution, I was called to Dr. Morrice, 
who at that Time practis'd in London, and now at Petworth 
in Suſſex ;, he had this Fever with violent Sweats, and ma- 
ny Spots, and by the conſent of other Phyſicians, that 
were his and my Acquaintance, he was blooded, and roſe, 
having firſt rubbed off the Sweat; he us'd a cooling Diet, 
and Medicines, and was preſently reliev'd, the violent 
Symptoms ſoon going off; and perſiſting in this Method, 
he recover'd in a few Days. 

| But 


of the Tears 1667, 68, and part of 69. 109 


| Rat to return to the Buſineſs: Nor did the Looſeneſs 
Which often accompanied this Fever, hinder me from pro- 
Feeding in the Method above-mention'd; yea I have found 
A torafinuch as it was occaſion'd by inflammatory Vapours 
{12s from the Blood through the Meſenterick Arteries 
to the Inteſtines, and vellicating them) that nothing was 


FY 


Jo cfiectual for topping this Fins as Bleeding and cooling 
ie Blood with Barley-water, Whey, and the like. 
$ This Method ſucceeded excellently well in the Cure of 
tus Diſeaſe, and ſeem'd better than any other, tho' I 
ow many recover'd that were treated a quite contrary 
a, iz. By Cordials and an hot Regimen: But J always 
T bught they ran great Hazards unneceſſarily ; for the 
Ppots, which otherwiſe were very few, became by this 
$1cans very numerous, the Thirſt, which moſt commonly 


1 | S145 little, was by this way of proceeding mightily encreaſ- 
he : |, and the Tongue, which otherwiſe was moiſt, and-not 
d; uch unlike the Tongue of a healthy Pegſon, only, as 
in e de faid, was a little white, was dry under this Regimen, 
he [nd often black: Laſtly, thoſe very Sweats, which by the 


we of Cordials they fo much labour'd to force out, at 


at length were ſtop'd by the uſe of them: For too great a 
de. Entity of Serum being evacuated through the Habit of 
of ne Body, the Blood was unable to ſupply any more of it, 
nd nd rhat Moiſture being quite waſted wherewith it ought 
by o have been diluted, the Sick grew forthwith dry, and 
is ite outward Parts are bound up quite contrary to the 
ny $courſe which Nature uſed to obſerve in this Fever, till at 
tis length the Blood being again repleniſh'd from the Moi- 
ts) aſt ire receiv'd from what is taken in, expels this Serum 
2r- lately brought in together with the Fever, partly by the 
m, NMelp of Medicines, and partly by the force of the Fever - 
re- But this Criſis was too much forc'd, and too dangerous, 


and, which is yet worſe, ſeldom happen'd. | | 


ag, 
4 E 
* 


ce, But now, as I mention'd above, the ſolution of this Fe- 
th ver, as allo the Snall-Pox which is near akin to it} was of- 
na- ten made by Salivation, and was always beneficial, and 
at WE when it lowed plentifully, it took off. the Purple Spots 
ſe, and the Fever too: Therefore when the Spitting ariſes, 
et, Ino Evacuation mult be uſed, neither by Bleeding nor by 
nt 3 Gliſters, for by the uſe of either there is danger;ﬀelt the 


umour ſhould bediverted ; but Whey and other cooling 
things will further the Salivation; whereas on the con- 
trary. 


110 Of the Cantinual Fever, &c. 


trary, Cordials, and all Things heating thicken the My: 
ter, and ſo ſtop Spitting. 

In the Year 1668, before this Fever was quite extin&, 
the Looſeneſs became Epidemical, without any maniſz| 


Sign of a Feder; for now the Conſtitution inclined to thi 


Diſcentery, which prevail'd in the ſollowity Lear; « 
which we thall treat in the next Section: Yet notwitk 
ſtanding I thought this Looſeneſs was the ſame with the 


Variolous Fever now reigning, only differing in Form, 
and appearing in another Symptom, and perceiving that: 


Shaking and Shivering was wont to precede this Looſz. 
neſs, and mor?over, that it was occaſion'd moſt common. 
ly by the ſame Cauſe the Fever was that raged then, it 
ſeem'd probable to me, that this Fever took its Riſe from 
inflammatory Rays inverted upon the Bowels, and pro- 
voking them to Expulſion; dan in the mean while 
the Maſs of Blood, by reaſon of this Diverſion, was tree! 


from Diſordegs, which otherwiſe thoſe Rays would har: 


occaſion'd, and no viſible Sign of a Fever ſhew'd it {elf out 
wardly. Moreover, the Sick could not ſuffer an hand ty 
preſs the Parts under the Scrobiculns Cordis; which Symp. 


tom, as we mention'd before, happen'd in the Small-Pox,ſ 


and in the Fever of this Conſtitution. The ſame Pain a. 
ſo, and tenderneſs of the Fleſh, often ſtretch'd it ſelf out: 
wardly to the Epigaſtrium, and ſometimes allo an Inflan- 
mation, which ended in an Impoſthume, and kill'd the 
Patient: All which clearly ſhew'd, that this Looſeneſs was 
wholly of the ſame Nature and Eſſence with that Fever 
which then reign'd. This my Opinion was confirm'd by 
the happy Event which Bleeding and the uſe of Medicines, 
Diet, and a Regimen that were cooling (which we have 
often ſaid were uſed in the Cure of the variolous Fever) 
always had in ſtopping the Looſeneſs, for it yielded rex 
dily to this Method; whereas, when it was treated in 4 
contrary manner, either by Rhubarb, or other gentle 
Catharticks (v4, to carry off the ſharp Humours which 
were ſuppos'd to irritate the Guts for ſuch an Excretion) 
or by Aſtringents, tho' it was naturally gentle, it became 
after a deadly Diſeaſe, as the Bills of Mortality at that 
Time ſufficiently teſtified. And ſo much for the Epide- 
mical Diſeaſes that depended on this Conſtitution, 


CHAP. 


E. 
I 
g 


* 
\ : 


111 


| Sxcr. IV. Cray. I. 


Of rhe Epidemick Conſtitution of part cf the 
Lear 1699, and of the Jear 1670, 
1671, 1672, at London. 


11 A the beginning of Auguſt 1662, the Cholera Morbus, 
UE A the Gr:pes without Stools, and the Bloody-Flex, were 


bo tery frequent, whereas for ten Years before they ſeldom 
* ppen'd. But tho' the Cholera Mhrbus was more 7 * 
"F demical in that Year than I ever knew it before, yet it did 
01 got laſt much longer than the Month of Auguft, or a fort- 
' Wight in September ;, but the Gripes without Stools conti- 
vie med to the end of Autumn, and accompanied the Bloody- 


Aux, and were more univerſal than that. But upon com- 
ing of Winter the Gripes without Stools vaniſh'd: Nor 
x 3 they appear again in the following Years, wherein this 
1 0 Conſtitution fouriſh'd ; but yet the Flux was more uni- 


"I verfal, whereof I think this was the Cauſe, viz. the Con- 
tion was not yet ſo perfectly diſpoſed to produce the 
1 oody-Flux, that it could in every one cauſe all the Symp- 
Out: ms which ali thoſe that have the Blooay-Hlux : For in 
yr e following Autumn, when the Cripes return'd, the 


iſeaſe was accompanied with every Pathogomonick 
ESy mptom. Betwixt the Dry Gripes and the Bloody-Flux 
pi mention'd, which was every way very raging, a 
mew Fever did ariſe that accompanied both Diſeaſes, 


ns, ich did not only ſeize thoſe that were afflicted with 
ave 2 of the former, but alſo thoſe that were yet free from 
ver) th; only ſometimes (but that ſeldom happen'd) there 
rer Were ſome ſmall Gripes, ſometimes with, ſometimes 
In . Stools, which becauſe in {ome ſort it reſembled 
ntle tat Fever that frequently accompanied the foremention- 
hich Wed Diſeaſes, it is to be diſtinguiſt'd from others by the 
ion) Mime of the Dyſenterick Fever, eſpecially ſeeing, as we 
15 all ſhew by and by and by, it only differs from the Ge- 


Mus of the Bloody-Fluz, in that it was not accompanied 
With thoſe Stools which were continually troubleſome in 
e Bloody-Flux, nor with thoſe Effects which neceſſarily 


\ p 4 Bloody- 


fo low this Evacuation. At the approach of Winter the 


112 Of the Epidemick Conſtitution, &c. 
Bloody-Flux withdrew for a while, but the Dyſexter;;| 
Fever raged more: Alſo the Small-Pox broke out 
ſome Places, but they were gentle. 

But about the beginning of the following Year, vir. 
January, the Meaſles ſucceeded; which 4:ily encreaſin: 
till the Vernal Equinox, viſited almoſt every Family, eſp. 
cially Children. But from that Time they decreaſed he 
degrees, and vaniſhed in Frly, and were no more ſeen i, 
any of theie Years of this Conſtitution, ſaving that the 
next Year, at the Time they broke out the Year befor, 
thev here and there appear'd a little. | 

Theſe Meaſtes made way for a ſort of Small-Pox te 
were hitherto unknown tome; and that I may diſtingai| | 
them from the reſt, I call them the Irregular Siall- Pau, 
of the Dyſcizterick Conſtitution, bv reaſon of their irrec 
lar and unalual Symptoms, that were very different fran 
the Small-Pox of the preceding Conſtitution; as I fhilf 
ſhew hereafter, when 1come to treat of them. Theſe Smz)-} 
Pox, tho” they were not near ſo frequent as the Meal, 
ſeizec many, till at the beginning of July the Dyſenreric] 
Fever prevail'd, and were Epidemick : But Autumn op 
proaching,-namely in Arnguft, the Bloody-Flux return, 
and raged more than in'the foregoing Lear; but it wal 
quell'd by the cold of Winter, as before, and afterwards tut 
Dyfenterick Fever, and the Sm#l-Pox raged all the Winten 

About the beginning of February of the following Year, 
certain Agues ariſing, both Diſeaſes ſeldomer appears 
aud tho' they were not very Epidemical, yet were tha 
more frequent than 1 ha obſerv'd them at any Time fag 
that Conſtitution went off, which, as I noted before, a4 
{0 inclined to them; and theſe, according to the Culton 
of Fernal Agues, went away ſoon after the Summer Scr 
ſtice. Ar:the beginning of July the Dyſenterick Fever Þ » 
retuarn'd'agiin to the Station they were in former Years; 
but the Autumn being near over, the Dyſentery return': 
again aithird Time, but it continu'd a leſs while than! 
the foregoing Year, wherein it ſeem'd to come to its height 
but when Winter came, it went off as before, and the D- 
ſenterick Fever and Small hx raged all that Seaſon. 

But as we, have mei tiod above, at the beginning d 
both the preceding Leafs, fome very Epidemical Diſcal: | 
prevail dz2w2-2the Meaſſef at the beginning of the Ye! Þ & 
1670, and Tertian Agnes at the beginning of 1671, ſo ti? 


: 8 54 1 OO ; _— | w | 
„ — 3 4 * gb ' 
> Aa „„ _ Mw — fend Wain woke Wd, fb > = A OJ 


„ 


Oo 5 © 9 : 
W 1 av an = "WE a LA 


wh — i As 


Py - ww 


i 4 


JO 


Of the Epidemick Conſtitutiom, Oc. 113 


the Small- Pox were over-power'd at the beginning ot ele 
Years, and could not ſpread much: But waen ther reign— 
ed alone at the beginning of 1672, they were very 2 le- 
mical till 7%, at which Time the Dyſenterick Fever 1nvo- 
ded again, but it ſoon gave place to the Bloody Flux, v ich 
return'd now in Auguſt a fourth Time; but it was not 16 
4% frequent as in the former Years, nor were the Symptoms 
| ” violent. Moreover, tne Sinall-Pox were here and theres 


* ſo that it was not eaſie to know which Diſenſe provail'd 5 
t indeed ſuppoſe that the Conſtitution of tue At being 

9 not ſo inclinable to produce the Bloody- Flux, give cccafi— 
8 Jon to the Small-Pox, whereby they were ble to reep pace 
Ty with tne Flux, which they could not do those 3 b. rs, 
5% rrhereiu the Bloody-Flus raged in Auguſt more violentliy. 


2.1 | The Winter, as it was wont, ſtopp'd the Flux, but tie 

Fever and the Small-Pox continu'd 5 and now tie Small- 

2 Pox, according to their Cuſtom, were chief, and raged 

all the Winter, and alſo the following Spring; and at the 

beginning of Summer they here and there appear'd, but 
— 2 


44 

„ 
a | 1 they were much gentler than this kind uled to be. . 
7b But when I affirm, that one 3 Diſeaſe expeli 4 
another, | do not mean that the Piſcaſe which is expelld, 
172 | does quite vaniſh, but that it does ſeklomer appear for 
„during this Conſtitution, either Diſeaſe was found at that 
. Sealon which was diſigrecable to it: For inſtance, the 
„ Pooly-Flux, tho' it properly belongs to the Autumn, did 

„ perchance ſeize one here and there in the Spring, tho' it 


„ uas very rare. 

ne We have therefore plainly prov'd, that through this 
whole Conſtitution, at the beginning of Fuly, (which 
Month is the certain Epoch of Aurunnal Fevers,as Fanuary 


* is of thoſe in the Spring „ Dy enterick Fevers ra ged, and 
mT that at the approach of Autumn the Zloody-Flux ſucceeded 
151 them, which, to ſpeak accurateiy, ls truly Autumnal; 
nt which being ſtop'd by the Winter, the Pyſentericł Fever 
un and the S-all-Pox prevail'd ; but the Small-Pox continu'? 
cht: all the Winter, the Spring and Summer, till in July they 


were vanquiſh'd by the Dyſenterick Fever that raged Epi- 


V) demically. And this was the Courſe of Things whilſt 
dus Conſtitution flouriſh'd. 

E. Tis moreover to be obſerv'd, that as every Epidemic]: 
en Aasits period: in particular Subjects, v1. of Encreaſe, State, 
. and Ueclinations (cevery'genera! Conſtitution that favours 


this 


14 


' 


T7 
1 


2 pie 2 — 
— "5 = 3 


2 22 


—— — —ů - 
— - 


-—_ 


a— 


114 Of the Cholera Morbus, &c. Ka 


the Epidemick Production of this vr that Diſeaſe, has it; 
Periols according to the Time it reigns; for it rages more 
and more Epidemically till it comes to its height, and then 
it gradually decreaſes, till at length it quite ceaſes, and 
gives place to another Conſtitution. For, as to the violence 
of the Symptoms, they are moſt violent when they firſt 
appear, and they grow gentle by degrees; and in the Cx 
cronies of the Conſtitution they are as gentle as the Na. 
ture of the Diſeaſe will permit, which is manifeſt in the 
Blocdy-Flux and Small-Pox of this Conſtitution, as I ſhal 
preſently ſhew, I begin to treat particularly of the Diſeaſes 
of this Conſtitution, according to the Qrder they kept. 


b, 
e ee 
| 
' 


En . MH; 
Of the Cholera Morbus of the Year 1669. 


HITS Diſeaſe, as we ſaid before, was more Epidemica! | 

in the Year 1669, than I ever knew it in any other 
Year; it comes as certainly at the latter end of Summer, 
and at the approach of Autumn, as Swallows at the begin: | 
ning of Spring, and as Cuckows at the heat of the follow. 
ing Seaſon. That Diſeaſe which is occaſion'd by a Surfeit, 
comes at any Time; the Symptoms are indeed alike, and 
the Cure the ſame, yet 'tis of another kind. The Diſeaſe is | 
caſily known, for there are violent Vomitings, and an eve 
cuation of ill Humours with great difficulty and trouble | 
by Stool; there is a violent Pain and Inflammation of the | 
Belly and Guts, an Heart-burning, Thirſt, a quick Pluſe, 
with Heat and Angiety, and often a ſmall and unequal 
Pulſe, with great Nauſeouſneſs, and ſometimes a colliquz- 
tive Sweat, Contractions of the Arms and Legs, Fainting, | © 
a coldnels of the extream Parts, and ſuch like Symptom, 
which frighten the By-ſtanders, and kill the Patient in 
twenty four Hours. There is alſo a dry Cholera, from 2 | 
windy Spirit breaking out from above and below, without 
V'omiting or Looſeneſs, which 1 never {aw but once, and 
that was at the beginning of this Autumn, at which Time r 
the former kind was very common. = 

| have found by much Conſideration, and by manifola 


Experience, that if on the one Hand I ſhould endeavour  * 
to 


— — 


e 4 


* 
3 
FC 


* 


* 


Of the Tear 1669. 115 


to expell theſe ſharp Humours, that are the Fuel of the 
Diſeaſe, by Catharticks, I ſhould do juſt as he that enleq- 
vours to quench Fire with Oil, ſeeing the Operation of th- 
* gentle Purge would but cauſe farther Diſturbance, 


Fand4 raiſe new Tumults; and on the other Hand, thould 
I reſtrain the firſt Effort with Narcotick Medicines, and 
other Aſtringents, whilſt I hinder'd natural Evacuation, 
zand detain'd the Humour againſt Nature, the Sick would 
undoubtedly be deſtroy'd by an Inteſtine War, his Ene- 
my being kept in his Bowels. For theſe Realons there- 
fore I thought I mult go inthe midale Way, that I might 


partly evacuate and partlydilute the Humour. I found 


out this Method ſeveral Years ago, and have long exne- 
trienc'd it, and have by it many times reduc'd this Diſeaſe 
Ito good Order. 

Boil a Chicken in about Three Gallons of Spring-wa- 
155 ſo that the Liquor has ſcarce any reliſh of the Chick; 
Zorder the Sick to drink ſeveral large Draughts of this a lit- 
#tle warm, or for want of it Poſſet drink; at the ſame Time 
da good quantity will ſerve for ſeveral Glifkers, to be given 
ſucceſſively, until all the Broath is conſumed and evacuat- 


ed upwards and downwards, an Ounce of the Syrups of 


oettice, Violets, Purflain, or Water-Lilley, may be mix'd 
now and then with the Draughts and Glifters, tho' the 
Broath will do very well without ſuch addition; ſo the 


Stomach being often loaded with a conſiderable quantity 


of the Liquor, and, as I may ſay, turn'd, and the Injection 
of Gliſters being repeated, the ſharp Humours are either 
-Fealt out, or their Acrimony being taken off, they are re- 
duc'd to a due Temper, the Filth being ejected by theſe 


means, which require three or four Hours. Some Anodyne 
Piediene perfects the Cure; I uſe the following often. 
Take of Com/lip water, one Ounce, of Aqua Mirabilis, m 
Drams, of Liquid Laudanum, 16 Drops, mix them. 


3 

Any other Narcotick of the Shops may be uſed inſtead 
' of it; and this way of diluting the Humours is much ſafer 
and quicker, than that which is commonly taken to ſtop 
this dangerous Diſeaſe, vs. either by Things that evacuats 
or bind, becthſe the Tumult is made worſe by Purges, 
and all Things are put in a hurly-burly thereby, and the 
other, on the contrary, _ the Enemy in the owes 

| 8 2 an 


115 Of the Cholera Morbus, &c. 


and of a Stranger makes him an Inhabitant. To ſay no- 
thing of the tedious Trouble created to the Sick when the 
Liieale is protracted, beſides the Danger, whereby xt 
length tne in Humours creep into the Maſs of Blood, and, 
{005 kindle a malignant Fever. 

But ic muſt be carefully noted, that if the Phy ſician is 
not cailPd till tne Vomiting and Looſeneſs have continued 
many Hours, ſuppole Ten or Twelve, and the Sick is worn 
out, ſo that the extream Parts wax cold; I ſay in thi; 
Calc, all other Remedies being omitted, he muſt imme. 
diately ffi: ro Laudanum, thegſacred Anchor in this Di- 
ea”, which muſt not only he given when the Symptoms i! 
are urgent, but allo after the Vomiting and Looſeneſs g 
off, and muſt be repeated Morning and Evening daily, til 
th „ck Nas recover'd his Strength and Health. 

Tho' this Dif:ale is Epidemical, as was ſaid before, yet 
it very ſeldom laſts longer than Aaguſt, wherein it firſt | 
began; upon Which account [ have, been induced to conf: | 
der the excellent Contrivance of Nature, for the product. 
on of Epidemick Diſeaſes; for tho' the fame Cauſes who!- | 
ly remain, ſo that many ſhould be ſeiz'd with this Diſeaſe, FR 
as Wellin Septever as Auguſt, by reaſon of eating too much 


Fruit. yet we ice the ſame Effect does not follow: And he 


that {hall carefully obſerve the Phauomena of a legitimate 
Cholet a, whervot we only treat at preſent, will confeß 
that that Nilcaſe which invades at any other Time of the 
Yeu, tno' coming upon the ſame occaſion, and accompani- |: 
ed with ſor” © oft the ſame Symptoms, is altogether differ 
ent from this now ſpoken of, as if there were ſome ſecret | 
aid peculiar Tz in the Air of this peculiar Month, that | 
impreſſes on the Blood, or on the Ferment of the Stomach, | 


fore ſuch ſpecifick alteration as is only for this Diſeaſe. 


— 
— 
ü» —— 


CH AF, = 


Of the Bloody-Flux of part of the Tear 
1669, and of the Tears 70, 71, 72. 


HE Dry Gripes, as we ſaid before, begin to invade at 

the beginning of Auguſt 1669, and in proceſs of thi! 
Autumn equal'd the Z/0ody-Flux that began with thei! 
| 5 


Of the Bloody-Flux, Cc. 117 


no- or rather exceeded it: Sometimes a Fever accompanied 
| the them, and ſometimes not. The aiorefaid Gries were al- 
Y ac {together like the Gripes of the Bloody-Flux, which was as 
and, frequent at that Time: They were very viotent,and aRttict- 


ed the Sick by intervals, but no excrementitious or mucous 
ni tools follow'd: They accompanied the Bloody-Flux 
wed through all this Autumn, but did not invade any more Epi— 
vorn demically with it in the following Years of this Conſtitu— 
this tion. But ſeeing theſe Dry Gripes do not much differ, either 
ia their Nature or Method, whereby they were eallly ap- 


me- 
Di- peaſed, from the Bloody-Flux, | ſhall treat only of it. 
oms RX I have taken notice, that as this Diſca ſe invades now at 


5 90 the beginning of Autumn, fo it uſes moſt commonly to do, 
til Fond that ' tis wont to ceaſe a while at the approach of Win⸗ 
ter? But when a Series of Years too much favour an Epi- 
yet | demick Production of it, it may ſeize at any other Time 
5;  Fhere and there one; yea, at the beginning of Spring, and 
nf. 


ct.. hard Froſt ſuddenly thaw'd) it may afflict a pretty many. 
10!- But tho' very few J may be ſeiz'd with this Diſeaſe, yet ſeeing 
aſe, Mit comes at aa unuſual Time, I am very well fatisfy'd that 
uch that Conſtitution does not a little favour this Diſeale;, and 


he o it was in thoſe Years wherein the Bloody-Flnax was io 
ate Epidemical, for ſometimes about Winter, or at the be 
fels | 38 inning of Spring, as was ſaid, this Diſeaſe did ſeize here 
the | and there one. 

ni. 3 Sometimes it begins with Shaking and Shivering, and 
f an heat of the whole Body follows, 3s is uſual in Fevers, 
and ſoon after the Gripes and Stools, but oftentimes there 
at is no appearance of a Fever going before, for the Gripes 
ch, begin, and Stools ſoon follow but there is always great 
4 f Tortures and a depron of the Bowels, and pain when 

l 


— 


— 
CL 7 
xz * 

eee My 


the Sick goes to Stoo the Stools are likewiſe frequent, 
| with a very troubleſome Deſcent, as it were, of the Guts; 
and they are all mucous, not excrementitious, excepting 
4 that ſometimes an excrementitious Stool comes between, 
5 and that is without any great pain. Theſe macous Stools 
„are ſtreaked with Blood; yet ſometimes there is no Blood 
dt all mixed with them through the whole Courle of the 
| Diſcaſe; yet notwithſtanding, if the Stools are frequent 
ita Oripes, and a mucous Filth, the Diſeaſe may as properly 
mh de calbd a Dyſentery, as if Blood flow'd out with them. 
u, Moreover, the Sick, if he is in the Flower of his Age, 
0: if 1 3 or 


a earlier (if hot Weather follows preſently after a“ 


o 
1 


* 
4% 
a 


118 Of the Bloody-Flux, &c. 


or has been heated by Cordials, has a Fever, and his 
Tongue is cover'd thick with a kind of whitiſh Mucilage; 
and if he has been much heated, it is black and dry, the 

Strength is much dejected, the Spirits are diſſipated, and . 
all the figns of an ill-favour'd Fever are preſent : And this 

Diſeaſe does not only cauſe violent Pains and Sickneſs, but 

unleſs it is skilfully treated, it endangers the Patient's Life AY 
before the Periods of acute Diſeaſes; for when a great 
many of the Spirits, and a great deal of the vital Heat 
have been exhauſted, by theſe frequent Stools, before the 
peccant Matter can be caſt out of the Blood, his Hands 
and Feet growing cold, he will be in danger of dying ; 
and if he ſhouldeſcape Death at this Time, yet many Symp- 
toms of a different kind attend the poor Man: For in- 
ſtance, ſometimes in the Progreſs of the Diſeaſe, inſtead WM: 
of thoſe ſanguineous Filaments, which at the beginning 

were wont to be mix'd with the Stools, pure Blood, un- 


®niv'd with Slime, is evacuated in a larger quantity at 


eve, Time, which is a ſign that ſome of the greater Vel- 
{:15 cf ©:2 Inteſtines are corroded, and ſo the Patient is 
in danger of Death; and ſometimes alſo by reaſon of the 
great burning, which is cauſed by a large Flux of hot and 
marp Humours to the Parts affected, the Inteſtines are 
gangren' J. Moreover, a Thruſb at the end of this Dif- 
eaſe does very often affect the Mouth and Jaws, eſpecially 
waen the Body has been a long Time heated, and when? 
the evacuation of the peccant Matter has been hinder'd by) 
aſtringent Medicines, the Fomes of the Diſeaſe having not Þ 
been firſt purged off; and this generally is the fore-run- 
ner of imminent Death. But iſ the Patient get over the 
torciaid Symptoms, and the Diſeaſe continues long, at 
length the Guts ſeem to be aff ſucce ſſively down- 
wards, till all the Diſeaſe is thruſt down to the right Gut, 
and enis in a Tepeſius; and then, quite otherwiſe than 
in ci Bloody-Flux, the excrementitious Stools cauſe great 
pain in the Bowels, the Excrements as they paſs through 
icraping the {mall Guts, whereas the mucous Stools at 
the ſame Time moleſt the right Gut, wherein alone the 
Matter is made, and from whence 'tis ejected. But tho 
this Diſeaſe is very often deadly in the Adult, and eſpe- 
Ciaily to old People, yet 'tis very gentle in Children, wio 
ſomatimes have it ſome Months without any Injury, if it 
be leit to Nature. | 9 

| What 


Of the Bloody-Flux, Cc. 119 


What likeneſs there is betwixt the Hu now deſcrib'd, 
and the Natural Bloody-Flux in Ireland, | know not, for as 
Jet I have had no account of it; and I cannot tell how 
lixe this Dyſentery is to others that come in other Years in 
rgland, for perhaps there are various Species of Dyſeu- 
teries, as there are of Small-Pox, and other Epidemicks, 

proper to divers Conſtitutions, and which may in ſome 
I Things require a different Method of Cure: Nor is there 
any reaſon why we ſhould wonder much at this Luſuss 
Nature in this Caſe; for all confeſs, that the nearer we pry 
into any of the Works of Nature, the more manifeitly 
Mappears the wonderful Variety, and almoſt divine Artifice 
= of its Works, which is far ſurpaſſing our Underſtanding : 


Vary Jo that whoever he be that has taken upon him to ſearch 
ine! into theſe Things, and to hunt after the various Operati- 
ing q yo ard . 

um ! ons of Nature, he will be partly deceiv'd in his great Un- 


dertaking, and will not be able to accompliſh his Dettgn ; 
and beſides, he muſt expect to be reproach'd for his beſt 
Inventions, and only becauſe he was the firſt Inventer. 
Moreover, *tis to be obſerv'd, That all Epidemick Diſ— 
=_ eas, at the beginning, ſeem by their Phenomena, to be 
more ſpirituous and ſubtil than when they grow older, and 
that the more they decline, they become daily more groſs 
and humoral ; for whatever thoſe Particles are, which be- 
ing thronghly mixed with the Air, we ſuppoſe, occafion 
2X Epidemick Conſtitugons, 'tis very reaſonable to think they 
= ſhould act more powerfully at their firſt breaking out than 
g afterwards, when their Force is weaked ; ſo in the firſt 
Months the Plague raged, almoſt every Day, they that 
were ſeized with it died ſuddenly, as they were walking the 
Streets, without any manner of Sickneſs before; whereas 
when it had continu'd a while, no one died of it before he 
had a Fever, and other Symptoms: From whence it plainly 
appears, that this Diſeaſe was moſt violent and acute at the 
beginning,, tho? then it kill'd feweſt, for afterwards it be- 
came more univerſal. And alſo in the Dyſentery, whereof 
we now treat, all the Symptoms were at fir{t moſt violent 
tho', if you do reckon the Number of the Sick, the Diſ- 
eaſe daily encreas'd, till at length it came to its height, 
and conſequently more died than at the beginning; yet the 
Symptoms were more violent at the beginning than at the 
declination; and, all Things conſider'd, more for the num- 
ber of the Sick died, Moreover: the longer the Diſcaſe 
1 | 4 Con- 


— 


©" 


* . 
4 


= 
— 
1 


120 Of the Bloody-Flux, &. B 
continu'd, the more humoral it ſeem'd to be: For in. 
ſtance, the firſt Autumn it invaded, very many had o 


Stools at all; but as to the violence of the Gripes, the 


height of the Fever, the ſudden proſtration of Streng, 


and other Symptoms, it far ſurpaſs'd the Bloody-Flux of thy | 


following Years; yea, the Bloody-Flux with Stools, which | 


fir{t invaded, ſeem'l to be more ſpirituous and ſubtle than 


ti oſe that follow'd , for in the firſt Dyſenteries the prove. i 
cation and ſtraining was greater and more frequent, bu: 
the Stools, eſpecially the Excrementitious, were leſs, and 
not © frequent; but generally as the Diſeaſe proceeded, 
{o 1:2 Gripes were leſſened, and the Stools were more 
Excr-mentitious ; and at length the Epidemick Conſti. 
tation fading, the Gripes were ſcarce perceptible, and th: 


excre:12ntitious Stools were more than the ſlimy. 


Now, at length, to come to the curative Indications, F 
when | 11 well weigh'd the various Symptoms that come 


in this Dicaſe, I found it was a Fever of its own kind caſt 


inwardly upon the Guts, whereby the hot and ſharp Hu- Ba: 
mours contain'd in the Maſs of Blood, and exagitating it, 
are put off, by the meſcraick Arteries, upon the ſaid Parts, 
from whence the Blood flows ont by Stools, the Orifices- 


of the Veſſols being opened by the Blood and Humours 
flowiag impetuouſiy thither, and by reaſon of the conti. 
nual Endeavours of the Inteſtines to expel the ſharp Hu- 
mours which continually moleſt them, that Slime which 
naturally covers them is caſt out by every Stool, ſometinics 


in a greater, ſometimes in a leſſer quantity; and ſo the In- 
dications offer themſelves plainly : Neither have I thoftght 


there is any Thingelle for me to do, than that I ſhould firſt 
immediately cauſe a Revulſion cf thoſe tarp Humours by 
bleeding, and afterwards attemperate the other Maſs, and 
al'o evacuate the fail Humonrs by Purges. I uſed this 
method when I was firft call'd; I bled in the Arm, and at 
Nigtiic] gave an Anodyne, and the next Morning this Le- 
nitive Purging Potion, which I frequently uſe: 


Tale of Tamatinas, half an Ounce, of the Leaves of Sena 
tro Drams, , Rhubarb, one Dram and an half; infuſe 
th mm in aſuſſicient quantity of Vater; to three Ounces 
the ſtraiued Liquor add of 71anaa and Syrup of Roſes 
Solutive, each one Ounce ; and mane a Potion, to be 
taten early in the Alorning, | 


- x z 
#* 4 


= 

PR 

* 7 5 

8 0 
5 * 


Of the Bloody-Flux, &c. 121 


in. I prefer this Potiorfbefore any Electuary made of Rhu- 
d no > parb in a ſmall quantity; for tho' the Rhubarb is proper 
the o evacuate Choler, and any ſharp Humour, yet unleſs 
gti, uch a quantity of Manna, or of Syrup of Roſes, or the 
the Hike, be mixed with it, as may cauſe it to work well, it 


hich Hoes not much conduce to the Cure of the Bloady-Fluæ. 
thin Hand becauſe *tis very obvious that purging Medicines, tho” 
ey be never ſo gentle, do heighten the Gr1pes, and cauſe 
general diſorder and depreſſion of the Spirits, by the ad- 
Mentitious Tumult they raiſe in the Blood and Humours; 
herefore I commonly give an Anodyne ſomewhat earlier 
an is cuſtomary after Purging, v:z. at any Time of the 
Afternoon, if the Purge ſeem to have done working, 
Prhereby I may be able appeaſe the Tumult I have raiſed. 
= repeat the ſaid Purge to be taken twice every other Day, 
nd give an Anodype after every Purge at that Timeabove- 
Paention'd; and I order this to be uſed Morning and E- 
Pening, when the Patient does not Purge, that I may ſup- 
Wpreſs the violence of the Symptoms, and gain a Truce, 
*Þ» hile 1 am evacuating the peccant Humour. The Anodyne 
"WT ufed was chiefly Liguid Laudanum, viz. ſixteen or eigh- 
een Drops in any Cordial-water, for one Doſe. After 
{Bleeding and Purging once uſed, I allow, through the 
rhole courſe of the Diſeaſe, any temperate Cordial to 
We taken now and then, as Epidemick Water, and Com- 
Wound Scordium Water, and the like. For inſtance : 


Take of the Waters of Black-Cherries, and Strawberries, 
each three Ounces, of Epidemick-water, of compound 
Scordiuim: water, and of Cinnamoa-water hordeated, each 
one Ounce, of prepared Pcart one Dram and an half, of 
Chriftaleine Sugar a ſufficient quantity, add half a Dram 
of Damask- Reſe-water to make it pleaſant to the Taſte; 
mix them, and make a Fulep, whereof let him take four 
or five Spoonfuls when he is faint, and at pleaſure. 


l chiefly uſed theſe Things in old and Flezmatick Peo- 
414 |, ple, that I might ſomewhat refreſh and comfort their 
Spirits, commonly dejeted in this Caſe. Their Drink 


ces was Milk mix' with three times as much Water, or the 
ſes white Decoction, as they call it, of calcin'd Harts-horn, 
be * and of Crumbs of White- bread, each two Ounces, boil'd 


in three Pints of Fountain- water to two, and afterwards 
* | {weeten'd 


| 1 . 
{ 
i 
4 
{ 
3 
1. 
n 


122 Of the Bloody. Flux, Cc. 


ſweeten'd with a ſufficient quantity of white Sugar, and 
ſometimes Poſſet-drink; and when they were very weak, 
they took for their ordinary Drink cold a Quart of Fonn- 
tain-water boil'd with half a Pint of Sack; they were di. 
ated ſometimes with Panado, and ſometimes with Broths 
made of lean Mutton. T kept old People much in Bed, 
and permitted them to uſe more freely any Cordial Wa- 
ter they had been accuſtom'd to, than was fit for Infants 
and young People. This Method was the beſt I have hi- 
therto met with for the Cure of this Diſeaſe, which rarely 
laſted after the third Purge. 

Bat if the Diſeaſe was obſtinate, and did not yield to 
theſe Things, I preſcrib'd the fore-mention'd Paregorick 
every Day in the Morning and at Bed-time, till the Sick 
was quite well; and that it might be the more certainly 
que!l'd, I gave the foreſaid Laudanumgvery eighth Hour, 
that is, thrice in the ſpace of a natural Day, and a larger 
Doſe than I have mention'd above, v:z. twenty five Drops 
if the for mer Doſe could not reſtrain the Flux. Moreover 
I order'd a Gliſter made of half a Pint of Cows Milk, and 
of and Qunce and half of Venice-Treacle to be injected e- 
very Day, which is truly very beneficial in all manner of 
Fluxes of the Belly; and indeed I never perceiv'd the leaſt 
injury from ſo frequent a repetition of the Narcotick Me- 
dicine; tho' unexperienc'd People may ſay wharthey pleaſe 
of the Miſchiefs that are-to follow; for I have known ma- 
ny that have daily uſed it when the Diſeaſe has been obſti- 
nate for ſome Weeks together. But it is here to be noted, 
that when there is only a Looſeneſs, *twill be ſufficient 
that (Bleeding and Purging being omitted) Rhubarb is 
given alone every Morning, viz. half a Dram of the Pow- 
der of it, more or leſs, according to the ſtrength of the 
Sick, made intoa Bolus, with a ſufficient quantity of Di- 
aſcordium; add to it two Drops of Chymical Oil of 
Cinnamon; the Night following give an Anodyne, with 
an Quace of Cinnamon-water hordeated, and fourteen 
Drops of Liquid Laudani:m, and obſerve ſuch a Diet as we 
have deſcrib'd above in the Cure of the Bloody-Flux, and 


every Day, if there is occaſion, give the Gliſter commend- 


ed there. But this by the by. 

Nov, to confirm the uſefulneſs of the Method ] have 
propoſed by one Example, for I will not unneceſſarily 
trouble the Reader with many ; The Learned and 3 * 

T. 


Of the Bloody-Flux, &«. 123 


Mr. Thomas Belke Chaplain to the Earl of St. Albans, 
BY labouring with a very acute Dyſentery, ſent for me and 
* . . 

: | was cured with this Method. 

© Infants afflicted with this Diſeaſe are to be treated after 
© the ſame manner; but the quantity of Blood to be taken 
EZ away, and the Doſes of the Purge, and Anodyne Medicines 
are to be leflen'd, with reſpect to their Age. For Inſtance, 
= Two Drops of the Narcotick may be ſufficient for a Child 
= ofa Year old. 

© The Liquid Laudanum, which, as I ſaid, I uſed daily, 
was prepar'd according to the following plain manner. 


Take of Spaniſh Wine, one Pint, of Opium, two Ounces, 
of Saffron, one Qunce, of the Powder of Cinnamon and 
Codes, each one Dram; let them be infuſed together in 
4 Bath two or three Days, till the Liquor comes to a 
due conſiſtence; train it, and keep it for uſe, 


I do not think this Preparation has more Vertue than 
the ſolid Laudanum of the Shops; but I prefer it before 
that for its more commodious Form, and by reaſon of the 
greater certainty of the Doſe, for it may be drop'd into 
Wine, or into any diſtill'd Water, or into any other Li- 
quor. And truly I cannot here forbear mentioning, with 
Gratitude, that Omnipotent G OD, the Giver of all 
good Things, has not provided any other Remedy for the 
Relief of wretched Man, which is ſo able either to quell 
more Diſeaſes, or more effectually to extirpate them, than 
» [DB Opiate Medicines taken from ſome Species of Poppies. And 
| tho” there are ſome that would fain perſnade ſome credu- 
lous People, that almoſt all the Vertues of Opiate Medi- 
cines, eſpecially of Opium, principally depend on their 
artificial Preparation of it; yet he that ſhall make Expe- 
f tience the Judge, and ſhall as often try the ſimple Juice, 
ds it comes by Nature, as the Preparations of it, if he be 
careful in his Obſervation, he will ſcarce find any differ- 
ence, he will certainly know, that thoſe admirable Effects 
which it produces, proceed from the native Goodnels and 
| I 
| Excellency of the Plant, and not from the Skill of the 
Artificer. And ſo neceſſary is this Inſtrument in the Hand 
of a skilful Man, that without it Phyſick would be very 
lame and imperfect ; and he that rightly underitands it, 
will dogreaterThings than can well be hop'd * N one 
; ledicine : 


- —— — 


F þ 
* 
be?! 
„ 
* 
j 
' 
f 


124 Of the Bloody-Flux, ec. 


Medicine: For ſurely he is very unskilful, and little under. 
ſtands the Vertue of this Medicine, who only knows how 
to uſe it to promote Sleep, to eaſe Pain, and to ſtop a Looſe. 
neſs; whereas it may be accommodated, like the Delphici 
Sword, to many other uſes; and it is really a moſt excel. 
lent Cordial Remedy, TI had almoſt {aid the only one, which 
has been hitherto found amongſt the Things of Nature, 

The Bloady-Flux was to be treated in general after thi; 
manner. But it muſt be noted, that in the firſt Year it be- 
gan, it was, as we ſaid, of a more ſubtile and fpirituons 
Nature than that that raged in the following Years, and 
therefore it did not ſo readily yield to purging Medicines, 
as to thoſe which did as well dilute and attemperate the 
Blood, as the ſharp Humours which were put off on the 
Bowels; therefore in the firſt Autumn, when the dry Gripe; 
and Bloody-Flux invaded, I always uſed the following Me- 
thod for the Cure of both, with very good Succeſs, till the 
Weather grew cold, and then I found *twas not ſo effectual 
tho' in the ſame Year; and it was wholly uſeleſ in the 
following Years, when the Diſeaſe was more humoral. 

I proceeded in the following manner: If the Sick, being 
in 25 Flower of his Age, had a Fever, I order'd him to 
be bled in the Arm, and after an Hour or two, that he 
ſhould take great quantities of Liquor, as I was wont to 
do in the Cholera Morbus; but not Chicken-broth or Poſ- 
ſet-drink, as in that Caſe, but Whey, which I order'd to 
be drank cold in the ſame quantity, as in the Cholera: But 
the Gliſters were to be injected warm, without Sugar or 
any other Thing. I found the Gripes and the bloody Stool: 
went off with the fourth Gliſter; this Buſineſs being done, 
and all the Whey ejected (which might be done in the 
ſpace of two or three Hours,if the Sick minded his Buſineſs) 
I preſently order'd him to go to Bed, where he ſoon ſweat 
of his own accord, (by reaſon of the Whey mix'd with the 
Blood) and I order'd it ſhould be continu'd Twenty Four 
Hours, but not at all provok'd, allowing him nothing all 
the while but raw Milk a little warm'd ; which he only 
uſed three or four Days after he left his Bed. If either by 
riſing too ſoon, or by leaving off the uſe of Milk too ſoon, 
the Patient relapſes, the ſame Method muſt be repeated; 
and if this Method is certain and quick, it ought not to be 
deſpiſed by a wiſe Man, tho” tis not accompanied with a 
pompous Apparatus of Remedies, N 0 

at 


Of the Bloody-Flux, Cc. 12 5 


hat a Fever accompanied with ſuch Symptoms, as we 
Ww {hive deſcrib'd ahpve, is found in thoſe Plac:s and Times 
e. Nherein the Bloody-Flux reigns Epidemically, and the Me- 
4: 


Fhod which we have propoſed is very proper; for it is fully 
confirmed by the Teſtimony of Dr. Butler, who accompa- 
ch nied the Honourable Mr. Howard, Ambaſſador from the 
King of Great Britain to Africa; in which Country, as he 
told me, he obſerv'd at that Time a Bloody-Flux raged Epi- 
demically, as it did always, and that the Fever, which ac- 
Wcompanicd it, was like that which we have deſcrib'd, 
11 WE which he treated always with Succeſs with the forefaid 
„Method, whether the Sick were Blackmoors, or our own 
be Country-men: And indeed neither of us borrow'd this 
be Method of the other, but both of us being at ſo great a 
W giſtance fell accidentally upon the fame; and moreover 
he declar'd, that the Method of diluting in the Bloody- 
he Hur ſucceeded excellently there; and I think it 15 very 
E reaſonable that this Method ſhould be much more ſucceſſ- 
tal in that hot Climate than in England. 
| [In the firſt Autumn this Conſtitution flonriſ'd, Dr. Da- 


ie Cox, being afflicted witha very acute Dyſentery, ad- 
to F vited with me, and was cured quickly, ſafely, and eaſily, 
a by the Method above-mention'd, viz. after the third or 
0 


E fourth Gliſter, the Gripes and Bloody Stools vaniſt'd; nei- 
ther was any Thing elſe, beſides keeping his Bed for the 


(0 Time above-mention'd, and the Milk-diet, requiſite for 
ut the recovery of his Health; and he cured many others 
or 


afflicted with this Diſeaſe by the ſame Method, at the lat- 


er end of the Autum, but it did not anſwer his Expecta- 
© don the Year following. 

el aid before, that oftentimes this Diſeaſe, if it continue 
J long, affects all the Inteſtines gradually downward, till at 
it length it quite falls to the right Gout, with a continual In- 
0 | clination of going to Stool, whereby nothing is Evacuat- 


ed but ſomewhat ſlimy and bloodiſh; if this happen, it 


win be in vain, in my Opinion, to endeavour to remedy it, 
either by any Method mention'd before, or by cleanſing 
Y IF <ltringent, and glutinating Gliſters, which are wont to 
I be injected according to the various Seaſons of this ſup- 
3 poſed Ulcer, or by Baths, Fomentations, Suffumigations, 
ad Suppolitories reſpecting the fame ; for it is manifeſt, 
4 IF that this does not proceed from an Ulcer of the right Gut, 


: but rather becauſe as the Guts gather Strength ys 
| 0 


126 Of the Bloody-Flux, cc. 


ſo they put off the Relicks of the morbifick Matter upon 
it; which being continually provoked, pygis out that (ly 
Matter, whereby the Guts are naturally cover'a ; there. 
fore the Part affected is to be ſtrengthen'd, that it may be 
able, as the other Guts have done, to eject the {mall Re. 
licks of the Diſeaſe ;, but thoſe Things alone will do this, 
which are proper to ſtrengthen the Body in general; for 
a topick Medicine, whatever it be, applied to the Part af 
tected, it being troubleſome, will rather weaken thn 
{trengthen it, therefore the Patient muſt bear it till ji 
Strength is recover*d by ſome reſtorative Diet, and ſome 
Cordial Liquor, that beſt pleaſes him, drank as often ax 
he will, and then this Symptom of a Teneſmas will go of 
gradually of its own accord, as the Strength returns, 
It happens alſo ſometimes, tho' very rarely, that the 
Bloody-Flux, not rightly cur'd at the beginning, afflicts 1 
articular Perſon for ſome Years, the whole Maſs of Blooi 
eing of a Dyſenterick Diſpoſition, ſo that ſharp and hot 
Humours continually flow to the Bowels; yet in the mean 
whily the Sick can perform his Buſineſs tolerable well. | 
met with a Specimen of this not long ago in a Woman, 
my Neighbour, who was always afflicted with this Diſeak 
the laſt three Years of this Conſtitution, ſhe having uſe! 
very many Medicines before ſhe came to me; I order' 
Bleeding, and I was encourag'd to repeat it often, tho'at 
a good diſtance, by the Colour of the Blood, which was 
like that of Pleureticks; and by the great Relief ſhe re- 
ceiv'd every Time ſhe bled, at length ſhe recover'd. 
Before I conclude, tis to be noted, that tho' in theſe 
Years wherein Dyſenteries have been ſo Epidemical, the 
foreſaid Evacuations were wholly neceſſary before we uſe! 
Laudanum, yet in any Conſtitution not favouring ſo much 
this Diſeaſe, they may ſafely be omitted, and the Cure 
may be performed more compendiouſly by Laudanum a. 
lone, according to the manner we have deſcrib'd. And ſo 
much for the Bloody-Flux, 


CHAP. 


"I 


= 


" — 2 
C HA. IV. 


Of the Continual Fever of part of the Tear 


16699 70, 71, 72. 


Al the ſame Time when the Bloody-Flux raged, a Fe- 
A ver, like that which was often wont to accompany 
the Bloody. Flux, aroſe, which did not only ſeize thoſe that 
ae the Blooch-Fluæ, but allo thoſe that were wholly free 
ol rom it; only ſometimes, tho' ſeldom, the Sick was grip- 
cad, but not violently ; ſometimes with Stools, ſome- 

the times without; it alſo had always the {ame maniteſt and 
pparent Caules as the Bloody-Flux had : The Symptoms 
vere alſo the ſame with thoſe that accompanied the Fever 
hot f ſuch as had the Bloody-Flux ;, ſo that it you exeept the 


ei WF vacuations by Stool, and the Symptoms that neceſſarily 
I cpended on them, the faid Fever ſeemed to be of the 
12", ime Nature with the Bloody-Flux; and moreover , 
eie through the whole Courſe of this Conſtitution, it had the 
. lime alteration of Symptoms in the Encreaſe, State and 
er 


eclination, as generally the Bloody-Flux had, and there- 
Wor I call'd this a Dy ſenterick Fever. 

This Fever {ometimes, as was ſaid, began with Gripes, 
ut they were gentle (eſpecially in the firſt Years it inva- 
ped) or they came afterwards, but moſt commonly there 
were none; the Sweats which, as we noted formerly, were 


the very large in the Fever of the foregoing Conſtitution, were 
uſel WF are and (mall in this, but the Pain of the Head was more 
auch violent in this, than in that Fever; The Tongue of the Sick, 
Lure tho' it was moiſt and white, as in the other Fever, yet it 
* . das cover'd with a thick Skin: This ſeldom went off by 
1d ſo 


Spitting, as the other commonly did; but it was more dif- 
"Pa to cauſe a Thruſh when it was going off, than either 


he former, or any other kind of Fever | hitherto knew; 


for it was very common for this (as alſo for that Fever that 

Tine upon the Bloody-Flux) when it was going away, to 

put off filthy and acrid Matter, upon the Mouth and Throat, 

by which means the ſaid Symptom was occaſion'd, eſpeci- 

Ap Wy in thoſe that had been much waſted in this Diſeaſe, 
AY. when 


0 
— 
C 


2 - 12 


= 
— : A * 
- — mw — 
4 al . 
— TERS — = 


—= ——ů - — — 


p 


| 
' 
: 
0 j 
a 
5 


128 Of the Continual Fever, c. 


when it was obſtinate, and when too hot a Regimen hot 
weaken'd them more. And upon the ſame account th: 
Thruſh was occaſion'd, which happen'd every Day in don; 
Dyſenteries, accompanied with a Feve7, eſpecially if, be. 
ſides a hot Regimen, the Evacuation by Stool was {ton 


by aſtringent Medicines, before the Fomes of the Diſc: 


was carried off by Bleeding and Purging. 


Theſe were the certain Signs of judging of this Fever: 


the other Symptoms varied Yearly, and, according to the 
manifeſt Qualities of the Air at ſome certain Times, an! 
generally according to the Progreſs of the Bloody-Fln, 
and the various Seaſons of it. But that theſe Things m1 
appear more clear, becanſe by this Artifice eſpecially I 
ture Triumphs in the Production of Epidemicks, I wil 
treat more particularly of this Matter. Tis therefore t 
be noted, that tho' the manifeſt Qualities of the Air can- 
not force any conſtitution, ſo as to be the Productive Cauſe 
of Epedimical Diſeaſes, that properly belong to it (fo 
they flow from an hidden and inexplicable Diſpoſition of 
it) but for a Time they have Power over them, and {6 E 
3 are admitted or excluded, as the manifeſt Qu. 
ities favour or oppoſe them. But the univerſal Conſtiti 
tion remains the ſume, whether they promote, or in ſome 
ſort retard it. Upon which account it is, that when ſeveri 
Epidemicks happen in one Conſtitution, this or that pu- 
ticular Diſeaſe appears chiefly in that Seaſon, to which the 
ſenſible Qualities of the Air have aſſigned it, and at length 
gives place to another Epidemick, which the different 
Qualities of the ſubſequent Seaſon calls in ; by which means 
it comes to paſs, that the Stationary Fever, whatever i! 
be, that belongs to the Epidemick of that Year, chief) 
rages in July, at the beginning whereof it ſeizes a great 
many People together: But at the approach of Autumn it 
gives way to the great Epidemick then prevailing, which 
denominates the Year, and is leſs eb as every 
Year plainly ſhews : For Mens Bodies being heated by the 
foregoing Summer, the Fevers which are proper to the 
general Conſtitution eaſily invade at that Time ; but at 
the coming of Autumn, the prevailing Epidemick reſumes 
the Government, and they quite recede. 
But as the foreſaid Fevers take their riſe in this Mont! 
from the ſenſible Qualities of the Air, ſo alſo the various 


Symptoms that are quite contrary to their own ane” as 
| 75 


4 
— 
— 


Of the Continual Fever, &c. 129 


ai they depend on ſuch a general Conſtitution, are burcow'd 
th Þ froh the manifeſt Qualities which happen in this Month: 
o And upon this account it is, that in thoſe Years wherein 
b. the laid Fevers ſeize a great many, they are accompanied 
„with various new Symptoms, beſides thoſe which are pro- 
ber to them, as they proceed from ſuch a general Conſti- 
tution, yet they continue the fame; tho' the Vulgar, by 


rea ſon of the diverſity of the Phenomena, reckon there is a 

the new Fever every Year. But theſe peculiar Symptoms 
py P ? 4 1 — 

ani continue only a few Weeks, and the reſt of the Year only 


, the proper Symptoms are feen, wich happen to them as 
nr they are Stationary Fevers of uch a Conſtitution. 

N. This was manifeſt in other Fevers, but eſpecially in the 
I Dyſenterick Fever of July 71, and 72; in the former 


* . 


e whereof, violent Sicknels, green Choler, with a great in- 
-1n- clination to a Looſeneſs, were continually obſerv'd at the 
uſes ! end of the Diſeaſe; in the latter, Pains in the muſcular 
(r Parts of the Body, eſpecially in the Limbs like a Rheuma- 
n iſ. Moreover, an Inflammation of the Jaws, but gentler 
than in a Quinſie : Yet both theſe met in the ſame ſpe- 
. cifck Fever, and both requir'd the ſame Method of Cure; 
its they differ'd only with reſpe& to the ſenſible Qualities 
me that were at thoſe Times they happen'd in. But the E- 
eral MW ruption of theſe Fevers was unforeſeen, about the be- 
par | zinning of theſe Months, and there was a new Face of 


the peculiar Symptoms for ſome Time (tho? they did not dit- 
oth fer in Specie, nor in the Method of Cure, which they re- 
ent quir'd from that Fever that run through the whole Year ;) 


@ theſe Things, I ſay, ſufficiently teſtihe how difficult it is 
to diſtinguith at all Times the certain Species of a Fever, 
from the Phexomena : But he may well enough know it 
rent that ſhall carefully mind other Dileaſes that come in the 
ait fame Year, and alſo the proper Symptoms of the Fever, 
@ which reſpect this or that manner of Evacuation, and the 
* conſideration of the Method or Medicine, whereby it 
may be eaſily cured, conduces much to the Knowledge of 
the Species of the Fever. 


xe 


company Stationary Fevers, they only reſpect the various 
Salons of the Conſtitution, and fo they are either in- 
tenſe or remiſs, as the Symptoms of other Epidemicks to 
| Which they belong are heighten'd or depreſſed. But to re- 
turn to the Buſineſs, this Fever, n as wWe ſaid, ee 
N s Wit 


As to the other Differences of the Symptoms that ac- 


* 


130 Of the Continual Fever, &c. 
with the Bloody-Flux, kept pace with it, only it with. 


drew a little, whilſt other Epidemicks of theſe Years pre. 
vaild; yet it continu'd, and ſeiz'd ſometimes more, 


ſometimes fewer, during this Conſtitution. 


As to the Cure of this Fever, when I had obſerv'd, i; 
was {aid before, that the Phenomena of the Fever of very Þ .. 


many of thoſe that had the Bloody-flux, were plainly the 


ſame with thoſe which accompanied the ſol:tary Fever: of 


this Year; I thought it reaſonable to attempt the Cure 
by imitating in ſome fort that Evacuation, whereby Ni. 
ture was wont to expel that ſharp and corroſive Matter, 
which was the containing Cauſe of the Bloody-flux, and gi 
the Fever that came on it; and therefofe I proceeded in 
this Fever with the ſame Method, both as to Bleeding 
and Purging repeated, and Cordials, as I have mention 


above more at large; only I found that Paregoricks uſed Þ 
betwixt the Purge, did not only not do good, but were 


injurious, otherwiſe than in the Flux; for by theſe the 
Matter was detain'd which ought to have been expell'd by 
Purging. On the firſt Days the Sick fed on Barley and 
Oatmeal-broths, Panado, and the like; his Drink was 
Small-beer a little warm'd, but after Purging once or 
twice, there was no neceſlity for keeping the Sick from 
eating Chickings, and other Meats of eaſie Digeſtion : For 


this way of Cure by Purging made room for thoſe Things 


which could not be allow'd, if we proceeded in another 
way ; the third Purge moſt commonly, a Day being be⸗ 
twixt each, cured the Diſeaſe, but not always; for ſome- 
times more were to be uſed, If, after the Fever, the Sick 
was weak and recover'd ſlowly (which was very common 
in hyſterick Women) I endeavour'd to reſtore and recal 
the deſerting Spirits to their Stations they had forſook, by 
giving Laudanum in a ſmall Doſe : But I ſeldom repeate! 
this Remedy, and never preſcrib'd it till two or thre: 
Days were paſſed after the laſt Purge. But nothing did 
ſo much conduce towards the refreſhing the Spirits, and 
recovering the Strength, as the free uſe of the Air, pre- 
ſently after the Fever went off. 

I had an opportunty of inſtituting this Practice almoſt 
at the beginning of this Conſtitution; for being then very 
thoughtful about the Nature of this Fever, I was call'd to 
a young Woman, my Neighbour, that had the Fever, 
2nd a violent Pain in the fore-part of her Head, and other 

Symptoms 


4 

4 
4 
* 
ze 


NU 


ay 


© ©. — A @+s „ „„ K wh 4 


CA,  @ _ - — 


To A __ 


- VB ce” & ate. 
arte MS 


Of the Continual Fever, Cc. 137 
Symptoms, which, as we ſaid, accompanied the Dyſente- 
rick Fever, When Ienquir'd of her in what manner the 
Feyer invaded, and how long ſhe had had it; ſhe told me, 
That a Fortnight before ſhe had the Bloody-Aux, which was 
then very frequent, and that as ſoon as that went off, ei- 
ther of its own accord, or by the uſe of Medicines, this 
Fever ſucceeded with the Pain of the Head, and I gueſſed it 


y would be proper for both to ſubſtitute another Evacuation 
like it, inſtead of the Flux; which being ſtopp'd, the Fe- 


ver aroſe; and therefore | order'd the ſame by the Method 
above-mention'd, and the Fevers of this Conſtitution 


4 


| . readily to it; for I always thought it was not ſuf- 


cient in Acute Diſeaſes to prove the way of Cure to be 
true, becauſe it ſucceeded well (for ſome are cur'd by the 
raſhneſs of the moſt unskilful Women) but that it was ne- 
ceſſary that the Diſeaſe ſhould be eaſily conquer'd, and go 
off, as it were, according to its own Genius, as much as 
the Nature of it will allow : But this by the bye, 
At the beginning of Fuze, 1672, the Noble and Pru- 


dent Earl of Salisbury having this Fever, with Gripes, yet 


his Belly was bound, ſent for me, and was cured by the 
the Method propoſed : Nor had I any occaſion for any 
other as long as this Fever continued. En : 

In young People, and ſometimes in others that were a 
little older, this Fever ſometime ſeiz'd the Head, fo that 
the Sick was delirious, but not raving, as in other Fevers, 
but was ſtupid. This happen'd chiefly to thoſe, who at 
the beginning of the Diſeaſe unluckily endeavour'd with all 
their Might to force Sweat: I was not ſo happy at that 
Time as to be able to relieve ſuch, tho' I mov'd every 
Stone, and uſed all the noted Medicines for this purpoſe; 
And fo much for the Fever of this Conſtitution. 


1 8 


GC HAP. V. | 
Of the Meaſles in the Tear 1670. 


T Heſe eaſes began very early, as they were wont to 


do, viz. at the beginning of January, 1670, and en- 
creaſingdaily,came to their heighthin March, afterwards 
they gradvally dectez(cd; and * quite extinguiſh "_ 
— 282 s 


132 Of the Meaſles, C&c. 


the following July. I will give an account of this ſort, 
becauſe I reckon them the moſt perfect of their kind that 

I hitherto obſerv'd. x | 
This Diſeaſe began and ended at the Times above-men- 
tion'd, it chiefly invaded Infants, and all thoſe that were 
together in the ſame Houſe. It began with Shaking and 
Shivering, and with an inequality of Heat and Cold, which 
mutually expell'd one another the firſt Day, the ſecond 
Day it ended in a perfect Fever, with violent Sicknek, 
Thirſt, and want of Appetite ; the Tongue was white, 
but not dry; there was a {mail Cough, with an Heayj- 
neſs of the Head and Eyes, acompanied with a continu! 
Drowſineſs, and for the moſt part an Humour diſtill'4 
from the Eyes and Noſe; and this effuſion of Tears is 
certain ſign of the approaching AHcaſles, whereunto this is 
to be added, no leſs certain, vg. That tho' this Diſeaſe 
thews it ſelf moſt commonly in the Face, after the man- 
ner of little Swellings in the Skin, „yet in the Breaſt ra- 
ther red broad Spots than Swellings are perceiv'd, riſing 
no higher than the Superfices of the Skin; the Patient 
ſneezes, as if he had taken cold; and the Eye-lids ſwell a 
little before they come out; he vomits, but is oftener 
troubled with a Looſenefs, and the Stools are greeniſh; 
but this happens chiefly to Children that are breeding 
their Teeth; and they are more froward in this Diſeaſe 
than they are wont to be. The Symptoms encreaſe for 
the moſt part till the fourth Day, and then generally 
(tho' ſometimes they are deferr'd to the fifth Day) little 
red Spots, Jike Flea-bites, begin to come out about the 
Fore-head, and other Parts of the Face, and being encreaſ 
ed in Numver and Bigneſs, branch into one another, and 
ſo paint the Face with large red Spots of various Figures, 
Which are occaſion'd by little red Wheals not far diſtant 
one from another, that are elevated a little above the Skin, 
and their Protuberances may be perceiv'd by a gentle 
touch, tho' they can ſcarce be ſeen ; theſe Spots ſpread 
themſelves by degress from the Face, which firſt they on- 
ly poſſeſſed, to the Breaſt, Belly, Thighs and Legs, 
but they affect the Trunk and Members with red- 
neſs only, without any ſenſible inequality of the Skin. 
The Symptoms of the Meaſſes do not abate by the Erup- 
on, as in the Small-Pox, yet I never obſerv'd the Vomit- 
ing 


Of the Mealles, Cc. 133 


ing afterwards: But the Cough and Fever encreaſe, with 
the difficulty of Breathing, weakneſs of the Eyes, and the 
Delluxion on them, with continual Drowlinels, and want 
of Appetite, as before. On the ſixth Day, or thereabouts, 
the Skin breaking, and the Puſtles drying off, the Fore- 
head and Face grow rough, and at the ſame Time the Spots 
in the other Parts of the Body are very large, and very 
red. About the Eighth Day the Spots in the Face vaniſh, 
and are ſcarce perceiv'd in the reſt of the Body: But on 
the Ninth Day they quite diſappear. The Face and Mem- 
bers, and ſometimes the whole Body, ſeem as it were to 
be ſprinkled with Bran all over, viz. Particles of broken 
Skin being raiſed up, and ſcarce ſticking together, are 
torn in pieces now the Diſeaſe is going off, and afterwards 
fall from the Body like Scales; and, as we have ſaid, the 


Meaſles moſt commonly diſappear on the Eighth Day, at 


which Time the common People (being deceiv'd by re- 


ckoning upon the Time the Small-Pox are wont to con- 
tinue) affirm they are ſtruck in, tho' really they have fi- 
niſh'd their Courſe; and they think the Symptoms which 
come on their going off, are occaſion'd by their being 


ſtruck in ſo ſoon; for tis to be noted, that the Fever and 


difficulty of breathing are encreaſed at that Time, and 
the Coug/3 is more troubleſome, ſo that the Sick can neit 1x 
ſleep Night nor Day. Children are chiefly ſubject to this 
ill Symptom, which appears now at the going off of the 


AHeaſles, by reaſon of too hot a Regimen, or hot Meui— 


cines, that were uſed to force them out, and ſo tiicy are 
caſt into a Peripneumonia, which deſtroys more than 


the Small- Pox, or any Symptom thereunto belonging: And 


vet the Meaſtes are hot at all dangerous if they are skil- 
fully treated: And among the reſt of the i Symptoms, a 
! Looſeneſs often happ 

the Diſeaſe, or alſo continues many Weeks, after it and 
all its Symptoms are gone off, not without great danger 
to the Patient, by reaſon of a continual lots of Spirits; 
and ſometimes after a very hot Regimen, the Meaſles are 
7 firſt livid, afterwards black; but this only happens to 
' grown People, and they are utter! loſt when the black- 


which either preſently jucceeds 


neſs firſt appears, unleſs they are preſent!y relieved by 
Bleeding, and a more temperate Regimen. 
As the ANleaſtes are much of the {\me Na ure with the 
Sull-Poæ, ſo is the Method of Cure much the ſame z but hot 
8 : K 2 Medicines 


* 


134 Of the Meaſles, Cc. 


Medicines and an hot Regimen are very dangerous, hozy 
frequent ſoever they be uſed by ignorant Nurſes to drive 
the Diſeaſe from the Heart, This Metnod, above others 


has been moſt ſucceſsful in my Practice, v:z. that the Sick 


be kept in his Bed only two or three Days after they come 
out, that the Blood may gently breath out, according to 
its own Genius, thro' the Pores of the Skin, the inflamed 
Particles that are eaſily ſeparable which offend him; and 
that he have no more Cloaths nor Fire than he is wont to 
have when he is well. I forbid all Fleſh, and allow'd him 

Oatmeal and Barley-broth, and the like, and ſometimes z 
_ roaſted Apple: His Drink was either Small-beer, or Milk 
boiled with thrice the quantity of Water. TI often miti. 
cated the Cough, which almoſt continually accompanies 
this Diſeaſe, with a draught of ſome Pectoral Decoction, 
or with a proper Linctus taken now and then; but above 
all the reſt, I took care to give Diacodium every Night 
* through the whole Courſe of this Diſeaſe. For inſtance; 


Take of Peftoral Decoction one Pint and a half, of H- 
rup of Violets and Maidenhair, each one Ounce and an 
half; mingle them, and make an Apozem «© Take three 
or four Ounces three or four Times a Day. 


Take of the Oyl of Sweet Almonds, two Ounces, of Syrup 
of Violets and Maidenhair, each one Ounce, of white 
Sugar Candy a ſufficient quantity, mingle them, and 

make a Linitus, whereof let him lick often, eſpecially 
when his Cough troubles him. 


Tate of Blackcherry-water, three Ounces, of Diacodium, 


ene Ounce ,, mingle them for G l to be taken eve- 
ry Night. 


But if the Patient is an Infant, the Doſe of the Pectoral 
and of theAnodyne muſt belefſen'd with reſpect to the Age. 

He that uſes this Regimen ſeldom does amiſs, nor is he 
moleſted with any other Symptoms than what are neceſ- 
lary and inevitable in this Diſeaſe ; the Cough is moſt trou- 
bleſome, but is not dangerous, if it does not continue after 
the Diſcaſe is gone off; and if it does remain a Week or 
FOrtuight, it is caſily cured by Pectorals and the open Air; 
Pay, it degrea ſes of is o accord, and at length oy 

| | By 


Of the Meaſles, Cc. 135 


But, if by reaſon of too hot Cordials, and too hot à Regi- 
men, the Sick is in danger of his Life after the Meaſles go 
off, (which is very common) by the violent Fever and 
difficulty of breathing, and other Accidents that are wont 


to afflict thoſe that have a Peripneumonia, I have order'd 


the ſmalleſt Infants to be bled in the Arm, and have ta- 


ken away that quantity of Blood which their Age and 


Strength indicated, with very great Succeſs; and ſome- 


time when the Diſeaſe has been obſtinate, I have not fear'd 
to A, Bleeding: And, indeed, many Children that 
have been at the Point of Death, by reaſon of this Symp- 


tom, have been (with God's Bleſſing) cur'd by Bleeding: 
Nor have J found as yet any other certain way to vanquiih 


it. This happens to them after the Meaſles go off, and is ſo 
very fatal, that it may be well reckon'd the chief Miniſter 
of Death, deſtroying even more than the Smal/-Pox nor 
have I yet found any other certain way of taking off this 
Symptom: And the Looſeneſs, which, as we ſaid, fol- 


los the Meaſles, is alſo cured by Bleeding; for whereas 
it ariſes from Vapours of inflamed Blood ruſhing upon the 


Guts, (which is alſo common in a Pleuriſie, Peripneumo- 


nia, and other Diſeaſes that are occaſion'd by an Inflam- 
mation) whereby they are ſtimulated to Excretion, tis 
Hhleeding alone that gives Relief, by making revulſion of 
thoſe ſharp Humours, and by reducing the Blood to a due 
> Temper. 


Nor is there any reaſon why any one ſhould wonder that 
[ bleed young Children, whereas for what I have hitherto 
obſerv'd, it may be as ſafely perform'd in Children as in 
grown Perſons : And, indeed, it is fo neceſſary, that we 
can neither cure the Symptom above-men:tion'd, nor ſome 
other that happen to Children, without it; for by what 
means can we relieve thoſe that are breeding Teeth from 
Convulſions, Which ſeize them in the ninth and tenth Month 
with a Swelling and pain of the Gums, whereby the Nerves 


are oppreſſed and enraged, and from whence alſo the Fits 


come, but by Bleeding, which alone is much to be prefer- 


: red in this Caſe, before the moſt celebrated Specificks 


whatever that are yet known, whereof ſome do hurt by 
there adventitious Heat, and whilſt they are thought to 
cure the Diſeaſe by an occult Faculty, they encreaſe it by 
their manifeſt Heat, and kill the Sick. I paſs by at pre- 
{ent that wonderful Relief which Bleeding gives in the 

; K 4. #1 00 p 


13 Of the Irregular Small-Pox, Cc. 


Hooping Congo, wherein it far ſurpaſſes all Pectoral Me. 


dicines whatever, 


What we have ſaid now of the Cure of thoſe Symptoms, 


that come upon the going off of the Meaſles, may be foms. 
times alſo of uſe when they are at the heighth, if they are 


occaſion'd by an artificial Heat, if I may ſay ſo. In this 
Year 1670, I was call'd to viſit a Maid-ſervant of the Lady 
Ann Barington's, that had this Diſeaſe, together with: Þþ 
Fever, difficulty of Breathing, and purple Spots all over 


her Body, with very many other dangerous Symptoms; all 
whictTattributed to the hot Regimen and Medicines which 
were too much uſed. I order'd her to be bled in the Arm, 
and I prefcrib'd a cooling Pectoral Ptiſan to be taken of- 
ten, by tne help whereof, and a temperate Regimen, the 
purple Spots, and all the other 5y mptoms, went off by de- 
grees. 

This Diſeaſe, as I ſaid before, began in January, and 
encreaſed daily till March, and afterwards decreaſed gra- 
dually, and ended the following 75,5 only it appear'd in 
me few Places the next Spring, but rarely, neither re- 
tarn'd they again through all the Years wherein this Con- 
ſtitution reigned. And ſo much for the Meaſles. 


VI. 


Of the Irregular Small- POx in the Tears 
1670, 71, 72. | 


en ct * 


CHAS 


HE aforeſaid Meaſtes, as we ſaid before, introduc'd 

another ſort of Small-Pox,agfi:rent from thoſe we 
treated of before: They broke ont much about the ſame 
Time with them, diz. at the beginning of January 1669. 
But tho” they were not ſo Epidemical as the Meaſles, yet 
they accompanied them all the Time they reign'd ; and 
after they ceaſed, the Small-Pox continued the reſt of the 
Time of this Conſtitution ; yet notwithſtanding, it gave 


Place to the Bloody-Flux, which reign'd by the afſiftance 


of Autumn favouring it. But in the Winter it return'd 
again, the Flux beingeſuppreſſed by the Cold, that was 
diſagreeable to it: And they kept this Order through 4 


— 


WW, _ v * ” * v * , 
rr — 


+ — 


fo — — 2 


L Of the Irregular Small-Pox, 7 137 


5 


then fading, and ſlow 


the Years of this Conſtitution ; only tne laſt Autumn it 
reigned, namely, in * Year 1672, that Conſtitution 
y e the Flux, that was 

7 


tuen growing old, the Small-Pox, contrary to Cuſtom, 


raged at this Time alſo, and fo equally reign'd with the 


Flux, that it was not eaſie to ſay which fe:z'd more People, 
tho' I gueſs the Flux was yet more prevalent, 

The Small-Pox, as other Epidemicks were very ſevere 
at their firſt approach, and encreas'd Daily till they came 
to their height, which when they had paſſed they decreaſ- 
ed gradually, both as to the violence of the Symptoms, 


and number of the Sick. 


But now to come to their particular Phenomena : I was 


| not a little aſtoniſh'd when this fort of Small-Pox firſt ap- 


pear'd; for I found they differ'd in many notable Symp- 
toms from that kind which the preceding Conſtitution 
produc'd; in the obſerving whereof I had heretofore been 


very diligent, at preſentI will only treat of the Symptoms 


that differ from thoſe of the other kinds, omitting thoſe 


that were alſo common to that Sort, which I have de- 
ſcrib'd at large above. 


The diſtin& kind was diſtinguiſh'd from the common 


diſtinct Sort of the other Conſtitution, as follows: Firſt, 


whereas thoſe did not come out before the fourth Day, 


theſe came out moſt commonly on the Third, which in- 


deed, was uſual ih the Flux. Secondly, the Puſtles were 


not ſo big as in the former, but more angry, and about the 
end of the Diſeaſe, when they came to Maturity, they were 


often black. Moreover, (but rarely) the Sick was troub!'4 


with Salivation, as in the Flux-Pox, tho' the Puſtles were 


but few From whence it appears, that this kind was much 


ol the Nature of the Flux, and did partake of a more in- 
= tenſe Inflammation than was wont to be in the diſt inct fort. 


But the Flux differ'd from others of the ſame Sort, that 


* 0 


| I have obſerv'd in other Years in many Things, which! 
will now reckon up. They appear'd on the ſecond or 
| third Day in the ſhape of a reddith unitorm Swelling, co- 
vering the whole Face, and thicker than an Eryſipelas, and 
© ſcarce any viſible diſtance between the Puſtles, with an 


heap of almoſt infinite red angry Pimples running into 
one, and diſguiſing the whole Body, where between the 
Puſtles, eſpecially in the Thighs, appear'd ſome little Blad- 


ders very conſpicuous like a Burn, and diſtended with clear 


Water, 


F 
| 

T 
(: 
p 
* 


138 Of the Irregular Small- Pox, Cc. 


Water, which flow'd out plentiſully when the Skin wy | 


broken, the Fleſh underneath being black like a Mortificy, 


tion. But this dreadful Symptom was rare, and happen';Þ p 
only in the firſt Month that this kind reign'd; at which F 


Time, among others that were ſo grievoully tormented, | 


was ſent for at the beginning of January, 1669, by Mr. Cu 


lins a Brewer, whoſe Son being an Infant, had Bladder, 
on his Thighs as big as a Wall-nut, full of clear Water, 
which being broken, the Fleſh underneath appear'd as it 
were mortified, and ſoon after he died, which was the lot 
of all lever ſaw that had this dreadful Symptom. On the 
Eleventh Day, or thereabouts, a white ſhining Skin cover. 
ed the reddiſh Swelling in many Parts of the Face, and hy 
degrees ſpread over the whole Countenance, a little while 
after this white Skin caſt forth a cruſty ſhining Matter, the 


colour of it was neither yellow nor brown, (both whic 
were to be ſeen in the other kind of Pox) but a deep rei 
like clotted Blood, which, as the Puſtles ripen'd, Ward! 


black, till the whole Face was as black as Soot; and where: 
as in the other kind of Flux the Sick was in the greateſt 
danger on the Eleventh Day, and that was the laſt to moſ 


that died; in this ſort the Patient lived moſt commonly i 1 


till the fourteenth Day, and ſometimes to the Fifteenth, i N | 
(unleſs a violent hot Regimen deftroy'd him ſooner) wid U 


at length being paſſed, the danger was over: But this jar 


to be noted, that they who had thoſe deadly Bladders an! 
Mortification, we told you happen'd to ſome in the fil 


Month that this kind broke out in, died within few Day: | 


after the Eruption. 


The Fever, and all other Symptoms which preceded or 
accompanied this kind of Pox, were more violent than in 
the former, and had manifeſt Tokens of a greater Inflan 
mation, the Sick were more prone to the Salivation, th 
Puſtles angrier and much {maller, fo that 'twas not eaſie 
at firſt when they appear'd to dittinguiſh them from an 
Eryſipelas, or the Meaſles, it theſe were not known by 
theDay of their Eruption, and other Signs above-mention'l 


in the Hiſtory of the Meaſles; after the Puſtles fell off, : 


Scurf ſtuck on a long Time, which imprinted filthy Scars 


on the Skin 'tis fit to be noted, that when theſe Sal.. Por 


were inraged by an hot Regimen, it ſometimes occaſion's 
a Bloody-Hlux, which J have obſerv'd more than once. 


But 1 muſt acquaint you, that theſe Se Po were not 
| NE 7 27 | accom: 


„ > «<2 ns 239 r. 


2 


Of the Irregular Small-Pox, C. 139 


ccompanied with ſuch dreadful Symptoms all the while 
ey reign'd; for after they had paſſed two Years, they 
esan to grow mild in the third Year, viz. in 1672, and 
+ © Having put off the black Colour, they grew by degrees 
yellow, like an Honey-comb, which was natural to the 
egular Small-Pox, when they came to Maturity; ſo that 
the laſt Years of this Conſtitution, they were very be- 
ign and favourable, conſidering the kind, yet notwith- 
anding it was very manifeſt that they were of a quite 
different ſort by the ſmallneſs of the Puſtles, and Diſpo- 
ſition of ſpitting, and other Things. 
Tho' by reaſon of the ignorance of the Cauſes of every 
$pecifick difference, tis impoſſible for us to comprehend 
the formal Reaſon of theſe Small-Pox, as they are diſtin- 
| gviſh'd from thoſe which the other Conſtitution produc'd, 
ich yet it plainly appears to me from all the Phenomena, that 
the Inflammation in theſe was much greater than in the o- 
| ther, and that therefore the chief care ſhould be to ſtop 
the violent Ebullition of the Blood, and this is to be done 
| — being firſt uſed as above-mention'd) by a 
' temperate Regimen, viz. by allowing the Patient the 
free uſe of ſome Liquor which will not heat him, but ra- 
ther preſently mitigate that violent Heat, whereby this 
ich Diſeaſe wearies and ſcorches the poor Patient more than 
ny other whatever, eſpecially when the Puſtles begin to 
ripen ; the white decoction of Bread, and a {mall quanti- 
ty of calcined Harts-horn in a large quantity of Water, 
ſweetned with Sugar, is very good; but Milk-Water, 
made with three parts of Water, and one of Milk boy!'d 
dor together is better, for 'tis more palatable and more cool 
nin ing; nor is a large quantity of Liquor only proper to ex- 
am. | tinguiſh the violent Heat that chiefly rages with the Fe- 
the ver of maturation, but it alſo promotes Salivation, and 
ae protracts it longer than it cou'd be, if the Patient were 
nan ſcorch'd up. Moreover, I have often obſerv'd, that great 
1 by Þ quantities of Liquors drank, have ſucceeded ſo well, that 
ond by their uſe the Small-Pox, which when they came out 
f, 10 had the worſt ſigns of the Flux, afterwards were diſtinct, 
cats and the Puſtles, which otherwiſe as they ripen'd, would 
por have caſt forth firſt a red, and then preſently a black Mat- 
ond ter, were very yellow, and inſtead of being very ſmall 
i and angry, they were benign and favourable. Nor does 
not | the Flux of the Courſes, which is very frequent to Wo- 
om: | men 


140 Of the Irregular Small-Pox, Cc. 


men that have this Diſeaſe any whit prohibit, but rather 
incourage the free uſe of theſe Lignors, viz. if they flo 
at an unuſual Time; for Women are in danger upon no o. 
ther account, but becauſe the Blood being too much thin- 
ned, by the immoderate Heat, ſhould break out at the 
natural Paſſages, eſpecially when raſh Nurſes add Oyl to 
the Flame, by uling an hot Regimen, and the Decoction 
of Harts-hora and Marigold-fowers, and the like; for 
whatever powerfully dilutes and temperates the Blood, ne- 
ceſſarily conduces, tho' not immediately, to the preſervinz 
the Puſtles, and the ſwelling of the Face and Hands in their 
State, in as much as it {tops the foreſaid Flux; whereas on 
the contrary hot Medicines, tho' they ſeem more proper 
_ 3a thts Cale, yet while they promote this continual Flux 
ot Blood, they are much beſides the Buſineſs; neither 4g 
I queſtion but many Women have periſh'd by this Error, 
i, while the By-ſtanders fearing, left the Puſtles ſnould 
atten by reaſon of this Flux of Blood, have endeavour'd 
to keep them up by Cordial Medicines, and an hot Regi- 
men, whereby they have certainly caſt away the poor 
Woman, the' by mingling various Aſtringents with theſe 
Cordials they labour'd to ſtop the Hemorrhage, and to 

keep the Puſtles and Swelling up at their due heighth. 
Not long ago x very Virtuons and Noble Lady was 
committed to my Care,wao had the dangerous black Small 
Pox, and t10' at the beginning I forbid all thoſe Things 
that might exagitate the Blood, yet ſhe being of a very 
Sanguine Complexion, and Brisk and Young, the Seaſon of 
the Year being very hot, ſhe was ſeiz d of a ſudden on the 
third Day after the Eruption, with ſo large a Flux of the 
(.ouries at an unuſual Time, that the Women that were 
by thought ſhe Miſcarried; but tho' this Symptom con. 
tinued violent for many Days, yet I did not think that | 
ought therefore to intermit the uſe of the Milk-water, in- 
deed I thought it more neceſſary now, and allowed her to 
drink of it freely, through the whole Courſe of the Diſeaſe, 
elpecially when the Fever of maturation appear'd, at whici 
Iime the Learned and Candid Phyſician Dr. Millingtou, 
heretofore my fellow Collegiate, and now my very good 
Friend was join'd with me, who perceiving that all Things 
ſucceeded weil according to the genius of the Diſzaſe, res- 
Qily conſented that our Patient ſhould perſiſt in drinking 
treely of the foreſaid Liquor, which ſhe often Nel 
| | : Oti! 


* 


4 Of the Irregular Small-Pox, cc 147 


ner both cooled and 4 her, and promoted her ſpitting. 1 
low But when the Face began to be cruſted over, we were L 
00 ®&fraid that our Patient would be injured by putrid Va- | 
hin- pours, ariſing from the Purulent Matter Introverted, 

| F hich ſmelt ill in this worſt fort of Sa P; and there- 4 
1 to Þ fore we order'd a few Spoontuls of mulled Sack to be ta- 1 
ion gen once in a Day, or as often as ſhe found her ſelf ill in i 
for © Þþ:r Stomach; and with theſe few Things ſhe recover'd to- | 
,ne- Þ gether with a Paregor! ck Draught, which was taken every 
ing 1 Night; nor was ſhe Delirious, nor had any other Symp- 
wir tom beſides the foreſaid Hemorrhage, which threatened 
5 on way great Danger; the Face and Hands ſwell'd ſufficiently, 
per the Puſtles were as big as this Sort would permit, and the f 
lux Salivation was large and eaſie to the end; and laſtly, tho? 4 
do fte Puſtles in the Face ſeem'd blackiſh when they ripen'd, [ 
or, get in moſt Parts they were yellow, $ 
hut by how many degrees ſoever of Heat and Inflamma- 
tion this ſort of Pox peculiar to this Conſtitution exceeded 
i- others of other Conſtitations, yet if the Puſtlgs were di- 
oor ſtinct or but few, experience taught that there was not 


fe ſach need to drink ſo great a quantity of the foreſaid Li- 4 
to quors. But it was ſufficient if the Patient drank Small- 1 
beer, when he was Thirſty, and eat Water-gruel, and 1 
vas ſometimes a roaſted Apple; and if he were paſt Four- f 
all- teen, he took Diacodium when he was Sick, or began to | 


nes be Delirious for want of Sleep; nor did I do any Thing 
ery elſe (only keep the Patient a Bed) when the Puſtles were 
of MW iow. And by this Method alone my Son Milliam Sydenhant 
the vas recover'd by God's Aſſiſtance from this diſtinct Sort, 
the in December, 1670. I will ſay no more of the Small. Pax of 
rs this Conſtitution, ſeeing I have diſcourſed largely of the 


on- other Kind, from which theſe only differ'd in this, viz. 
ti |. that they were of an hotter and more inflammatory 
in- Nature, ſo that greater Care was requir'd to extinguiſh 


to the intenſe Heat, which was ſo natural to them, and 
k, bo certainly threaten'd to fire the Patient. 


VE | CHAP: 


GHAP. VII. 


Of the Bilious Cholick of the Year 1650 1. 


71, 72. 


THOUGH all the Years of this Conſtitution, tf 


Blood was much diſpoſed to fling off on the Bowe, 


hot and cholerick Humours; for which Reaſon this CW 


lick was more frequent than is uſual, which Diſeaſe, thy 


it ought to be reckon'd among the Chronical, and then 

fore beſides my Purpoſe, yet ſeeing it depended on ti 
E Blood at this Lime, froni when 

moſt other Epidemicks, which then reigned, took ther, 


ame indiſpoſition oft 


Riſe, it ought here alſo to be treated of; but eſpecially be 


cauſe the very ſame Feveriſh Symptoms went before ti 


Diſeaſe, ag were wont to precede the Bloody-Flux, whit 
reigned in thoſe Times: And ſometimes this Diſeaf 


which is noted above, followed the Dyſentry when i ; 
had a long while afflifted the Sick, and was juſt about tt 


leave him; but when it did not follow a long Dyſentery, 


it generally took its riſe from a Fever, which, after fon:We 


Hours, was wont to end in this Diſeaſe. It chiefly ſeiz! 


young People of an hot and cholerick Conftitution, eſpe | 
cially in the Summer; the Pain of the Bowels was ver 


violent, and more intollerable than any, that affficts poo 


Mortals; it ſometimes binds as it were in the Guts, an! 


ſometimes being contracted to a Point, it bores like u 
Augur; the Pain now and then abates, and preſently th: 


Fit approaches again, which as ſoon as the Sick perceive, 
he looks ſadly and bemoans himſelf, as if it were actually 


on him. At the beginning of this Diſeaſe the Pain is no 
fo certainly determin'd to one Point as in the pfogreß d 
it, nor is the Vomiting ſo frequent, nor does 5 

obſtinatel 


creaſed, the more pertinaciouily is it fix d in a Point; tie 
Vomitings are more frequent, and the Belly more bound, 
till at length by the dreadful force of theſe Symptoms: 
total inverſion of the Periſtaltick Motion of the Guts ( 
the Sick is not ſooner reliev'd) and conſequently an IliackW 
Paſſion is occaſion d, in which Diſeaſe all Purging Medi- 

PE OF cine i 


e Belly o 
reſiſt Purges; but the more the Pain is i- 


Of the Bilious Cholick, &c: 143 


cines are n vomited up with the Excrements; the 
Matter that is caſt up in this manner, if it be without 
mixture, is ſomeiimes Green, and ſometimes Yellow, 
and ſometimes of an unuſual Colour. 
Now every Phenomenon of this Diſeaſe ſhewing plainly 
70 that it was occaſion d by ſome acrid Humour, or Vapour 
ut of! from the Blood on the Guts; this, in my Opinion, 
5s the chief curative Indication, v:z. that the ſaid Humous 
ould be evacuated, as well that which is antecedently in 
the Veins, as that which is contained in the Inteſtines, 
Cl 2nd the next to this is, that the force of the Humours 
; Tending thither ſhould be reſtrain'd by Anodynes, and 
tat the violent Pain ſhould be mitigated by them. 
\ Therefore I order that the Blood ſhould be freely ta- 
en from the Arm, if no Blood has been taken away bes 
the Here; and after three or four Hours I give an Anodyne. 
The next Day I order ſome gentle Purge, and that it 
% Should be repeated the next Day ſave one, and ſometimes 
hiſs chrice, according as the Relicks of the Humour are more 


or leſs. 
_ But we muſt take notice, that if this Diſeaſe is occaſion'd 
„ by eating too much Fruit, or from any Meat of hard Di- 
ten geſtion, upon which account ill and corrupted juices are 
ost tranſmitted to the Blood, and afterwards to the Guts; 
e in this Caſe the Stomach much be waſh d with Poſſet- 
ee! drink, drunk plentifully, which muſt be vomited up again, 
11 1 which being done, an Anodyne muſt be given, and the 


„next Day a Vein muſt be open'd; and as to other Things, 
or you muſt proceed according to the Directions above-menti- 
den on'd: But when the violence of the Pain, and the Vomi- 
ting (by reaſon whereof the Guts are as it were inverted) 
{reſiſt the Operations of the Purges, they muſt be made 
ſtronger; for 'tis to no Purpoſe to give a gentle Purge, 
$ unleſs the Sick is eaſily purged, which muſt be carefully 
enquired into; for ſuch a Medicine being not ſtrong e- 


yo nough to make its way through the Guts, the Patient is 

Ho nore injured thereby, for by its ineffectual Agitation the 
hs te! Vomiting and Pain are encreaſed. A lenitive purging 
a 0 7 Potion of the infuſion of Tamarinds, of the Leaves of Sena 


ind Rhubarb, wherein may be diſſolv'd Manna and Syrup 
of Roſes Solutive, is to be preferr'd before the other Pur- 
ges, for it ſtirs the Humours leaſt. But if the Patient 
cannot retain a liquid Medicine by reaſon of an Averſion, 

O 


144 Of the Bilious Cholick, &c. 


or becauſe of the Vomiting, you muſt neceſſarily uſe pi, 
the Pill. Cochiæ pleaſes me beſt, for they paſs beſt throyy; 


the Body in this and moſt other Caſes; but when the! 


weakneſs of the Stomach, or the Vomiting is ſo gre: 


that the Pills cannot be retained; then I firſt order al 


Anodyne, an few Hours after a Purge; but there muſt he 
ſo much Space betwixt them, that the Purge be not <q. 
led by the Anodyne, and made ineffectual; but that!: 
may continue ſo long in the Stomach as is neceſſary fg; 
its imparting 1ts purgative Quality to it, that it may ope. 


rate when the vertue of the Narcotick is ſpent, tho' th:Þ 


Purge, if it could be conveniently done, is beſt given | 
long while after the Anodyne, for twelve Hours after tz 
king it the Sick is diiticultly purged, . 


But becauſe in this, as in moſt other Diſeaſes wherci: 


Anodynes are indicated, a Purge always encreaſes th; 
Pain (at leaſt when it has done working, tor while it's i 
Operation the Patient is not ſo ill) therefore I commonly 


give an Anodyne, as ſoon as the Purge has done working 


which I order to be taken Morning and Evening daily, 
Viz. in the middle ſpace betwixt the Purges, that I my 


the more certainly appeaſe the Pain till the Patient be 


been {ufficiently purged, 


The purging of the Humours being over, Iendearouſþ 


to bridle the fury of the Diſcaſe (which now only reming 


to be done) by giving an Anodyne conſtantly Morning 
and Evening, which muſt be ſometimes repeated ofetner;] 
nor could Jever take off violent Pains without a larger 
Doſe than is uſual, and that repeated too; for that which 


5s ſufficient to conquer another Diſeaſe, will be wholly in- 
ſufficient in this Caſe, the violence of the Diſeaſe ſubduing 
the force of the Medicine; and it's indeed fafe to repeat 
Anodynes while {uch a Pain as this continues violent, but 
not when 'tis gone off; wherefore I repeat the Narcotick 
according to the degree of the Pain ti!l it ceaſes, or till it 
is very much leſſened, yet there muſt be ſuch a ſpace o 
Time betwixt tnem, that I may find what may be hope! 


LiDÞ2H 


3 


2 


1 


2 


for from the former Doſe, before I give another. But Ta 


for the moſt part, unleſs the Pain is very violent, a Pi- 
regorick given Morning and Evening may be ſufficient. 
| chiefly uſe Liquid Laudanum, whereof I give fixteen 


Drops in ſome Cordial Water, or the Doſe may be in“ 


creaſed according to the violence of the Pain. 


may 


7 
t has 


,rouſ 


* 
43 ng 
41 AL 


rniag 


tner ; 


arget 
which 
ly in. 
duing 
epent 
b du 
eotich 
till it 


ace 01 


hope! 


But 
a Pa- 
cient, 


Ixteen 


be in! 


TI 5 
Hy 
44 


times the 


Of the Bilious Cholick, &c. 145 
This plain Method whereby firſt the pecant Matter is 


eracuated by Bleeding and Purgin g, and then Eaſe pro- 


tared by the uſe of Anodynes, ſucceeded better in my 
Practice than any other I ever knew,; whereas Carmina- 
tive Glyſters injected in order to expel the acrid Humours, 

» ny ſtir the Coals, and make the Diſeaſe the more 
lame by the tumult they raiſe in the Humours: But here 
155 muſt take notice, that though I have ſaid Bleeding and 


Purging muſt neceſſarily go before this quieting Method, 


ye: ſometimes upon occaſion, both being omitted, you 
muſt begin with Anodynes: For inſtance; when by reaſon 
of ſome preceeding Sickneſs large Evacuations have been 
uſed, not long before the coming of the Chol:ick (for many 
| who have recovered of another Diſeaſe have 
uddenly fallen into this, by reaſon of a weakneſs of the 
owels, eſpecially it there is a great degree of heat occa- 
ſioned by drinking Wine, or ſome other ſpirituous Liquor 
1woderately, ) I ſay in this caſe, 'tis not only unneceſſary, 
but 1 think 'tis injurious, to give Purges again, for new 
umults will be raiſed by them. Moreover, the Guts 
re moſt commonly ſufficiently cleanſed with Glyſters u- 
d often before the Phyſician is called, ſo that partly for 


this Cauſe, and partly by the reaſon of the long continuance 


the Diſeaſe, Narcoticks in a manner ſeem to be only uſe- 
L 
In Auguft 1671, the Noble Baron Anneſiy being ſeized 
ith the Bilious Cholick with intolerable Pain, and frequent 
'omiting for ſome Days, ſent for me to the Caſtle of Bel- 
voir; he had tryed all forts of Glyſters and other Reme- 
ies, by the order of Learned and Experienced Phyſicians 
wing thereabouts: J adviſed without any more ado, the 
tepeated uſe of Anodynes; according to the Method be- 
tore delivered, whereby he recovered in a few Days, and 
tame to Town well with me. | 
but becauſe this Pain is wont of its own Nature to re- 
urn more than any other, all occaſions of its relaple muſt be 
revented, by giving an Anodyne twice a day for ſome days 
at if as often as the uſe of the Anodyne is omitted, the 
Fin now and then returns, as it ſometimes happens, I do 
ot know any thing that will ſo certainly perfect the Cure 
sthe Riding on Horle-back, or ia a Coach a long Journey; 
ut an Anodyne mult be given conſtantly Morning and 
I. Evening, 


N 88 — 

— — . 
* — 2 
— — 
— 


. —ͤ—U—U—ä6ä —— — ——— — — _ 


144 Of the Bilious Cholick, &c. 


or becauſe of the Vomiting, you muſt neceſſarily uſe Pill 
the Pill. Cochiæ pleaſes me beſt, for they paſs beſt throyg, 
the Body in this and moſt other Caſes; but when th: 
weakneſs of the Stomach, or the Vomiting is ſo gre; 
that the Pills cannot be retained ; then I firit order a 
Anodyne, ans few Hours after a Purge; but there muſt he 
ſo much Space betwixt them, that the Purge be not que. 
led by the Anodyne, and made ineffectual; but that ti 
may continue ſo long in the Stomach as is neceſſary fy 
its imparting its purgative Quality to it, that it may ope.ſþ 
rate when the vertue of the Narcotick is ſpent, tho' th: 
Purge, if it could be conveniently done, is beſt given: 
long while after the Anodyne, for twelve Hours after ti. ; 
King it the Sick is difficultly purged, . # > 
But becauſe in this, as in moſt other Diſeaſes wherein 
Anodynes are indicated, a Purge always encreaſes te F, 
Pain (at leaſt when it has done working, for while its H In 
Operation the Patient is not ſo ill) therefore I commonlyÞ pu 
give an Anodyne, as ſoon as the Purge has done working # 
which I order to be taken Morning and Evening daily, 
dix. in the middle ſpace betwixt the Purges, that I may 
the more certainly appeaſe the Pain till the Patient hs 
been {ufficiently purged. 
The purging of the Humours being over, I endeavour 
to bridle the fury of the Diſeaſe (vrhich now only remains 
to be done) by giving an Anodyne conſtantly Morning i 
and Evening, which muſt be ſometimes repeated ofetner;ÞF« 
nor could Jever take off violent Pains without a larget So: 
Doſe than is uſual, and that repeated too; for that which Tic 
is ſufficient to conquer another Diſeaſe, will be wholly in fi 
{ufficient in this Caſe, the violence of the Diſeaſe ſubduing fer 
the force of the Medicine; and it's indeed ſafe to repeu pr 
Anodynes while ſuch a Pain as this continues violent, but fat 
not when tis gone off; wherefore I repeat the Narcotidſß | 
according to the degree of the Pain till it ceaſes, or till i gur 
is very much leſſened, yet there muſt be ſuch a ſpace o Fre 
Time betwixt them, that I may find what may be hopeif Rut 
for from the former Doſe, before I give another. But a 
for the moſt part, unleſs the Pain is very violent, a P Pot 
regorick given Morning and Evening may be ſufficient t 
| chiefly uſe Liquid Laudanum, whereof I give fixtenÞ put 
Drops in ſome Cordial Water, or the Doſe may be it 
creaſed according to the violence of the Pain. 


Thi K 


out 


rning 
tner; 
arget 
Vlich 


ly in- 


Juingf 


epeat 
„ but 
otich 
till it 


ace o 


10Pe! 
But 


a Pa- 
cient 


xteen 
Je in- 


Tumults will be raiſed 


Jore delivered, whereby he recovere 
$ame to Town well with me. 


This 1 


Of the Bilious Cholick, Ce. 1 45 
This plain Method whereby firſt the pecant Matter is 


eracuated by Bleeding and Purging, and then Eaſt 
rured by the uſe of Anodynes, ſucceeded better * 
Practice than any other I ever knew; whereas Car mina- 


1 


ive Glyſters injected in order to expel the acrid Humours, 


go ceny ſtir the Coals, and make the Diſeaſe the more 
Laſting by the tumult they raiſe in the Humours : But here 

"© you muſt take notice, that though I have ſaid Bleeding and 
Purging muſt neceſſarily go betore this quieting Method 
pet ſometimes upon occaſion, both being omitted, you 
'® juſt begin with Anodynes: For inſtance ; when by reaſon 
bf ſome preceeding Sicknels large Evacuations bave been 
uſed, not long before the coming of the Cholick (for many 
times the 
ſuddenly fallen into this, by reaſon of a weakneſs of the 


who have recovered of another Dileaſe have 


Powels, eſpecially if there is a great degree of heat o 
| ecia | cca- 
zoned by drinking Wine, or ſome other ſpirituous Liquor 


Iimmoderately,) I ſay in this caſe, tis not only unneceſſary, 


dut J think 'tis injurious, to give Purges again, for new 

by them. Moreover, the Guts 
re moſt commonly ſufficiently cleanſed with Glyſters u- 
2d often before the Phyſician is called, fo that partly for 


this Cauſe, and partly by the reaſon of the long conti 
F | by tl tinuance 
4 the Diſeaſe, Narcoticks in a manner ſeem 8 be only uſe- 


11115 


In Auguft 1671, the Noble Baron Anneſiy being ſeized 


Fith the Bilious Cholick with intolerable Pain, and fre 

| _— for ſome Days, ſent for me to che Caſtle 0 Bel- 
Loir; 20 g 

lies, by the order of Learned and Experienced Phyſici 

Þving thereabouts: I adviſed 5 more 6, abs 
epeated uſe of Anodynes; according to the Method be- 


ad tryed all forts of Glyſters and other Reme- 


in a few Days, and 


But becauſe this Pain is wont of its own Nature to re- 


urn more than any other, all occaſions of its Pang muſt be 


revented, by giving an Anodyne twice a day for ſome days; 


| ut if as often às the uſe of the Anodyne is omitted, the 
bY now and then returns, as it ſometimes happens, I do 
Bot know any thing that will ſo certainly perfect the Cure 


sthe Riding on Horſe-· back, or in a Coach a long Journey; 


hut an Anodyne mult be * conſtantly Morning and 


Evening, 


2 
—— 


2 - — 
a „ * * 
ew LAS — _ — * 
2 cx: 
3 "II * 


Ph — 
— — 
3 


K 


a” 
x 


— 


a 2 
* 
a 


146 Of the Bilious Cholick, &. 


Evening: for by this kind of Exerciſe the Matter cauſig 


the Diſeaſe is removed to the Habit of the Body, and the 


Blood being broke into ſmall parts by continual motion, 5 


as it were, depurated again, and at length the Guts ar: 


much ſtrengthned and refreſhed by this way of ſtirring Þ 
the natural heat; nor am I aſhamed to confeſs, that by Þ 


this Exerciſe I have more than once perfectly cured thi; 
Diſeaſe, when l could not cure it any other way: Bat thi 


muſt not be uſed before the Sick has been well purged, and Þ 


then he muſt continue the uſe of it many Days. 


One of my poor Neighbours, who is now living, was in 


theſe Years troubled with a moſt violent Bil:ous Cholich 
who a long time endeavoured, but in vain, to vanquiſh 


this Diſeaſe by Parges, Glyſters, and the ſwallowing of lex 
den Bullets: 1 order'd him to uſe Narcoticks frequently, Þ 
which he did ſucceſsfully; for as often as he uſed them he 


found himſelf very eaſie. But ſeeing the Diſeaſe was only 
alliated, and not cured (for it returned as ſoon as the 
irtue of the Anodyne was ſpent ) I took pity on him, ani 
lent him one of my Horſes, that he might go a Journey, 
as above directed; and having travell'd a few Days, his 
Bowels grew ſo ſtrong, as to be able to ſhake off the Relick; 
of the Diſeaſe; and ſo he was perfectly recovered without 
the help of Anodynes. 
And truly I have known this kind of Exerciſe has bee: 
always uſed with admirable ſucceſs in moſt other Chronical 
Diſeaſes, if the Sick continued it reſolutely : For if we 
conſider with our ſelves, that the lower Belly, wherein are 
laced the Organs of Secretion, are much ſhaken by this 
xerciſe, perhaps ſome Thouſands of times in a day, we 
ſhall eaſily believe, that they are able, by the help of the 
foreſaid Exerciſe, to ſhake off any Excrementitious Juice 
that is impacted there, and (which is of greater moment 
yet) that they are ſo ſtrengthned by the powerful excitation 
of the native heat, that they may duly perform the 
x try of Purifying the Blood, which Nature has appointed 
them, | 
If the Patient is young and of a hot Conſtitution, | 
reſcribe a cooling and thickning Diet, as Pulp of Barley, 
3 and the like; and every third day, if the Sto- 
mack is craving, a Chick or a Whiting boyled. I allow 


no other Drink than Small-beer, or Milk-water; and this 
| is 


and ſometiines green. And moreover ( which 


Of the Bilious Cholick, ec. 147 


is all I order; unleſs Riding, neceſſary to recover the 
Health, requires more generous Liquors, and more nou- 
riſhing Food, whereby the Spirits, weaken'd by Exerciſe, . 
may be repaired, 


Moreover. tis plain from obſervation, that when the 
7 > 


Di.iſeaſe, by reaſon of ill management, has a long while affli- 


cted the Sick, ſo that the Bowels became weak and infirm, 


and he is in a manner quite waſted ; I lay, in this Caſe we 


tind by Experience, that the free uſe of Epidemick-water, 
or of Agua Mirabilis, or of any other the Sick likes beſt, 


relieves him at this time beyond expectation; for by this 
means the ſmall Relicts of the Native Heat and the Spirits 


will be ſtirred up, and the preternatural ferment ſticking 
to the Bowels, and now and then cauſing new Fits, will be 
extinguiſh'd by ſpirituous Liquors, 

Moreover, as in the cure of the Diſeaſe, ſo when 'tis 


over, the thin diet we have mention'd muſt be obſerved 
for ſome time; for this being more apt to return than any 


other, and ſeating it ſelf on the principal Parts of Con- 
coction (I mean the Bowels, already weaken'd by it) the 
leaſt Error of this kind will preſently cauſe much pain: 
therefore in this, and all other Diſeaſes of the Bowels 
Meats of hard digeſtion muſt be carefully avoided, and 
things of eaſie digeſtion muſt be uſed only in ſuch a quanti- 
ty as will be ſufficient to ſuſtain Life. 

A kind of hiyſterick Diſeaſe aſflicts fome Women, very 
like the Bilious Cholick, both as to the violence and ſituation 
of the Pain, and alſo by reaſon of the Humours vomited up 
of a yellow and green colour, Iwill treat of it by the bye, 
leaſt any one ſhould take it for the Bilious Cholict mentio- 
ned juſt now, 

Such Women as are of a crude and lax Habit of Budy 
are chiefly afflicted with this Diſeaſe, and they that have 


laboured under ſome other Hyſterick Indiſpoſition ( or 


which is very often) thoſe that have ſcarce evaded a dif- 


| ficultand hard Labour in bringing forth a large Child, 
whereby the Mother's Nature and ſtrength have been al- 


moſt ſpent ; a Pain almoſt as violent as that of the Cholick 


or 1laick Paſſion (eizes the Region of the Stomach, and ſome- 


times it comes a little lower, and then violent V omitings 
follow, and the Matter which is caſt up is ſometimes 1 
2ave 


often obſery'd ) there is a greater dejection of Spirit, and 
: L Deſpera- 


148 Of the Bilious Cholick, &c. 


Deſperation, than in any other Diſeaſe whatever. After 
a Day or two the Pain goes off, and returns again a few 
Weeks after as violently as ever. Sometimes it 15 accom- 
panied with the Faundice, which is very viſible, and which 
goes off of its own accord in a few Days. When all the 
Symptoms are gone off, and when the Patient ſeems very 
well, the ſmalleſt Diſorder of Mind, whether it is occaſio- 
ned by Anger or Sorrow ( to both which in this Cale Wo- 
men are very prone) almoſt recalls the Pain. The ſame 
may be ſaid of Walking, or any other Exerciſe uſed too 
ſoon; for by theſe means Vapours are Elevated in a weak 
and lax habit of Body, when according to the vulgar Op! 
nion, I fay, Vapours, whether they be ſo or no, or whether 
they are Convulſions of particular Parts, the Phenomens 
may be ſolved either way. Theſe Vapours, or Convulſions, 
when they have invaded this or that Region of the Body, 
produce Symptoms agreeable to the Parts they invade ; a 
though they are one and the ſame Diſeaſe every wher-, 
yet they cunningly reſemble moſt of the Dileaſes Mankind 
are expoſed to; which is manifeſt from this Symptom, 
which when it ſeizes on the Parts near the Colon, imitates 
exactly the Bilicus Cholick, which is allo apparent in many 
other Diſeaſes of the Body afflicted with this Diſeaſe : For 
inſtance; ſometimes it ſeizes one of the Kidneys with a 
violent Pain, from whence ariſes violent Vomiting, and be- 
ing oftentimes conveyed by the Paſſage of the Ureter, it 
reſembles the Stone, and being exaſperated by Glyſters, 
and other Lithontriptick Medicines uſed to force away the 
Stone; it afflicts the ſick in the ſame manner a long while, 
and ſometimes ( contrary to its Nature, for left to its ſell 
it is no way dangerous) kills the Patient. Moreover | 
have ſeen Symptoms occaſioned by it reſembling exact!) 
the Stone in the Bladder, I was called up not long ago 
in the Night to vitit a Counteſs my Neighbour, ſuddenly 
liezed with a violent Pain in the Region of the Bladder, 
and with a ſuppreſſion of Urine; and having underſtood 
that {ſhe was inbject to many Hiſterick Indiſpoſitions, 1 
thought the Diſeaſe was not that they 5 it to be; 
and therefore I would not permit her Maid to inſect a 
Glyſter ſhe had prepared, left thereby the Diſeaſe ſhould 
be encreaſed, and inſtead of this and Emolliments, vis, 
Syrup of Marſh-mallows, and the like, which "my Apo- 

thecary 


r — „ „ — —2 


th "a St th "_ -. po „ x : 7 


Of the Bilious Cholick, &c. 149 


thecary had brought, I ordered an *Anodyne, which ſoon 
removed the Symptom. And indeed there is not one part 
of the Body quite ſecured from the Aſſaults of this Diſeaſe, 
whether they are inward or outward, as the Jaws, Hips, 
and Legs, in all which it excites violent Pain, and when 
it goes off leaves a Lenderneſs behind, which will not 
bear touching, juſt as it the Fleſh was bruiſed with violent 
itrokes. 

But now, ſeeing I have ſaid ſomething by the bye ap- 
pertaining, ro the Hyſtory of the Hyſterick C'olick, left it 
ſhould be miſtaken for the Bilious Cholick, I will tranſient- 
touch on ſome things relating to the cure of the Symp- 
tom of Pain which accompanies it, for the perfect Cure 
which takes off the Diſeaſe by removing the Cauſe, comes 
under another Speculation, and belongs to another 
Place. 

Bleeding and Purging repeated, which are plainly indi- 
cated at the beginning of a Bilious Cholick, are not to be 
uſed here, unleſs in the Caſe to be mentioned by and by: 
for Experience teaches, that the Pain is exaſperated, and 
chat all the Symptoms encreaſe by reaſon of the Tumult 
which thoſe things occaſion: and I have more than once 
ſerved, that the repetition of the gentleſt Glyſters has 
brought on a long Series of Symptoms; and Reaſon as 
well as Experience, dictates, that this Diſeaſe is rather 
produced by an inordinate motion of the Spirits, than by 
vicious Humours, if we conſider what things moſt com- 
monly occaſion it; and they are ſuch as theſe; large and 
unneceſſary profuſions of Blood, violent Motions of the 
Bedy and Mind, and the like; all which forbid thoſe Me- 
dicines that may occaſion a greater diſturbance of the Spi- 
rits, and inſtead of them Anodynes are to be uſed, though 
the green and ill colour of the Matter Vomited up ſeems 
to indicate the contrary ; for the ſpeculation of Colours is 
too nice to authorize thoſe Evacuations, which we find 
ipſo facto injurious; and 1 do not at all doubt that this 
Diſeaſe (which though it occaſions violent Pain is no way 
mortal) has proved deadly by reaſon of the Errors com- 
mitted on the belief of ſuch Speculations ; And beſides, if 
any one ſhould give the ſtrongeſt Vomit to Day, to eject 
that which he ſuppoſes to be the occaſion of the Diſeaſe, 
yet the next Day the Sick would Vomit up full as green, or 
of ſome other ill colour, as was the former. thy 

ut 


Bay f 


150 Of the Bilious Cholick, &. 


But it is to he noted, that there is ſometimes < 
great a quantity of Blood and Humours, which fo oppoſz 
the operation of the Anodyne, that though it is often re. 
peated, it cannot ſtop the Tumult till the Patient is bloog. 
ed and purged, which I have obſerved in Women of 3 
very ſanguime Conſtitution, and in Viragoes. If the Ck 
is fo, Bleeding or Purging, or perhaps both, muſt make 
way for the Narcotick, for either of theſe being uſed, 
moderate Doſe of the Narcotick will perform the buſineſk;, 
which otherwiſe would ſignifie nothing, though the largeſt 
Doſe was given. Bat this ſeldom happens, and then theſe 
Remedies muſt not be repeated; which being premiled, 
when there isneed of them, you muſt proceed m giving 
Anodynes in that Method which I have propoſed in the 
Bilious Cholick, and they mult be repeated according to the 
degrees of Pain; which Method indeed reſpects only the 
Symptom of violent Pain; for I do not now undertake to 
treat of that Method which takes off the Cauſe: but 
becauſe this Diſeaſe in Hypochondriacal, as well as Hy- 
ſterick People (for the Reaſon is the ſame in both, as ſhall 
be ſaid in another place) often ends in the Jaumdice; and 
as this comes on, that goes off, We muſt take notice, that 
in curing this kind of Fzundice, all Purges are either whol- 
ly to be omitted, or if they are given, you mult uſe only 
Rhubarb, or {ome other gentle Purge: For there is danger, 
leſt by purging new Tumults ſhould ariſe, and fo all the 
Symptoms return: And therefore in this Caſe nothing 
muſt be done preſently, ſeeing the Jaundice taking its rile 
on this account, commonly leſſens of its own accord, and 
quite vaniſhes in a little time. But if it continues a long 
while, and ſeems to go off difficultly, Remedies muſt be 
taken for it; I uſe the following. 


Take of the Roots of Madder and of Turmerick, each one 
Ounce, of all the greater Celandine, and of the tops of 
the leſſer Centuary, each one handful ;, boyl them in equal 
parts of Rheniſh-wine and Fountain-water to a Quart ; 
in the ſtrained Liquor diſjolve two Ounces of the Syrup of 
the f.ue opening Roots; mingle them, make an Apozem ; 
let br? Sick take half a Pint Morning and Evening till he 
15 well, © ad 


But 


4 >. v . — — 
* p 9 K S 


— 


CT 


0f the Bilious Cholick, &c. 151 


But if the Jaundice comes of it ſelf, the Cholick not going 
before, it is neceſſary, beſides the Alteratives juſt mentio- 


ned, to give Cholagogues, that is, ſuch things as purge 


Choler by Stool, viz. once or twice before the Patient en- 
ters on the Apozem preſcribed, and afterwards oncea Wee 


as long as he takes it. | 


As, Take of the Electuary of the Juice of Roſes two Drams, 
of Rhubarb finely powder d. half a Dram, of Cream of 
Tartar one Scruple; make a Bolus, with a ſufficient quan- 
tity of Syrup of Rhubarb, with a Succory; give it early in 
the Morning, and let the Sick drink on it a ſmall draught 
of Rheniſh-wine, 


But if notwithſtanding the conſtant uſe of theſe things 
a long time, the Diſeaſe continues obſtinate, the Patient 
muſt drink Tunbridge- waters, or the like, from the Foun- 


| tain every Morning till he recovers, And ſo much for the 


Diſeales of this Conſtitution, 


ns 2 


SECT. V. CHAF. I. 


Of t he Epidemick Conſtitution of part of the Tear 
1673, and of the Jears 1074, 735. 


A Bout the begining of July 1673, another ſort of a Fe- 


der began, but was not very Epidemical, the Conſti- 
tution being not as yet wholly diſpoſed to it, for the Diſea- 
ies of the foregoing Conſtitution were not quite excluded ; 
for that ſort of Small Pox was not gone off, which began 


to invade the Year 1670, but they did not happen fo 


often, and their Sy mptoms were milder. So that both theſe 
Diſeaſes kept pace in a manner with one another ; but nei- 
ther of them were very raging, the former Conſtitution 


being not ſo perfectly extinguiſhed as yet, that no Diſeaſes 


belonging to it ſhould appear, (for a few Dyſenteries re- 
mained) nor was the new one ſo confirmed as to produce 


ſuch as were able to expe! all the reſt, 
1. 4 And 


152 Of the Fpidemick Conſtitution, &c. 


And all this Autumn and Winter the Small-Pox kept pac 

with this Fever, but neither Diſeaſe was very raging; ang 
in the mean while the Bloody Flux was in a manner extin. 
guiſhed; but in November following, after an hard Froſ 
that continued ſome days, the Weather contrary to expect. 
tion, was hotter than ever I knew it at that time of the 
Year; and a little before, and about Chriſtmas, the Blnody 
Flux was here and there a little, but it ſeemed to he ex. 
piring, and ſoon after it went quite of, at leaſt this fort «f 
It, | 
Very early the following Year, viz. in January, the 
Aﬀealles invaded, and were as Epidemical, as thoſe were 
which began almoſt at the ſame time ofthe Year 1670, for 
they viſited almoſt every Family, eſpecially all the Chil. 
dren, but they were not fo regular as thoſe which reigned 
in the foreſaid Year : But] ſhall ſay more of the difference 
betwixt them, when I come to treat more particularly of 
theſe ; they encreaſed more and more daily till the Vern 
Equmox, and then they decreaſed gradually, and vaniſhed 
a little after Midſummer, 

And as the Epidemick Meaſles, which invaded at the be- 
ginning of the Year 1670, introduced the Black Small-Pox, 
theſe in like manner being as Epidemical as they, cameat 
the beginning of this Year, and where alſo accompanied with 
a ſort of Small Pox that were like them; For whereis 
(which was noted before) the Smal! Px of the preceeding 
Conſtitution, after the firſt two Years, ſent forth Puſtles 
that were leſs and leſs black, and that moreover by degrees 
grew bigger and bigger, till about the end of 1673, they 
were gentle, and benign as to their kind, now they return- 
ed, being accompanied with the worſt Symptoms, and their 
wonted fierceneſs, This fort of Salo prevailed the 
next Autumn, and longer than ordinaryin the Winter, for 
the unuſual warmth of it favoured this Diſeaſe ; but when 
the ſeaſon grew colder they abated, and gave way to the 
Fever that now prevailed, 

This Fever, that had continued all the Year, was very 
Epidemick at the beginning of July 75; but towards Au- 
tumn it began to turn in on the Bowels, ſometimes appear- 
ing with the Symptoms of the Bloody Hux, and ſometimes 
with thoſe of a Looſeneſs, though ſometimes it was accom- 
panied with neither, but ſeizing the Head, it W He 

ic 


% 
* 


Of the Epidemick C ouſtitution, &c. 153 


dick ſtupid. The Smaſl-Pox in the mean while, which ſei⸗ 


ed here and there a few, quite vaniſhed about the Autum- 


nal Equinox; for now the Fever prevailing over the other 
Epidemicks, poſſeſs'd the Government: yet it is to be ob- 
ſerved, That this Fever being, prone to put off the morbi- 
fick matter upon the Bowels, which ſometimes occaſioned 
the Bloody-Flux, but oftner a Looſeneſs; 'twas vulgarly 


ſuppos'd, that the Cripes, were the diſtructive Diſeaſe, 


whereas they were really to be imputed to the Fever; for 
every one knew, that had the care of the Sick, how pre- 


vailing the Fever was, and that the Bloody-Fluæ and Looſe- 


neſs were rather Symptoms than Eſſential Diſeaſes. 

This Fever held this courſe all the Autumn, ſometimes 
ſeizing the Head, ſometimes the Bowels, raging ever 
where under the diſguiſe of Symptoms happening to thoſe 
parts, till the end of October; at which time the Seaſon, 


which till then was warm, and like Summer, preſently 


changed to cold and moiſt ; on which account Catarrhs and. 
Coughs were more frequent than I ever knew them at any 
other time. But that which was of greateit moment, the 
Stationary Fever of this Conſtitution was wont to come up- 
on theſe Coughs, and took occaſion from hence to rage 
more and more, and to vary ſome of its Symptoms; for 
whereas a little before it fell, as was ſaid, moſt commonly 
on the *foreſaid parts, now it ſeized chiefly the Lungs and 
Pleura; upon Which acount Pleuritick and Peripneumonick 
Fevers were occaſioned ; and yet it was the very ſame Fe- 
ver that began in July 1671, and continued without any 


alteration of its Symptoms till the Catarrhs broke out. 


Theſe Catarrhs and Coughs preſerv'd to the end of No- 
veznber, but afterwards they leſſened of a ſudden ; but the 


lover continued the ſame as it was before the Catarrhs ſhew'd 
| themſelves, though it were not quite ſo vg tan wer nor 
0 


accompanied with the ſame Symptoms; for both of theſe 
depended accidentally on the Catarrhs: But when the Ca- 


ths went off, the Small-Pox began to break out here and 


tare, exactly of the ſame kind with thoſe of the preceed- 


ing Year. But now, when they had paſſed the ſecond 


Year, the Symptoms were not ſo violent as when they firſt 
invaded. How long this Conftitution would continue I can- 


not certainly ſay, but this ] certainly know, viz. That hi- 
| klerto it has been irregular, and that all the Diſeaſes of it 


Vere lo alſo, 


154 | Of the Continual Fever, &c. 


I will now treat of the Epidemicks of this Conſtitutig, 


in the ſame order they followed one another, 


CHAP. II. 


Of the Continual Fever of the Tears 
1673, 74, 75: 


"I His, as other Epidemicks, was accompanied with Symp. 

toms at the beginning, which ſhewed plainly, thar 
the Inflamation was then greater and more Spirituous than 
when the Diſeaſe had continued longer: for the firſt Vear 
it invaded, as alſo in the following Spring, Pleuretick 
Symptoms came upon the Fever, and the Blood taken away 
(eſpecially the firſt or ſecond time) was like the Blood 
of e Laid; but in time the Signs of intenſe Inflamation 
ceaſed. 

Beſides the Symptoms common to all Fevers, theſe fol- 
lowed this Fever moſt commonly; the Sick was ſeized with 
a violent Pain of his Head and Back, alſo with a numbneſs 
and tenſive Pain of the Joynts, and Limbs and whole Bo- 
dy; but it was gentler than in a KRhumatiſm, Of the firſt 
days heat and cold ſucceeded one another, and ſometimes 
at the beginning the Sick was prone to ſmall Sweats. 

The Tongve, when the Fever was left to its ſelf, was 
neither dry, nor much different from the natural colour, 
only it was whiter, and the Sick was not very thirſty ; but 
it he was heated beyond the ordinary condition of the Fever, 
the Tongue was very dry, and of adeep yellow colour, the 
Thirſt was increaſed, and the Urine, which otherwiſe was 
almoſt of the natural colour, was very red, ; 

The Fewer, accompanied only with theſe Symptoms, it 
it was well managed, left the Sick on the fourteenth day; 
but when it was very obſtinate it continued to the one and 
twentieth Cav, | 


Among 


Of the Continual Fever, &c. 155 


Among the Symptoms of this Fever there was one like a 
Coma, wherein the Sick became ſtupid and delirious, and 
ſometimes he ſlept for ſome Weeks, and could be rouſed only 
by a great noiſez whereby, being difficultly waxed, he 
would atlength open his Eyes, and having taken either a 
Medicine, or Drink, he fell aſleep again, which was ſome- 
times ſo profound, that it ended in loſs of Speech, | 
| He that was ſo affected, when he came to himſelf, began 
to recover on the twenty eighth or thirtieth day; the arſt 
ſion whereof, was the deſiring ſome unuſual or abſurd kind 
of Meat or Drink; the Head of the Perſon that was re- 
covering was weak for ſome days, and would nod ſometimes 
this way, ſometimes that. There were alſo other Signs 
that ſhewed the Head had been much diſorder'd; but as the 
Strength returned this Symptom went off. 

Sometimes the Sick did not ſle ep ſo much as rave ſilently, 
bat he would ſometimes ſpeak incongruouſly, as if he were 
angry, but the Fury was not ſo much as is uſual when Peo- 
ple are light headed in the Small-Pox, and other Fevers; 
and it was different alſo on this account, becauſe he ſlept 
abruptly berwixt whiles, and ſnorted much. Moreover, 
though this Symptom was not ſo accute as the other, yet was 
it more laſting, and it happened moſt commonly to Chil- 
dren, or to thoſe that were not full grown; whereas that 
befel grown People chiefly ; but in both, if hot Medicines 
were taken, and Sweats forced, the Diſeaſe was ſoon tranſ- 
erz to the Head, and the ſaid Symytoms were occaſio- 
ned. 

But when the Symptom neither came of it ſelf, nor was 
forced by Medicines, the Diſeaſe went off moſt commonly 
within fourteen days, and ſometimes in three or four days, 

as] have ſeen ſometimes, 

In Autumn 75, as we ſaid before, the Fever endeavour- 

ed to go off by a Dyſentery, and ſometimes by a Looſenels 

the latter of theſe eſpecially did often come, the Stupor 

Jet remaining; but Kick of them, according, to the beſt 

; Obſervation 1 could make, were nothing but Symptoms of 
the Fever, 

As to the Cure of this Fever, when it firſt began/in Fuly 
1673, | preſently found, both by the various Phenomena 
tney were very different from thoſe which accompanied the 
preceeding fever, and alſo becauſe it did not yield to pur- 


ging 


156 Of the Continual Fever, &c. 
ging, whereby I ſucceſsfully cured all the Fevert of tj; 


and J was longer in finding out the _— of it, than] 
uſed to be; and therefore I was very thoughtful to kngy 
which way I ſhould proceed with it; for when this Fery 
firſt broke out it had no Contemporary Epidemick, hy 
whoſe Genius I might find out the Nature of this: Fi 
the Small Pox, as 1 ſaid, which accompanied it, were the 
Relicks of that black fort which invaded in the Year 167, 
and were now very gentle, and going off in a manner: 


therefore I had no other way. than to enquire carefully 


the Diſeaſe, as it ſtood alone by it ſelf, and obſerve wh 
did good or harm, The violent Pain of the Head, ay 
the Propenſity of this Diſeaſe to cauſe Pains in the 
Sides: alſo the Blood, which was like that of Pleuritich, 
ſhewed plainly, that there was a great Inflamation in thi: 
Diſeaſe, and yet it would not bear that large Evacuatic 
which was requiſite in a Pleuriſie; for the Blood, after tl: 
firſt or ſecond Bleeding, was not of the colour of Glue 
and the Sick was relieved by Bleeding repeated, unles 
perchance the Diſeaſe turned to a Pleuriſie; and fo it did 
ſometimes after too hot a Regimen, eſpecially the firit 
Spring it invaded, viz. in the Year 1664, at which time, 
being farther'd by the heat of the Sun, (for as yet it was 
young and more ſpirituous than afterwards } it ſeem'd to 
incline to a Peripneumonia; but when by repeated Experi 
ence and Examples | was deterr'd from Bleeding, thong 
it was very plain, that this Fever, eſpecially at its firſt com. 
ing, Was very inflamatory ; nothing now remained where- 
by its heat might be extinguiſhed beſides Glyſters often fe. 
peated, and cooling Medicines. But beſides the Symp. 
roms plainly ſnewing an Inflamation, the Phænomenon 0 
pnſenſibleneſs, which was more common in this Fever than 
in any other, wholly indicated, that Glyſters were to be 
repeated often, whereby the febrile Matter which was 
apt to ſeize the Head was diverted from it: Moreove! 
they were ſabſtituted in the room of Bleeding repeated, 
Which did not well agree with the Nature of this Diſeaſe, 
and they did ſupply the defect of it by gently attempers- 
ting the heat of the Blood, and by expelling the Morbi. 
fick Cauſe. Moreover, I judged that large Bliſters appl! 


ed to the Neck would be of greater uſe in this Fever than 
14 


1 Conſtitution, that it was plainly of another king; 


158 Of the Continual Fever, Cc. 


ſed by things that cover'd him (which could not be ay. 
ded if he were kept continually in Bed) nor the force 
the Blood tending to the Head promoted; for therehz 
the Heat of the Brain would be encreaſed, and conſe 
quently the Animal Spirits heated and exagitated, where. 
dy the beating of the Heart would be more violent, and 
the Fever encreaſed. 

But how beneficial ſoever it is in all Fevers that par. 
take of a great Inflamation, to keep the Patient from Bed 
for ſome time, yet it muſt be noted, that if they ar: 
kept up too long at once, eſpecially at the Declination 
of the Diſeaſe, they are apt to have wandring Pains, 
Which may end in a Rheumatiſm ;, and ſometimes the 80. 
perficies of the Body is ſeized with the Faundice, ff 
theſe things happen, the Sick muſt be put to Bed, that 
the Pores being opened, ſuch Particles may be carried 
off, as occaſion either of theſe Diſeaſes: But the Sick 
muſt be kept in Bed only a day or two, and Sweat muſt 
not be provoked: But theſe Accidents are very rare, and 
never come but at the declination of the Fever, at which 
time the Diſeaſe being abated, it is much ſafer to permi 
the Sick to lie continually in Bed, than either at the Be 
ginning or State; for at this time it does more good in di- 
geſting the febrile Matter, which if the Sick be conh- 
_ to his Bed too ſoon, will be more inraged and fi- 
red. | 

If jany one ſhould here object, that this Method, tho' it 
be proper enough to refreſh the Sick, and to hinder the 
Fe ver's ſeizing the Head, yet it is not convenient, becauiz 
it {tops the Evacuation by Sweat, whereby the febrile Mat. 
ter now concoct2d ſhould be ejected. I anſwer, That the 
Opponent ſays nothing to the purpoſe, unleſs he can pro- 
duce Arguments to prove, that ſuch an Evacuation 1 
neceſſary in H vers, which is not eaſie for him to 
do; for Experience teaches, not Reaſon, what kind ol 
Fever is to be cured by Sweats, and which by Purging, 
and the like: yea, we may ſuppoſe, that there are ſome 
ſorts of Fevers, which Nature cares by a peculiar Method 
of her own, Without any viſible Evacuation, viz, by re- 
ducing and aſſimulating the Morbifick Matter to the Mal 
of Blood, wherewith it did not ſo well agree; for which 
reaſon J have often, as well in this kind of Fevers as in o- 
thers, if they were not intermittent, reduced them to ea 

er 


Of the Continual Fever, &c. 159 


der preſently at their beginning, before the whole Blood 
was infected, by ordering only Small- beer to be drank at 
leiſure, and by forbidding the uſe of Broths of any kind, 
permitting in the mean while accuſtomed exercile, and 
thefree Air, without ſo much as once ufing any Evacuation, 
Truly I have cured my Children and Friends only by faſt- 
ing two or three Days: But this Remedy muſt be uſed on- 
I in young People, and ſuch as are of a ſanguine Tempera- 


ment. 


But if we ſhould grant, that Nature could not overcome 
that Diſeaſe by any other Method than by Sweats, it muſt 
be underſtood ſuch Sweats that come at the latter end of 
the Diſeaſe, and after previous digeſtion, but not thoſe 
that are forced out on the firſt days of the Diſeaſe, which 


proceed from the interrupted Oeconomy of raging Nature; 


[ (appoſe ſuch Sweats are not to be promoted, but the 


F Tamult from whence they ariſe is to be quell'd. But ſuch 


kind of Sweats are wont to accompany many Fevers. though 
notall ; yet I know very well, that ſome ſorts of Fevers na- 
turally require this kind of critical Sweat at their declina- 
tion z ſuch are particular Fits of Azues, alſo the greateſt and 
moſt frequent Fever of Nature proceeding from that Con- 
ſtitution which wholly favours the Epidemick Production 
of Agues : For theſe, if any Method be inſiſted on, which 


does not tend firſt to the digeſtion of the Morbifick Mat- 


ter, and afterwards to the ejecting of it by Sweat, the 
Diſeaſe will be encreaſed; wherefore no Evacuation ought 
to have place here, only as they ſuppreſs the violence of 
the Diſeaſe at firſt, leſt the Sick die of the Phyſick, More- 
over, the canſe of a Peſtelential Fever, which is very thin 
and ſubtle, may be carried off by Sweat on the firſt 
days of the Diſeaſe, as Experience every where teſtifies. 

But in theſe Fevers, if they are permitted to follow the 
ordinary Courſe of Symptoms, and their own Genious, we 
never ſee that Nature is wont to evacuate the Morbifick 
Matter, now prepared at an appointed time. [I think he is 
therefore very raſh that goes about to force the Diſeaſe 
by provoking Sweat, and to cure the Patient by that 
Method alone; whereas the divine old Man ſays, That tis 


in vain to do any thing contrary to Nature's Inclination, I 


think this ought to be taken notice of in this particular 


fever, of which we now treat, which by frequent Expe- 
rience 


2 
160 Of the Continual Fever, Cc. 


rience I know may be cored without Sweat, and that the 
Patient when we endeavour unſeaſonably jto force it, is of. 
ten brought into great danger, without any neceſlity, from 
the Morbifick Matter tranſlated to the Head, But nei 
ther in this Fever, nor in any other, even in thoſe which 
are not wont to go off by critical Sweats, if perchance 1 
Sweat of this kind comes of its own accord, when the Dif. 
eaſe is abating, which we ſuppoſe, by the remiſſion of all 
the Symptoms, and proceeds from a due Concoction, 
no prudent Phyſician will contemn it; but when it does 
not come of it ſelf, how can we certainly tell that we may 
not kill the Man, whilſt we endeavour to diſpoſe the Hy. 
mours to Sweat by a hot Regimen, and hot Cordials ? li 
any one by chance ſtumbles upon a Treaſure, he would be 
a Fool if he ſhould not ſtoop down to take it up; but he 
muſt be accounted a Fool, who having once light on ſuch a 
good Fortune, ſhould ſpend all his time, and hazard his Lite 
in ſeeking for ſuch another Booty: But howſoever it be, 
it is clear to me, that the Fever alone has heat enough of 
it ſelf; nor needs it any greater heat from abroad, by an 
72 Regimen, to prepare the febrile Matter for Conco- 
ion. 

have found that the foreſaid Method, by Bleeding and 
Glyſters has been excellently ſucceſsſul in the Cure of this 
te ver; but that when it was provoked by Diaphoreticks, 
it had not only irregular Symptoms, but the end was al- 
ways doubtful. Among the Symptoms was that tacit De- 
lirium, which did not ſnew it ſelf ſo much by N 
as by a ſtupor like a Coma; which, as we ſaid, frequent. 
ly happened in this Fever, This Symptom, ( thoug1 
ſometimes I have ſeen it come of its own accord) is moſt 
commonly occaſioned by the over-officiouſneſs of Nurſes 
provoking Sweat; for by this means the morbifick Matter, 
which refuſes to yield in this Kind of Fever to Sweats, is 
violently exagitated, and at length elevated to the Head, to 
the great hazard ofthe Sick. 

[ heretofore mentioned in the Cure of a Fever of ano- 
ther Conſtitution, that in the laſt Years of it ſuch a kind 
of Stupor now and then invaded Children eſpecially, and 
Striplings; but it was not ſo much, nor altogether ſo Epi- 
demick, as was that which accompanied this Fever; and! 
could neither tame this nor that, though I did all J could 


by 


Aa — AX — — = — = — ond 3 {> = — + — A 23 £& © % +, — — — 


Or OTE 
1 


nn, — F A, 


Fever, and the Symptom now menticned ; having blooded 
| M 


Of the Continaal Fever, &c. 161 


f by bleeding repeated, not only in the Arms, but alio in 


the Neck and Feet by Bliſtering Plaiſters, Cupping-Glaſ- 
ſ:s, G'yſters, Diaphoreticks of all kinds, and the like. 


At length I reſolve after Bleeding in the Arm, and the 


applying of a Bliſter in the Neck, and the injecting of 


two or three Glyſters of Milk and Sugar on the firſt days 


of the Diſeaſe, to do nothing elſe, only I forbid Flelh, 


and all ſpirituous Liquors. In the mean while I attended 


on Nature's Method; and following her Footſteps, at length 
J learned how to conquer this Symptom, for the Diſ.afſe 


went off ſafely, though ſlowly ; therefore | thought I muſt 


erſiſt in this method in all the Fevers, which-afterwaras I 
ad to do with; Which indeed ſeems to me of great mo- 


ment, if we reſpe& the greatneſs of the Symptom, and the 
event Which is always good: And truly | ſometimes thought 


that we could ſcarce proceed too {lowly in driving away 


& Diſeaſes ; and that we ſhould proceed ſlowly, more being 
” very often to be left to Nature than is now generally to 
be imagined: For he is much in the wrong, who thinks 
that Nature always wants the help of Art; for if fo, ſhe 


would take leſs care of Mankind than the preſervation of 
the Species requires. For there is no manner of propor- 
tion betwixt the multitude of Diſeaſes, and the ways of 
Cure, which have been uſed even in thoſe Ages, wherein 
the Medicinal Art has been moſt cultivated ; what may be 


done in other Diſeaſes I know not, but 1 am ſure that in 
this Fever, whereof we now treat, the ſaid Symptom, not- 


withſtanding general Evacuations, I mean Bleeding and 
Glyſters, was conquer'd ſucceſsfully by time alone. 
We ſaid before, that the ſigns of recovery were moſt 


commonly deferr'd to the thirteenth day, iz. when the 
Stupor was much, and when the ſick was ſometimes ſpeech- 
leis; afterwards he earneſtly deſired ſome odd or abſurd 


fort of Meat or Drink, the ferment of the Stomach being 


much vitiated by the continuance of the Diſcaſe: In this 
: Cafe, though the weakneſs of the Patient required ſuch 
things as would ftrengthen him, yet I willingly allowed 


- thoſe things that were not ſo proper for him if they pleaſed 
| the Palate, | 


In September 1674, I viſited the Son of Mr, Nott, a 
Bookſeller, being about nine Years of Age ; he had this 


him 


— 
160 Of the Continual Fever, &c. 


rience I know may be cored without Sweat, and that the 
Patient when we endeavour unſeaſonably jto force it, is gl. 
ten brought into great danger, without any neceſlity, from 
the Morbifick Matter tranſlated to the Head, But ye. 
ther in this Fever, nor in any other, even in thoſe which 
are not wont to go off by critical Sweats, if perchance 
Sweat of this kind comes of its own accord, when the Di. 
eaſe is abating, which we ſuppoſe, by the remiſſion of all 
the Symptoms, and proceeds from a due Concottion, 
no prudent Phyſician will contemn it; but when it does 
not come of it ſelf, how can we certainly tell that we may 
not kill the Man, whilſt we endeavour to diſpoſe the 1. 
mours to Sweat by a hot Regimen, and hot Cordials ? ff 
any one by chance ſtumbles upon a Treaſure, he would be 
2 Fool if he ſhould not ſtoop down to take it up; but he 
muſt be accounted a Fool, who having once light on {ſuch 
good Fortune, ſhould ſpend all his time, and hazard his Lite 
m ſeeking for ſuch another Booty: But howſoever it be, 
it is clear to me, that the Fever alone has heat enough ol 
it ſelf; nor needs it any greater heat from abroad, by an 
_ Regimen, to prepare the febrile Matter for Conco- 
ion. 

{ have found that the foreſaid Method, by Bleeding and 
Glyiters has been excellently ſucceſsful in the Cure of thus 
te ver; but that when it was provoked by Diaphoreticks, 
it had not .only irregular Symptoms, but the end was al- 
ways doubtful. Among the Symptoms was that tacit De- 
Uirium, Which did not ſhew it ſelf ſo much by ex ogy eg 
as by a ſtupor like a Coma; which, as we ſaid, frequen!- 
iy happened in this Fever, This Symptom, ( thouz!1 
fometimes | have ſeen it come of its own accord) is moſt 
commonly occaſioned by the over-officiouſneſs of Nurse 
provoking Sweat; for by this means the morbifick Matte”, 
which refuſes to yield in this kind of Fever to Sweats, “ 
violently exagitated, and at length elevated to the Head, to 
the great hazard of the Sick. 

[ heretofore mentioned in the Cure of a Fever of ano. 
ther Conſtitution, that in the laſt Years of it ſuch a kind 
of Stupor now and then invaded Children eſpecially, and 
Striplings; but it was not ſo much, nor altogether fo Epi. 
demick, as was that which accompanied this Fever; and! 
could neither tame this nor that, though I did all J could 


by 


— 


— 3 + ma A 22 & © ů22 AY wg pa» 


— < — 2 & = 


<v oy 


t 


Of the Continual Fever, &c. 161 


by bleeding repeated, not only in the Arms, but alſo in 
the Neck and Feet by Bliſtering Plaiſters, Cupping-Glaſ- 
ſes, G'yſters, Diaphoreticks of all kinds, and the like. 
At length I reſolve after Bleeding in the Arm, and the 


applying of a Bliſter in the Neck, and the injecting of 


two or three Glyſters of Milk and Sugar on the firſt days 
of the Diſeaſe, to do nothing elſe, only I forbid Fleſh, 
and all ſpirituoas Liquors. In the mean while I attended 
on Nature's Method; and following her Footſteps, at length 
learned how to conquer this Symptom, for the Diſ.ale 
went off ſafely, though t{lowly ; therefore | thought I muſt 
erſiſt in this method in all the Fevers, which after wards I 
bad to do with; Which indeed ſeems to me of great mo- 
ment, if we reſpect the greatnels of the Symptom, and the 
event Which is always good: And truly | ſometimes thought 
that we could ſcarce proceed too flouwly in driving away 
Diſeaſes ;, and that we ſhould proceed flowly, more being 
very often to be left to Nature than is now generally to 
be imagined: For he is much in the wrong, Who thinks 
that Nature always wants the help of Art, for it ſo, ſhe 
would take leſs care of Mankind than the prelervation of 
the Species requires. For there is no manner of propor- 
tion betwixt the multitude of Diſeaſes, and the ways of 
Cure, which have been uſed even in thoſe Ages, wherein 
the Medicinal Art has been molt cultivated; what may be 
done in other Diſeaſes I know not, but l am {are that in 
this Fever, whereof we now treat, the ſaid Symptom, not- 
withſtanding general Evacuations, I mean Bleeding and 
Glyſters, was conquer'd ſucceſsfully by time alone. 

We laid before, that the ſigns of recovery were moſt 
commonly deferr'd to the thirteenth day, v:z, when the 
Stupor was much, and when the lick was ſometimes ſpeech- 
lels; afterwards he earneſtly deſired ſome odd or abſurd 
fort of Meat or Drink, the ferment of the Stomach being 
much vitiated by the continuance of the Diſeale : In this 
Cale, though the weakneſs of rhe Patient required ſuch 
things as would ſtrengthen him, yet I willingly allowed 
thoſe things that were not ſo proper for him if they pleaſed 
the Palate. 

In September 1674, I viſited the Son of Mr, Nott, a 
Bookſeller, being about nine Years of Age; he had this 
Fever, and the Symptom now menticned ; having 8 

| im 


162 Of the Continual Fever, &c. 


him in the Arm, and injected Glyſters for the firſt days 
of the Diſeaſe, J would not comply with the importunity 
of the Mother, who earneſtly urg'd, that I would haſten 
the buſineſs, which I thought I could not do with ſafety : 
Therefore having gain'd a truce, I ordered nothing but a 
common Julep to pleaſe the Mother; and when on the 
thirtieth day he began to recover, he earneſtly deſired 
ſeveral odd things, and for that Reaſon they were permit. 
ted, though otherwiſe they ought not to have been alloy. 
ed; and fo at length he Recovered. 

But though this Stupor of the nature of a Coma was 
more frequent in this Fever than other Symptoms; yet 
ſometimes, tho' rarely, a Frenſie without Stupor invaded 
ſome, and the Sick lay awake Night and Day, and could 
be govern'd by no means; and there were other Symptoms 
like thoſe which moleſted ſuch as are Frentick in other 
Fevers, and in the Small-Pox. This Symptom would not 
bear a Truce as the Comatoſe Symptom now mentioned 
was wont to do, till digeſtion was made, but kill'd the 
Patient in a few days, unleſs the inflammation was reſtrain 
ed; and in this Caſe Spir it of Vitriol did better than o- 
ther things, which after Bleeding and the injection of z 
Glyſter or two, I ordered to be dropped into Small beer 
for the ordinary drink, and in few days it diſpoled the Sick 
to reſt, having conquered the Symptoms, and cured the 
Patient, which indeed I was not able to do by any other 
Method; and this was manifeſt to me by repeated Expe- 
rience, 

In Autumn 1675. Dyſenterick Stools, and ſometimes 8 
Looſeneſs came upon this Fever : I preſently found tha! 
theſe were Symptoms of the Fever, and not original Diſea- 
ſes, as in the preceding Conſtitution ; and yet notwith- 
fianding, ſeeing the cauſe of the Diſeaſe was contained in 
the Mals of Blood, bleeding was indicated, which indeed, 
a Narcorick being given twice after it, was able to quel] 
this Symptom. 

In September 75, Mrs. Conysby, dwelling near the Mew, 
ſent for me: She was ſeized with this Fever, and ſuddenly 
with Gripes, and afterwards with blood y and ſlimy Stools; 


though ſhe was much weakned by the continuance of the 
Diſeaſe, elpecially by frequent Stools, wherewith (he was 
tired the forego.ng Night; yet I ordered her to be blooded 


ix 


„ wean, ow => — 


et. e..4A wa. Atm AM R8ac Co 4. tn ant fn mat &. 


a — 


Of the Continual Fever, &c. 163 


in the Arm, and a little while after I gave her a Narc®- 
tick, afterwards, that very Night, the .Stools became 
thick, and the next morning and evening I repeated the 
ſaid Narcotick, having alſo order'd a moderate Cordial to 
_— her Spirits; and by this means ſhe preſently reco- 
yered, 

As to the Looſeneſs, which happened often tothis Fever 
about this time of the Year, it did not cauſe much trou-— 
ble; and becauſe it did neither good nor harm, ſo far as 
could perceive, whether there was a Stupor or whether 
there was none, I could not take any curative Indication 
from it; if it did not exceed the Bounds, fo as the Patient's 
Life was not endangered thereby ; if it did, an Anodyne 
was certainly Indicated; and for this reaſon only the uſe 
of Anodynes was to be approved through the whole courſe 
of this Diſeaſe : For the great Propenſion in this Fever 
to a Stupor was n thereby; and therefore un- 
= there was abſolute neceſſity, they were never to be u- 
ed. 

t is to be noted, that often in this Fever, and in others, 
thoſe that recovered, eſpecially ſuch as had been much 
waſted by them, and required long and great Evacuations 
for their Cure ( eſpecially if they were of a weak Conſtitu- 
tion ) as they lay in their Beds a Nights, firſt grew hot, 
and afterwards ſweat much, and ſo were much weaken'd ; 
and for this reaſon recovered difficultly, and ſome fell into 
a Conſumption. I perceived this Symptom 1 on- 
ly from the Blood impoveriſhed and weakned by the con- 
tinuance of the Diſeaſe, ſo that it could not aſſimulate 
the Juices newly taken in, but endeavoured to eject them 
by Sweat; wherefore I ordered that they ſhould take 
three or four Spoonfuls of old Malaga Wine, Morning 
and Evening, by the uſe whereof they recovered ſtrength, 
and Sweats went off, And ſo much for the continual 
Fever of this Conſtitution, which by reaſon of the great 
2994.9 which moſt commonly accompanied it, I call Co- 
matofe, 


M 3 CHAP, 


* 


164 


CHA P. III. , 
Of the Meaſles of the Tear 1674. 


AT the beginning of the Year, in January 1674, a 
fort of Meaſies broke out, which were different 
from thoſe that invaded in the ſame Month in the Year 
1670. and were as Epidemical as they, but not ſo irregular; 
nor did they ſo conſtantly keep their Types; for they 
came out ſometimes ſooner, ſometimes later; whereas 
the Eruption of the other ſort was always on the fourth 
Day, reckoning from the firſt Invaſion, Moreover they 
firit poſſeſt themſelves of the Shoulders and other parts 
of the Trunk, whereas the other firſt began in the Face 
and crept by degrees over the reſt of the Body: Nor could 
] obſerve but very rarely thoſe Scales of Skin, like Bran 
ſprinkled, when the Meaſles went off, which was as cer- 
tainly ſeen in the other ſort as after a Scarlet Fever; and 
beſides, they were more Mortal than the former, when 
they were unskilfully managed ; for the Fever and difficulty 
of breathing that uſed to follow the ea/les were more vi- 
olent, and more like a Peripneumonia, than in the other 
kind. Though theſe Meaſles were irregular as to the 
Symptoms now mentioned, yet in the general, the de- 
ſcription that we made of thoſe in the Year 1670, well e- 
nough agreed with theſe; and therefore it is needleſs to 
repeat the ſame here. Iheſe, as the former, encreaſed til! 
the Vernal Equinox, and then decreaſing, vaniſhed at the 
approach of the Summer Solſtice, or ſoon after. 

Seeing the Method of Cure was ſcarce any whit different 
from that which I have handled already in the Hiſtory 
of the /Mea/les, to Which | refer you: I will mention only 
one Obſervation (according to my Cuſtom ) of the Mg 
thod1 uſe in this fort of Aleaſies. | 

The molt virtuous Countels of Salisbury ſent for me in 
February 74, to one of her Children, which was then 
lick, and preſently the reſi (they were five or (ix, ) I 1 

e 


i; 


a Sw aHn re 


9 


1 7 aw Mud mn) | bens” 


FF 


TY Pad — — 


Of the Meaſles, &c. * 165 


the ſame Method to them all. I ordered them to keep 
their Beds two or three Days before the Eruption, that 
the Blood, according to its own Genius, might caſt out 
through the Pores the Particles that were eaſily ſeparated, 
which occaſioned the Diſeaſe ; but I did not permit that 
they ſhould have any more Cloaths on, or Fire, than they 
uſed to have when they were well: I forbad the eating of 
Fleſh, and allowed them Oat-meal and Barley broths, and 
now and then a roaſted Apple, and for their Drink Small- 
beer, and Milk boyled with three Parts of Water; and 
when the Cough was troubleſom, as was uſual, I preſcri- 
bed a Pectoral Ptiſan to be taken often: They recovered 
with this Method in the ſhort time this Diſeaſe is wont to 
finiſh its Cour ſe; nor were they troubled thro' the whole 
courſe of this Diſeaſe, nor when it went off, with any o- 
ther Symptom than what is frequent in this Diſeaſe. 

In the firſt two Months that this ſort of Meaſles ap- 
pear'd, a Meaſley Fever here ana there intervened, in 
which ſome Pimples broke out in the Trunk of the Body, 
eſpecially in the Neck and Shoulders, like the Meaſles 
bat they were diſtinguiſhed from them, becaule they did 
not ſeize the whole, being conhned to thoſe Parts we now 
mentioned. 

But the Fever, tho' it was plainly of the ſame kind, 
was more violent, and continued fourteen Days, an 
ſometimes longer ; it neither bore Glyſters, nor Bleed- 
ing, being enraged by both; but the Method for 
he Meaſles agreed with it, And ſo much for the Mea- 

es. 


— 9 nnn. 4 


CHAP. IV. 


Of the Irregular Small-Pox i» the Tears 
1674, 75. 


AS the Epidemical Meaſles breaking out in the begin- 
ning of the Year 70, introduced the black Small- 
Vox, Which we deſcribed w_ ſo theie which were Ke: 

3 els 


166 Of the irregular Small- Pox, &c. 


leſs Epidemical in the Year 74, uſhered in this fort of 
Pox, Wo like the other, that they ſeemed to be the ſame re. 
viſed, not a new fort: For whereas, as was ſaid, in the 
for mer ſort of the Small Pox, after the firſt two years, the 
Pn?les were dayly leſs black, and they grew bigger by 
devrees, till the end of the Year 73, and then the Diſeaſe, 
that was gentle and favourable for ſuch a ſort of Pox, re- 
turned again With its former Violence, accompanied with 
an unlucky Train of ill Syrwtoms ; for the Puſtles were 
as blk as Soot when they fluxed. The Patient did not 
die chey came to maturity, for before they were ripe 
they were only of a brown colour, and if they were nume- 
rous, hey were very ſmall ; for when they were very 
few, they were no leſs than in other forts of Pox. and 
ſeldom Mack. In 2 Word, they were very like thoſe we 
deſc: ib-d in the Year 70, yet they differed from them in 
ſor. few things, Which truly diſcovered a greater Putri- 
fact. n in theſe than in theother, and that they were of 2 
more gros Nature, and harder to be concotted ; for 
4: t{-y were ripe they ſtunk worſe, fo that I could 
me near thoſe that had them much, by reaſon of 
tue fk, and they were flower in finiſhing their Courſe 
th in any wt that I have yet ſeen. 

'r's worth while to note, that the milder the fort is, 
the ſooner the Puſtles come to maturity, and the ſooner 
the Diſeaſe goes off; ſo in the regular fort of Flux-Pox, 
which began in the Year 67, theeleventh day was moſt 
dangerous, which being once paſt, the Patient was moſt 
commonly free from danger: In the next ſort of Flux- 
Pox, which were irregular, and began in the Year 70, 
the Patient was in greateſt danger on the 14th day, or at 
fartheſt on the 17th, and if he ſurvived theſe he was ſafe; 
for I never knew any one die of this Diſeaſe after that day: 
But in this ſort of Fluz, the Patient died after the twer- 
tieth Day, and ſometimes if he recovered, which very 
few did, his Legs did not only ſwell, which is common in 
all forts of Flux Pox, but allo the Arms, Shoulders, 
T highs, aud other parts, which tumours began their Tra- 
gedy with intolerable Pain, like a K heumatiſm, and after- 
ware eommorly ſuppurated, and ended in cavernous Ul- 
cers, and Impuithumes of the Muſcular parts, fo that the 
Patient was in danger of his Life many days after the * 
e | A IVEY. * 5 


Of the irregular Small- Pox, &c 167 


por was off, whereby I clearly perceived by what degrees 


this Epidemick Diſeaſe advanced through theſe three Con- 
ſtitutions whereof the latter was always worſe than the 


former, as to the greater putrifaction, and by reaſon the 
matter was harder to be concocted. 
But the Small-Pox whereof we now treat, ſeem to be a 


new Species ſpringing from the former waxing old; for 


though according to the Diſpoſition of the Air, producing 
this Epidemick, the black Small. P, which firſt broke out 
in the Year 70, came to their declination, yet like the 


| relapſe of a Diſeaſe occaſioned by the old matter ferment- 


ing afreſh, the Air being again diſpoſed for the production 
of the Small Pox, fetch'd them from the old Store; which 
Diſeaſe being renewed, and having got Strength again, plain- 
ly revived, and as it were grew young: And theſe were 
{> much the more irregular, and had ſo much the more in- 
tenſe putrifaction, by how much the matter from whence 
they were generated was groſſer and more feculent, than 


that from which the former took their riſe. Now that 


this may be more apparent, we muſt by no means think that 
it is neceſſary to ſuppoſe ſuch a kind of diſpoſition in the 
Air, which ſhould produce ſuch an Epidemick in this place, 
and another very different in another not ſar diſtant ; For 
if it ſhould be ſo, and fo it is ſometimes, every motion of 
the Wind would be able to ſcatter a Conſtitution, But it 
ſeems more probable to me, that this or that particular 
tract of Air is filled with Effluvia's proceeding from ſome 
mineral fermentation, which contaminating the Air, they 
oy through with Particles deſtructive, ſometimes to one 


ort of Animals, ſometimes to another, and they ſo long pro- 


pagate Diſeaſes appropriated to the various affections of 


the Earth, till that ſubterraneous Minera of Vapours is 


expired, which may likewiſe ferment afreth from the re- 
liques of the old matter, as in the caſe now mentioned; 
but it is all one to me, who do not pretend to any thing 
more than what is clear from the thing it ſelf, whether this 


or any other Hypotheſis beſt ſolves the Phenomena ; this at 


leaſt I know, that the Small-Pox, which I now treat of, 


were very like thoſe of the preceding Conititution, only 


they ſeemed to be of a more groſs Nature, and of a much 
more intenſe putrifaction: For which two Reaſons, when 
they fluxed very much, they deſtroyed more than any o- 
ther fort I ever knew, and in my opinion they were as 

M 4 Mor t- 


— 
— I” ae TT. . 
— — - 


2 
: hs 
N — — — _ — * — 
8 RR Ye - 2 * — — wb IE Ss. . A 
— . C k Yd : TC) =” —— 4 * oo — —_ 8 8 _ = 2 
_— = — a 5 5 
< : wm N —. FX a — . — pu ® . 


W 
— >, Ota 
= 2 3 


PE * 
9223 2 
<a o 22 
* > 
"+. 
22 * >. a l 
= — — 


168 Of the irregular Small-Pox, . 


mortal as the Plague it ſelf, for the number of the Sick 
though when they were diſtin, they were not more dan. 
gerous than any other ſort whatever, end they diſcovered 
them ſelves to be favourable by the largeneſe of their Puſt les, 
their Colour, and other good Circumſtances. 

As to the Cure, 1 have long wondied at thoſe quite 
contrary Indications, - Which this Diſcaſe ſeem'd to hint: 
forit was very manifeſt, that the Symptoms that proceed 
ſrom too great an Inflamypation were immediately occaſion: 
ed by a hor Regimen, as a Fever, Frenſie, Purple- ſpots, and 
the like, to Which this Dileale is inclined above all others; 
and 0.1the contrary, too cold a Regimen hinders the (wel- 
ling of the Face and Hands, which was very neceſſary, and 
readred the Paſtles more flaccid : After I had a long, time 
carefully thought on theſe things, at laſt I found, I could 
prevent borh theſe Inconveniencies at one and the ſame 
time; for by allowing a free uſe of the Miik-water, (mall 
Beer, and ſuch Liquors, it was in my power to bridle the 
rage of the Blood, and on the contrary, I could promote 
the elevation of the Puſtles, and the ſwelling, of the Hands 
and Face by keeping the Patient continually in Bed, and 
by the gentle heat thereof, not ſuff:ring him to put out 
his Arms: Nor does this method contradict it ſelf; for it 5 
to be ſuppoſed. that after this Eruption is finiſhed, the 
Blood has caſt out the inflamed Particles to the habit of 
th Body, and that it wants no provocative to a farther 
ſecretion of the matter; fo that now, whereas the chieſ 
buſineſs is perform'd in the habit of the Body, and in ri 
pening the Puſtles, this is only to be minded, to wit, that 
it be (ufficiently defended from thoſe hot Vapours, that 
may chance to be ſtruck in, by reaſon the Skin is cruſted 
with the Puſtles: But as to the Puſtles, they are to be 
brought to maturity by the gentle heat of the external 
parts. Now though this Method ſucceeded well in other 
Flux x, 4s ſaid before, yet it failed mein theſe of this 
Confticution, f that molt of thoſe died that were very full 
whether they nied my method, or an hot Regimen and 
Cordis; and therefore | was very ſenſible that there was 
yet lomethirg Wanting beſides thoſe things that bridled the 
Ebullition of the Blood, or promoted the elevation of tht 
Pultles, and th- ſwelling of the Face and Hands; to wit, 
jomet nnn cht might be able to conquer the Putrefaction, 


lc 


2 
py 


Of the irregular Small-Pox, &c. 169 


which is more intenſe in this ſort, than in any other I have 


obſerved; at length I thought of Spirit of Vitriol, which 


ſuppoſed, would reſiſt the Putre action, and tame the 


lage of the Blood; wherefore, leaving the Patient to 
himſelf, till the pain and vomiting which preceded the 


Eruption, were over, and till all the /i i P were fully 
come out, at length On the th or ix th day, I pre- 
ſcribed the 'forelaid Spirit to be dropped into Small beer, 
which being made a little acid with it, was to be drank as 
often as he liſt, for his ordinary drink, but more freely, 
when the Fever of Maturation approached. I ordered 
this Drink to be uſed dayly till the Patient was perfectly 
well. 

This Spirit, as if it had been truly Specifick in this Di- 
ſeaſe, wonder fully aſſwaged all the Symptoms; the Face 
ſwelſed ſooner, and much higher, the ſpaces between the 
Puſtles came nearer a red Colour, and were like a Da- 
mask Roſe, the very little Puſtles grew as large as this 


Z fort would permit; and whereas they uſed to be black, 


now they caſt forth a yellow Marter, in colour like a Ho- 
ney comb, and the Face, inſtead of being black, was of 
a deep yellow Colour; they ripened ſooner, and finiſhed 
their whole courſe a day or two ſooner than they uſed to 
do. All things were exactly ſo, if they drank freely of 
this Liquorz therefore as ſoon as | perceived the Patient 
did not drink enough to quell the Symptoms, I mixed 
the Spirits with a Spoonful of Syrup, or with ſome di- 


' fiill-d Waters and Syrup, and gave it him now and then, 


that by this means I might compenſate his too {paring ule 
vi the Liquor, 


have now reckoned up the many Virtues of this Me- 
dicine, and truly I never found the leaſt inconvenience in 


the uſe of it: Although it moſt commonly ſtop'd the Sali- 


vation the tenth or eleventh day, yet at the ſame t:me 


| ſome Stools were wont to ſupply its place, and there was 
| lels danger from theſe than from that. And whereas I 


have often mentioned, that they which have the Huæ- 
Poxare therefore chiefly in danger, becauſe the Spittle, be- 
ing more viſcid in thoſe days, is like to choak the Pati- 
ent; the Looſeneſs prevents this Symptom, and either goes 
eff of it ſelf, or is eaſily cured by the Milk-water, and a 


Narcotick, When there is no more danger from the Small- 


Pox, Though 


r — 2 IM 


1 I 
6? 
* 
1 
4 * 
5 
g 
* 
' 
7 
4 


170 Of the trregalay Small-Pox, &. 


Though I ordered the Patient to lye a Bed, and to kee 
his Arms in, yet I would by no means permit that he ſho! 
have more Cloaths on him than he uſed to have; and! 
allowed him the liberty of moving from one part of the 
Bed to the other as oft as he would, to prevent Sweating, 
to which he was very prone, notwithſtanding this Remedy, 
He eat Oat-meal and Barly-Broth, and ſometimes a ros. 
ſted Apple; and at the latter end of the Diſeaſe, if he 
were weak or ſick in his Stomach, he drank three or 
four ſpoonfuls of Canary-Sack, and took a Paregorick 
Draught every Evening, after the fifth or ſixth day, to 
be taken in the Evening earlier than is uſual if he were full 

rown (for Children had no occaſion of it) to wit, I pre- 
Eribed fourteen drops of Liquid Laudanum in Cowſlip-wz 
ter. I permitted the Patient to riſe on the fourteenth day, 
and on the one and twentieth day I let him blood in the 
Arm, and purged him twice or thrice, after which he had 
a better colour, and looked brisker than thoſe are wont to 
do that this Diſeaſe has ſo ſeverely handled, Beſides, this 
Method moſt commonly prevented thoſe Scars that uſe to 
disfigure the Face, Which are occaſioned by raging hot Hu- 
mours that corrode the Skin. 

Oa the 26th of July 1675, the worthy Mr Elliot, one 
of the Grooms of the King's Bed. chamber, committed to my 
care one of his Domeſticks, who had this cruel fort of 
black Flax Pox coming out; he was about Eighteen Years 
old, of a very ſanguine Complexion, and was ſeized of this 
Diſeaſe preſently after hard drinking z the Puſtles fluxed 
more than ever I knew any, ſo that there was ſcarce any 
ſpace between them, and I, confiding in the Strength ol 
this excellent Medicine, did not let him Blood, though 
was called in early enough to have done it ; and, indeed, 
J ought to have bled him, becauſe this Diſeaſe was occafic- 
ned by exceſſive drinking of Wine. After the Eruption 
was finithed, on the fifth or ſixth day, I order'd Spirit of 
Vitriol to be drop'd into ſome Stone- Bottles full of ſmall 
Beer; and this he was to ule as often as he would for his 
ordinary Drink. On the eighth day he bled ſo much at 
the Noſ?, that the Nurſe being terrified by this Symptom, 
fent haſtily for me: As ſoon as I came, I perceived this 
was occaſioned by the immoderate heat and unuſual forceof 
the Blood; therefore I ordered him to drink a greater 

quantity 


Of the irregular Small- Pox, &c. 17¹ 


tity of ſmall Beer impregnated with the *foreſaid Spi- 
nl "4 — the Hemorrhage was immediately ſtop'd he 
nd | I fpit very plentifully, and the ſwelling of his Face and Hands, 
the ana the Puſtles proceeded very well, The D ſeaſe difpatch- 


ed its baſineſs well enough, only at laſt ſome ſhmy and 


in 
dy bloody Stools were ſomewhat troubleſom, which perhaps 
roa- had not bappened if I had let him blood when J was firſt 
' he called, for the reaſon above mention'd ;, yet I uſed no other 
ort Medicine for the cure of the Bloody- Flux, but the Narcotick, 
rick MW which otherwiſe I ſhould have ordered every night, if the 
to symptom had not happened, whereby its force being aba- 
full ted till the Puſtles went off, afterwards he ſoon recovered 
re · ¶ by the taking away a large quantity of Blood from his Arm, 
wa and by drinking freely Milk and Water. 
ay, About the ſame time my Neighbour, Mr. Cinch, ſent 
the ¶ for me to two of his Children; one was four Years of Age, 
had and the other ſuck'd, and was not then half a Year old: 


In both the Poſtles were very ſmall, and flux'd mightily. 
They appeared firſt like an Eryfipelas, and were of the black 
to sort. 1 ordered Spirit of Vitriol to be drop'd into all their 
Ju Drink, which, notwithſtanding their tender Age, they 
drank without any averſion ; and having no worle Sym- 
One _ they preſently recovered. My very good Friend, 
Dr. Mapletoft, went with me to viſit them: he found the 
of eldeſt upon recovery, and the younger was then ſick of 
ars them in the Cradle. 
his WF lt is to be noted, That as the Small-Pox of this Conſti- 
ed tution which did not flux were very fayourable, ſo had they 
ny ro need of the Remedy now preſcribed ; but it was ſuffici- 
of {We ent that they were treated according to the Method of the 
11 WW dittin&t Small Pox above-mention'd. 
d, WW And now, Reader, I have given you a particular ac- 
[0- count of the Small-Pox, Which though perhaps every one 
on will contemn according to the Humour of the Age, yet it 
of WW bas not coſt me a little Care and Pains for theſe man 
all Years together to collect theſe Obſervations; and I ha 
is dot publiſhed them now, if Charity towards my Neigh- 
at bour, and a deſign of doing good to others, had not weigh- 
„ ed more with me than the eſteem of my own Reputation, 
is W hich [verily believe will be prejudiced on the account of 
che novelty of the Subject. And 17 I cannot ſee why any 
r Aan ſhould diſlike a new Method of curing a Diſeaſe not 
2 "EP — 


8 
| 
: 
% 


172 Of the irregular Small-Pox, &. 


to be found in the Writings of Hippocrates or Galen, yy; 
leſs perchance ſome place be puzled by a more difficult 
Conſtruction: whereas the Cures adapted by the modem 
Phyſicians, being not inſtituted by thoſe two great Lum. 
naries of Phyſick, are commonly neglected by ſome, and 
eſteemed by others. And for the ſame reaſon it ought ng 
to ſeem ſtrange, if I have alter'd ſomething in that Me. 
thod, whereby thoſe Fevers axe-to be cured, which de- 
pend on ſuch Confſtitutions!which are Epidemical with the 
Small Pox: For if in the firſt Ages of the World the Sal: 
Pox, never appeared any where, it follows alſo, that ſuch 
Fevers Where never any where. 

But it is moſt probable there was no Small-Pox at that 
time; for if this Diſeaſe had been as frequent in old times 
as it is now, | believe it would ſcarce have been unknown 
to the moſt skiltul Hippocrates, who better underſtood, and 
more accurately deſcribed the Hiſtory of Diſeaſes, than a. 
ny one that came after him; and he would alfo, according 
to his cuſtom, have left us an exact and natural Deſcription 
of this Diſeaſe. Wherefore I conjecture, that Diſeaſes 
have certain Periods according to the occult and unac- 
countable alterations which happen in the Bowels of the 
Earth, to wit, according to the various Age and Duration 
of the ſame, And as there have been other Diſeaſes here- 
tofore, which are either now utterly extinct, or at leaſt, 
being almoſt waſted by Age, fade away, and very rarely 
appear, (of which ſort is a Leproſie, and perhaps ſome 
other) ſo the Diſeaſes which now reign will vaniſh in time 
and give place to other kinds, whereof, indeed, we are 
not able ſo much as to gueſs. This may be {o, whatever 
we, Who are ſo ſhort-liv'd, think of it, who are born as it 
were one day, and die another: Nor are the molt anci- 
ent Authors, that have written Obſervations of Diſeaſes, 
of much longer Age, if they are compared with the be- 
ginining of the World, 


CHAP, 


l 


a CHAP. v. 


} | 
. Of the Epidemick Coughs, with a Pleuriſie 
” and Peripneumonia coming upon them, of 
e the Tear 1675. | 
| 


not 


the W Hen a pleaſant and warm Seaſon, like Summer, 

held to the end of October contrary to Cuſtom, 
ach n the Year 1675, a Cold and Moiſt Seaſon came preſent- 

ly after it, and there were more Coughs than ever | knew 
har {WS any other time, ſparing ſcarce any body of whatever 
nes Age or Temperament, ſeizing whole Families together ; 
nor were they remarkable only for their number, tor e- 


"Wn | 
and ery Winter there are many, but allo upon the account of 
the danger which they caſt thoſe into accidentaily that had 


them: For the Conſtitution being now, and all the fore- 
going Autumn, very inclinable to produce the Epidemick 
ae ever above deſcrid'd; and whereas there was no o- 
ac. ther Epidemick Diſeaſe to oppoſe and obſtruct the 
the force of it; theſe Coughs made way for the Fever, 
ton end eaſily turned to it. In the mean while, as the Conghs 
re. fliſted the Conſtitution in producing the Fever, ſo the 
aft, ever upon this account fell upon the Plerra and Lungs, 
rely as the Week before the coming of the Coughs, it fell upon 

the Head; which ſudden change of the Symptoms gave 
ne occaſion to ſome, that were leſs thinking, to ſuppoſe this 
are as an Eſſential Pleuriſie, or an Eſſential Peripneumonia, 
tho' it was the very ſame that had been all this Conſtitu- 
tion; for now, as always before, it began with a Pain in 


* the Head, the Back, and Limbs; which Symptoms agreed 
foe with every Fever of this Conſtitution, only the febrile 
be. Matter being poured plentifully, by reaſon of the Congh, 


upon the Pleura and Lungs, occaſioned Symptoms agacea- 
ble to the ſaid Parts: Bat the Fever, as far as J could ob- 
lerve, was the ſame that raged to the very Day the Coughs 
firſt broke out in, Moreover the Remedies whereby it was 
ealily cured, plainly ſhewed the fame. And tho' the prick- 
ing Pain in the Side, the difficulty of breathing, the co- 
lour of the Blood taken away, and other Signs common 


IP. 


1 


174 Of the Epidimick Coughs, & c. 


in a Pleuriſie, ſeemed to ſhew it was an Eſſential Pleurif, We 


yet it did not require any other Method than what agrey 
with the Fever of this Conſtitution, but was very diſfzren 
from that which was proper for a true Pleurfie, as wil 
plainly appear from what ſhall be ſaid hereafter. More 
over, when a Pleuriſie is an Eſſential Diſeaſe, it is wont 
come moſt commonly betwixt Spring and Summer; By 
this Diſeaſe came at a quite different time, and is only, 
be accounted a Symptom proper to the Fever of this Nen 
and the Off. ſpring of this accidental Cough. 

But now, that I may proceed rightly to that Methy 
which as N ſhe ws is neceſſary for the Conghs of thi 
Year, an 
they proceed from the ſame Caufes, we muſt take notice 


that the Effluvia that are wont to be expelled from th | 


Maſs of Blood by inſenſible Tranſpiration, are caſt upy 
the Lungs, the Pores being ſuddenly ſtopp'd by cold, ar 
they prelently occaſion a Cough, and the hot and Exci 
mentitious Exhalations of the Blood Song, by this mean 
detained, a Fever is ſoon kindled in the Blood, to wit 
when there is either ſo great quantity of Vapours, thi 
the Lungs cannot expel them, or when by reaſon of i 
ventitious heat, occaſioned either by too hot Medicine 
or too hot a Regimen, Oyl is, as it were, added to it 
Flame, and he that was before too prone to a Fevey, | 
now precipitated into it: And whatever the Stationan 
Fever is that reigns that Year, or at that time; this ne 
Fever preſently turns to, and is of the ſame Genius; ti 
as yet it retains ſome Symptoms that proceed from tit 
Cough, the Original of it; and therefore it is plain, ti 
we muſt apply our ſelves in every Cough proceeding fron 
this occaſion, not only to it; but alſo th 
readily comes upon it. | 
Having laid this Foundation; I endeavoured to reli 
thoſe that were my Patients in the following manner. 
If the Cough had not yet occaſinned a Fever, and othet 


Symptoms; which, as we ſaid, moſt commonly accomps 


hicd it, I thought it ſufficient to forbid the uſe of Flel 
and all fpirituvus Liquors ; I alſo order'd, that he ſhoul 
uſe moderate Exerciſe, and go into a free Air, and thi 
now and then he ſhould drink a cooling Pectoral Ptiſan 
Theſe few things vets ſifficietit to tame the Cough, - 


alſo for thoſe which happen in other Years, i 


e Fever, Which 


Of the Epidemick Coughs, c. 175 


to prevent the Fever and other Symptoms which uſually 
Fee ac companied it: For as the Blood is ſo qualified by abſti- 
nence ſrom Fleſh, and Spirituous Liquors, and with the 
wil uſe of cooling things, that it is not apt to receive febrile 
Impreſſions 3 ſo by the uſe of Exerciſe, the hot FAuvia of 
mend the Blood, which when the Pores of the Body are ſtopp'd 
with ſudden cold, turn in, and cauſe a Cough, are conve- 
{Wviently exhaled in a way natural and agreeable to them, 
and ſo the Patient is relieved, 
1 As to quieting the Cough, it is not ſafe to uſe Narcotick 
Band Anodyne Medicines ; nor is there leſs danger in en- 
Weavouring to remove it by ſpirituous Liquors and hot 
Medicines, for both ways the matter of the Cough being 
atangled and hardened, thoſe Vapours which ſhould paſs 
| 1, ently and eafily, by Coughing, from the Blood, now 
deing ſtoppd, are retamed in the Maſs of Blood, and 
rauſe a Fever there; and this very often happens very ill 
Wo the inconſiderate common People, who while they en- 
geavour to ſtop the Cough by burnt Brandy, and other 
Eg iquors, they occaſion a Pleuriſie or Peripneumonia; and 
dy this mad contrivance they make this Diſeaſe danger- 
pus, and often deadly, which of its own Nature is ſmall 
nd eaſily curable ; nor are they leſs deceived, though 
hey ſeem to proceed with more reaſon, who endeavour 

o expel the cauſe of the Diſeaſe by provoking Sweat: 
or though we do not deny, that Sweat coming of its 
dwn accord expels the Cauſe of the Diſeaſe better than 
any thing elſe, yet it is manifeſt, that when we endea- 
your to force it we fire the Blood, and kill the Patient 
hat we endeavour to cure. 

But ſometimes, not only when the Diſeaſe is ill mana- 
ged in the manner deſcrib'd above, but alſo ſometimes of 
Its own accord at the beginning, or a day or two after 

Tae an in delicate and tender People, heat and cold 

Tome 1 * the Cough by turns: They bad a Pain of the 
ead, Back, and Limbs, and they were inclined to ſweat, 
ſpecially at Night: All which Symptoms alſo moſt com- 
only followed the Fever of this Conſtitution, whereunto 
as often joyned a Pain in the fide, and ſometimes as 
t were, a Conſtriction and Narrowneſs of the Lungs 
Ind they breathed difficultly, the Cough was ſtopp'd, an 
Violent Fever raged, 8 

| 0 


176 Of the Epidemick Coughs, Cc. 


So far as I could perceive, the Fever and worſt Symy, 
toms of it were beſt cur'd by Bleeding in the Arm, a Bj. 
ſter in t Neck, and by a Glyſter daily injected. I te 
mean while I admoniſhed the Patient to keep from bed 
fome hours every day, and that he ſhould abſtain from 
Fleſh, and drink Small beer and Milk-water, and ſometimes 
a cooling and lenient Ptiſan; if after two or three day; 
the Pain of the (ide was not leſſened, but continued viz. 
lent, I blooded him again the ſecond time, and adv! eq 
him to perſiſt in the uſe of the Glyſters. But as to Glvſte;; 
it is to be noted as well in this as in other Fevers, they are 
not to be continually and long uſed, when the Diſeaſe à. 
bates, eſpecially in Hyſterick Women, and Hypochon— 
draick Men, for the Blood and Humours of ſuch are eaſily 
changed, aid ſoon exagitated and heated, and fo the 
Oeconomy of the Body is diſturb'd, and the febrile Symp. 
toms vex the Sick longer than is uſual. | 

But to return to the buſineſs. While by this means 
time was allowed the Diſeaſe, whereby the Blcod might 
leiſurely lake off thoſe hot Particles which fell upon the 
Lungs and Pleura, all the Symptoms were wont to go of 
ealily, Whereas when the Diſeaſe was ſtormed in a War- 
like manner by a great force of Remedies, the Sick was 
either kill'd, or his Life was at leaſt redeemed by Bleeding 
oftner repeated than either the Genius of the Dileaſe re. 
quired, or indeed would bear: For whereas in a true 
Pleuriſie, Bleeding repeated did the buſineſs, and was a- 
lone ſufficient for the Cure, (if hot Medicines, and à hot 
Regimen did not hinder ;) on the contrary, in this Symp- 
tom it was ſufficient to Bleed once, or at moſt twice, if 
the Sick riſe, and ule cooling Liquors; for there was no 
neceſſity, as far as I could oblerve, to bleed oftner, unlels 
the ſaid Symptom was much heightned by heat coming 
from abroad, nor in this caſe only without danger. 

Upon this occaſion 1 would ſpeak a few things of this, 
Viz, That it is commonly ſaid, that a Pleuriſie is ſometimes 
malignant, and that then it w:ll not bear Bleeding, at 
leaſt not ſo often as this Dileale commonly requires. 
think indeed, that a true and Eſſential /leurifife, which, 3s 
Will be ſaid hereafter, comes inciffterently in all Conſtitu— 
tions of all Years, does always indicate repeated Bleeding 


yet at ſometimes it happens that a Fever properly Ep de. 


mick, 


Of the Epidemick Coughs, Cc. 177 


mick, by reaſon of ſudden alteration of the manifeſt Qua- 
lities of the Air, freely puts off the mor bifick Matter upon 
the Pleura or Lungs, and yet the Fever remains wholly 
the ſame. In this Caſe, although Bleeding may be allow- 
ed, that the Symptom, if it rage much, may be abated; 
yet, generally ſpeaking, more Blood ought not to be 
drawn upon the account of the Symptom than the Fever 
requires on which the Symptom depends: For if the Fever 
be of that Nature, that it does not abhor repeated 
Bleeding, it may be repeated in a Pleuriſie, which is the 
Symptom of it, But if the Fever will not bear repeated 
Bleeding, it will do no good: yea, it will do hurt in 
the Pleuriſie, which ſtands and falls with the Fever. In 
this manner, in my opinion, was the Symptomatical Pleu- 
riſe, which accompanied the Fever that raged in this 
Place at the time the Coughs began, viz, in Winter, in the 
Year 1675, and therefore I muſt acquaint you, that I 
think he moves very uncertainly, that has not in the cure 
of Fevers always before his Eyes the Conſtitution of the 
Year, as it favours the producing epidemically this or that 
Diſeaſe, and all the aches Diſeaſes that concur, and are 
form'd into the likeneſs and ſimilitude of it. 

In November, in the 'forelaid Year, Mr. Thomas Wind- 
ham, the eldeſt Son of Sir Francis Windham, was my Pati- 
ent; in this Fever he complained of a Pain in the Side and 
other Symptoms wherewith others were afflicted that had 
this Diſeaſe; I bled him once, and applied a Bliſter to 
his Neck; Glyſters were daily injected, and he drank 
cooling Ptiſans and Emulſions, and ſometimes Milk water 
or Small beer, and I adviſed that he ſhould keep from 
Bed for ſome hours; and by this Method he recovered 
4 a few Days, and Purging being uſed, he was quite 
well. 

But it is to be noted, that though the Symptoms which 
were wont to come upon the Cough, weremoſt commonly 
theſe this Winter, yet the Cough invading alone with- 
out them, reigned chiefly at that Seaſon, The Cure 
of it did not require either Bleeding or Glyſters, if a 
Fever was not raiſed by a hot Regimen and hot Medi- 
cines; for the forbidding of Fleſh and Wine, and ſuch 
ſpirituous Liquors which are apt to occaſion a Fever, 
and ordering the Sick to £0 abroad into the open Air, 

Was 


178 Of the Epidemick Coughs, &c. 


was ſufficient to quiet it. Moreover, [I oder'd the folloy. 
ing Lozenges to be taken often, which indeed are the beſt 
I wg knew to ſtop Coughs which are occaſtoned by taking 
cold, 


Take of Sugar candy two Pounds and a half, boyl it in 3 
ſufficient quantity of common Water, till it flicks to thy 
fingers; and then add of the Powder of Liquoriſh, Ele. 
campane, the Seeds of Aniſe and Angelica, of each half 
an Ounce, of the Powders of Orris, and of Flowers if 
Sulphur, each two Drams; of the Chymical Oyl of the 
Seeds of Aniſe two Scruples : Make Tablets according to 
Art, which let him always carry in his Pocket, and take 
one of them often. 


But before I make an end of this Diſcourſe concerning 
Epidemick Diſeaſes, I muſt anſwer one Objection, which 
I foreſee will be urged againſt ſome of it, viz, That it 
does not ſufficiently provide againſt that Malignity, 
which is in moſt of thoſe Diſeaſes. I neither can, nor 
will endeavour to vilifie the Opinion received of Learn. 
ed Men of all Ages concerning Malignity; for it mani- 
teſtly appears in moſt Epidemick Diſeaſes; I only deſire 
to propoſe what I think concerning the nature of it, that 
my Practice may not ſeem diſagreeable to Reaſon ; for I, 


according to the Learned Scaliger, will be governed by 
Reaſon. 


Won mihi fed ratione, aut que ratio eſſe videtur 
Mlito; ſecurus quid mordicus hic tenet, aut hic. 


Therefore I think that all that Malignity which is in 
Epidemicks ( whatever the ſpecifick Nature of it be) 
conſiſts and ends in very hot and ſpirituous Particles, 
which are more or leſs contrary to the nature of the Hu- 
mours contained in the Humane Bodies; becauſe only 
ſuch Particles can ſo ſoon alter the Humours, as we 


ſee they are in malignant Diſeaſes. I think alſo, that 


theſe hot and ſpirituous Particles endeavour chiefly to 
aſſimilate; becauſe, according to the Law of Nature, 
every active Principle is buſied in creating its like, and 
in turning and accommodating whatever is contrary . 

| it's 


Of the Epidemick Coughs, Cc. 179 


its own Genius; ſo Fire generates Fire, and one infected 
with 2 malignant Diſeaſe infects another by an emiſſion of 
Spirits, which preſently aflimilate the Humours to be 
infected to themſelves, and pervert them to their own 


Nature. 
Theſe things being premiſed, it follows, that nothting 


is better than to eject the Particles by Sweat; for by this 


means the Diſeaſe may ſeem to be preſently rooted out : 


Hut this Experience contradicts, and teaches, that it can- 
not be done in every fort of malignity. For though in 


the Plague, the peſtilential Particles, both becauſe they 
are ſubtle, and alſo becauſe they reſide chiefly in the ſpi- 
rituous part of the Blood, may be diſſipated and ejected 
by an uninterrupted Sweat; yet in other Fvers, where 
the aſſimilating Particles are not fo ſubtle, and are incor- 
porated with groſſer Humours, the malignant Minera cans 


not only not be carried off by Sweat, but is very often en- 
' creaſed by thoſe ſudorifick Medicines whereby it is ſollicita- 


ted; for the more theſe hot and ipirituous Particles are 
moved by the uſe of hot things, the more the aſſimilating 
Faculty which they have is encreaſed; and the more thoſe 


Humours are heated whereon they act, the more freely 


are they aſſimilated, and yield to the impr eſſions of them; 
where as on the contrary, Reaſon ſeems to diate, that 
thoſe Medicines which are of a contrary Nature, do not 
only ſuppreſs the violence of the hot and acrid Particles, 
but alſo condenſe and ſtrengthen the Humours, ſo as that 
they may ſuſtain the force of the morbifick Spirits, or con- 
quer them; and Experience, my Miſtreſs, vouches that 
the Purple Spots of Fevers, and the black Puſtles of the 
Small. Poæ more readily encreaſe when the Patient is heat- 
ed; and that they, according tothe degree of the moderate 
Regimen, which is very agreeable to them, are wont to 
decreaſe and be leſſened. 

Now if any one ſhould ask me how it comes to pals, that 
ſeeing malignity conſiſts of hot and ſpirituous Particles, 
there ſhould be very often ſuch ſmall Signs of a Fever, even 
in Diſeaſes that are highly malignant. I Anſwer, firſt, it 
plainly appears in the chief and mot notable inſtance of 
malignity, the Plague; that the morbitick Particles are ſo 
very ſubtle and fine, eſpecially when it begins, that, like 


the Air, it paſtes the _— and kills the Spirits before 
2 10 


180 Of the Fpidemick Coughs, &c: 


it can raiſe an Ebullition; and ſo the Sick dies without ; 
Fever. 

But in that leſſer degree of Malignity, which is found iz 
other Epidemicks, the febrile Symptoms are ſo ſmall foe. gs 
times, by reaſon of a confuſion raiſed in the Blood and Hu- 
mours by the inimical Particles contained in their Boſom, 
whereby Nature, being as it were oppreſſed, is not able 
to produce thoſe regular Symptoms which are fuitable to 
the Diſeaſez but almoſt all the Phenomena are irregular, 
by reaſon the Oeconomy is quite ſubverted; in which caſe 


the Fever is often depreſſed, which, if it conld proceed A 
according to its own Genius, ſhonld be very high: And 
ſometimes allo fewer ſigns of the Fever ſhew themſelves MW let 
than the Genius of the Diſeaſe requires, by reaſon of the lia 
Tranſlation of the malignant Minera upon the Genus Nerve. Sp 
ſum, or upon other Parts of the Body, or upon the Hu- thi 
mours, without the Territories of the Blood, whit 1 A 
the matter occaſioning the Diſeaſe, ſhould be yet tur- to 
ent. all 
: But however it be, I cannot ſo much as gueſs what o- Pa 
ther Method of Cure is to be appointed for any malignity by 
beſides that which is proper to the Epidemick, to which thi 
it belongs. So that whether the Epidemick be of the ab 
number of thoſe that require, firſt Concoction of the febrik ef 


matter, and preſently after the ejection of it rightlydiſpo- 
ſed by Sweat, or of thoſe that endeavour to go off by 


20 
ſome Eruption, or alſo of thoſe that require the help df 5 
Art to make a way for them; I ſay, in all theſe kinds the te. 
malignity, th: Companion of rhe Diſeaſe, will ſtand and Di 
fall with it. eeping pace with it, and going off when it Ty 
goes, and coniequert!y whatſoever Evacuation agrees with th 
the Fever, the ſa e agrees with the malignity, though pe 
the evacuations are contrary to one another; therefore pe 
Sweat, which follows Concoction as its effect; will cure m. 
that malignity which accompanies Autumnal Agues, and an 
alſo the continual Fever, which is of the ſame Nature, al- W. 
ſo the ſeaſonable ripening of the ſmall Ahceſſes carries of W. 
the malignity in the Sau-Pox; and ſo of the reſt; in all bo 
which the peculiar ſort of malignity is beſt conquered by m 
theſe ways and means, whereby thoſe peculiar Diſeaſes to by 
Which it belongs are eaſieſt cured whether by this Me- m 
thod or any other, This Reaſon dictates, and is ever, N 


where confirmed by Experience. CHAY.W ch 


18 


_—_ n 


CHAT. VI. 
The RECAPITUL ATION, 


AN D fo at length we have ſhown, that the ſpace of 
Years wherein the foregoing Obſervations were col» 
leted, produced five ſorts of Conſtitutions viz. five pecu- 
liar Diſpoſitions of the Air, producing ſo many ſeveral 
Species of Epidemicks, namely Fevers: But the firſt of 
theſe, which reigned in thoſe Years wherein Autumnal 


| Agues were moſt frequent, ſeemed the only one, according 
to my Obſervation, wherein Nature ſeemed to moderate 
all the Symptoms, ſo as to diſpoſe the Febrile matter pre- 


pared by due concoction to go off at a certrin time, either 
by a ſufficient Sweat, or by large Tranſpiration, and 
therefore I call it the Depuratory Fever; and truly I am 
apt to believe, that this was the chief and primary Fever 
of Nature, both as to the regular Method ſhe uſed in pro- 


moting the morbifick Matter, and in digeſting it at an 


appointed time; and alſo becauſe this more frequently oc- 
curred, than other Fevers, For it is probable, that in- 
termitting Fevers rage oſtner Epidemically than any other 
Diſeaſes, 1f we believe thoſe that have wrote ſo many and 


{ach large Treatiſes in former Ages of the frequency of 
them, whatever the reaſon ſhould be, why they have ap- 


peared fo ſeldom, ſince the laſt Plague in London; for the 


Peſtilential Fever was that Forerunner of all thoſe inflam- 


matory Fevers, Which invadedfafterwards z and unleſs I 
am deceived, all thoſe excellent and neceſſary Axioms 
which Hippocrates and other ancient Phyſicians delivered, 
were adapted to the primary Fever we have ſpoken of a- 
bove, whereby it is ſo to be governed, that the Febrile 
matter may be prepared to make a true Criſis by Sweat; 


- but] don't underſtand how thoſe Aphoriſms can be accom- 


modated to thoſe ſubſequent forts, that have a different 
Nature, and are ſeldom wont to be cured by any ſuch Me- 
thod: But however this thing be, it is worth notice, that 

3 whereas 


133 
4 


FE 1 
7 
1 
Fi A 
11 
7 
ll 
N 
** 
| 
15% 
pt 
"o 
v, 
14 


182 The Recapitulation. 


whereas this Fever, that depended on that Conſtitutioy 
wherem Intermittents prevailed over the reſt ( if it conti- 
nued long, or if the Sick was exhauſted by too great evz- 
cuations ) ſometimes turned to an Ague, Thole Fever; 
which raged the following Years, tho' they continued very 
long, very rarely intermitted, which was a plain ſign, that 
that continual Fever, and thoſe Agues did in ſome fort x 
gree in their Nature, or were not very much different 
from one another. 

Now if any one ſhould ask me how the ſpecies of ; 
continual-Fever may be gather'd from the Signs delivered 
by me in the deſcription of Fevers, when for the moſt 
part every one of them are intangled with thoſe Sym- 
ptoms that belong in general to all Fevers, as Heat, Thirſt, 
Reitleſſneſs, and the like: I anſwer, it is difficult, but 
not plainly impoſtible; if any one ſerioaſly weighs all 
the Cirumſtances which I have ſet down in the foregoing 
Hiſtory, eſpecially if he ſearch in ſome great Town or 
ſome other Populous Place; ſuppoſe, for Inſtance, a 
Phyſician is called to one that has a continual Fever, he 
has firſt this help to inform, his Judgment aright, 21k. 
he may either from his own obſervation, or by others, ealily 
know what other Diſeaſes, beſides this Fever, rage Epi- 
demically, in thoſe places, and of what kinds they are; 
which being known, he need not doubt any more of what 
kind that Fever is which atrends this other raging Epide- 
mick; for. tho” it may be ſo, that the Fever only ſhews 
it ſelf by thoſe Sy mptoms which are common to all Fevers, 
eſpecially if it be confuſed and diſordered by a method 
which is quite contrary to the Cure of it; yet other Epr 
demicks will plainly ſhew the Characters that are proper 
and peculiar to its Nature and Genius; for inſtance, be 
that ſhou'd look upon the Small- Pox, will eaſily cone. 
cture (it he rightly underſtand the Hiſtory of the Diſcak) 
the firſt day the Puſt les appear by their bigneis and co- 
lour, and the like, to What kind of Small-Pox this part!- 
cular Sp-cies is to be referrdz and when he has once 
known the ſort of Small Pox which is moſt in that Yeat, 
and in thoſe places, he will plainly underſtand the Species 
of any Fever raging at that time, and in thoſe places, 
And truly, i: | had exactly learned the Hiſtory of Diſeaſes, 
(which 1 do not pretend to) having ſeen any Epidemich 


into a Frenzie, and other dangerous Symptoms, 
cing Sweat. In the Peſtilential Fever which followed 


The Recapituation. 183 


{ ſhould not doubt to declare the kind of Fever then reign- 
ing, tho' I never ſee it; fo having ſeen any Fever, I 
ould eaſily know what Epidemick Diſeaſe accompanied 
it; the Small-Pox for inſtance, the Meaſles, the Bloody- Flux 
and the like; for ſome peculiar kind of theſe, as well as a 
peculiar Fever, conſtantly accompanies every particular 
Conſtitution. But ſecondly, beſides thoſe ſigns which the 
conſideration of Epidemicks invading together ſuggeſts ; 
alſo the T A of every Fever gives ſomg light for 
the knowing the Species of it, although, as we mentioned 
above, Fevers in general have ſome Symptoms that are 
common to all, yet there are ſome certain notes of diſtin- 
ion, which Nature has peculiarly impreſſed upon each 
Species: But becauſe they are ſomewhat obſcure, they are 
perceived only by thoſe that warily and exactly ſearch eve- 
rything. Among thoſe diſtinguiſhing ſigns I have always 
thought, that Sweat, or drynels in this or that time of the 
Diſeaſe, ſhew'd chiefly the Species, if it were not forced 
from its Natural State by an improper Method, and this ap- 
peared plainly to me in all thoſe Epidemick Fevers thoſe 
Obſervations contain: For inſtance, in thoſe Fevers 
which raged, while Autumnal Intermittents were decay- 
ing, the external parts of the Sick were dry, nor Was there 


the leaſt ſign of Sweat, before the Concoction of the fe- 


brile matter, Which was moſt commonly perfe&ed on the 
fourteenth day; nor could Sweat be provoked without 
great danger to the Sick, who was preſently n 

y for- 


this (which led the Dance of thoſe inflammatories that in- 


| vaded from that time) no Sweat broke out of its own ac- 


cord, but it might be raiſed by Sudorificks, even the firſt 
Days of the Diſeaſe, and when it was once raiſed, the 


Sick was freed of all the Symptoms. In the Fever next 
lucceeding, Which accompanied the Small-Pox in thoſe 


Years wherein they were regular, the Sick was of his own 


accord ſubie& to violent Sweats at the very beginning of 


| 


the Diſeaſe, but if the Sick indulg'd them, all the Sym- 
ptoms were preſently increaſed. In thoſe two Fevers, 
which accompanied the two irregular kinds of Small Pox, 


and the Bloody-Flux, the Sweat was alſo irregular ; but it 
F moft commonly began at the firſt Day, though the Sweat 


N 4 Wh ich 


184 The Recapitulation, 


which accompanied the Fever was ſomewhat larger 
than that which accompanied the latter; but neither fe- 
lieved the Sick; for it did not proceed from previous Con- 
coction, but from a confuſed motion of ill Particles. 

It ſeems very difficult to me to diſcover the Species of a 
new Fever the firſt Year of a Conſtitution when none have 
ſeen any Specimen of it, nor can imagine what Epidemicks 
are to come, Which the Fever moſt commonly fore-runs, 
It would be trouble ſome to mention all thoſe things which 
occurred imthoſe Years of which we have treated, where- 
by it might appear that ſome not very obſcure ſigns were 
ſuggeſted by Nature, whereby being help'd we were able 
to do this; and furthermore, this knowledge will neceſſa- 
rily depend on a diligent and accurate obſervation of all 
the circumſtances: But though it ſhould be difficult, yea, 
if we ſhould ſuppoſe it plainly impoſſible to diſtingu:th the 
Species of a new Fever, when it firſt begins, yet as to the 
cure, the indication from ſuch things as do good or harm 
is at lcaſt left to us, whereby we may by little and little 
find 4 way to ſecure the Patient, if we do not make too 
much vaſt, than which I think there is nothing more in- 
jurious, and that ſuch as have had Fevers have been de. 
ſtroyed by it more than any other thing; nor am I aſha. 
m-d to confeſs, that more than once I have adviſed wel! 
for iny ſelf and Patient in doing nothing, when it was not 
plain to me What ought to be done; for whilſt I waited for 
an opportunity, the Fever either went off gradually of it 
ſelf, or was reduced to ſucha Type as I knew how to cure, 
But it is a fad thing, that moſt of the Sick do not under- 
{| -10, that it is as much the part of a skilful Phyſician 
ſom-cimes to do nothing, as at other times to give the 
moſt eff-tual Remedies, and fo they will not receive the 
benefi of a juſt and fair roceeding, but count them either 
the effects of N-gligenceor Ignorance; whereas the moſt 
ignor..nt Wack knuws how to add Medicine to Medicine, 
as weli as the moſt prudent Phy fician, 

And ih.ie are in a manner the things Which [I have hi- 
theri.. obl.rved, Which could not be reduced to any Rule 
co:..c:ning the Species of Epidemick Diſeaſes, in that or- 
dir herein wa invaded from the Year 61, to the end 
of de Year 75, at Which time the Small-Pox, and the 
ggncinual Fevers, tueir Companions, Which reigned about 

ö | ; ; Lyi9 


Of the intercurrent Fevers. 185 


two Years, now growing mild ſeemed :o be now going 
off; what Diſeaſes will follow, he only knows that knows 
all things. 


— ——— 
———. — — 


SECT. VI CH A P. I. 
| Of the Intercurrent F EV E K. 


| T H E Obſervations of Years, which I have now de- 
| ſcribed ſufficiently argue, that ſome Fevers are de- 
ſervedly called Stationary ; I mean ſuch as proceed from 
ſome particular, and yet not well known, Conſtitution of 
> MW Mis or another Year, Every one in his order prevails, 
and rages very much, and is as it were ſuperior to all the 
reſt, through all that continued Series of Years. Whe- 
) ther other Species beſides thoſe that have been now men- 
tioned ; and alſo whether in an exact courſe of Years one 
followed the other in a conſtant Order; or whether. it be 
otherwiſe, I cannot yet tell, But there are alſo other 
continual Fevers, Which though they rage ſometimes more, 


lometimes leſs, yet becauſe they were mixed with all ſorts 
r of Stationary Fevers, and themſelves in the ſame Year ins 
t WF diflerently ; I therefore think they ought to be called Ja- 
: tercurrents; and what | have Learned hitherto by obſerva» 
- tion of their Nature, and of the Method of Cure belong- 
1 ing to them, I will ſet down in the following Chapters; 
e they are, the Scarlet Fever, Pleuriſie, Baſtard Peripneumo- 
e nia, Rheumatiſme, Eryſipelatoſe Fever, Quinſie, and perhaps 
r ſome other, 
| And now, ſeeing a Fever either as yet accompanies all 
„ theſe Diſeaſes, or at leaſt has accompanied them till it went 
off by exonerating the febrile Matter according to the Na- 
. ture of the Diſeaſe, upon this or that part, I do not at all 
e doubt, but that the Fever is to be accounted the primary 
'- Diſeaſe, and the other diſorders, from whence the other 
d Diſeaſes moſt commonly take their Name, are Symptoms, 
e which chiefly reſpe& the manner of the Criſis, or the part 


t mt which the force of the Diſeaſe ruſhes, But if the 
0 8 : | thing | 


186 Of the intercarrent Fevers. 


p i 
thing be agreed upon, I will not contend about Names 
though I may give a Diſeaſe this or that Name, as 
pleaſe. 

It is to be noted, that as the ſtationary Fevers where. 
of we have treated above, where more or leſs Epidemica, 
as we ſaid, according as the Conſtitution of Years, found. 
ed upon a ſecret and inexplicable diſpoſition of the Air fa. 
voured them, ſo theſe Intercurrents ſometimes, though 
not ſo frequently as the other, ragid Epidemically ; Fer 
though moſt commonly they proceeded from this or that 
1 diſorder of particular Bodies, whereby the 

ood and Humours were ſome way vitiated, yet ſome 
times they took their riſe immediately from ſome general 
cauſe in the Air, diſpoſing Mens Bodies ſo by the manifeſ 
Qualities, that ſuch and ſuch diſorders of the Blood and 
Humours ſhould be generated, as were the immediate 
Cauſes of ſuch Epidemick Intercurrents, as when a violer| 
Froſt continuing long, and a good while in the Spring, is 
ſuddenly ſucceeded by a hotter Seaſon, Pleurifies, Quin, 
and ſuch like Diſeaſes, are wont to invade, whatever i; 
the general Conſtitution of Years. And becauſe thek 
rage ſometimes as much Epidemically as others, therefore 
to diſtinguiſh theſe from ſuch Fevers, Which are determi- 
ned to a certain Series of Years, we call thoſe that are 
indifferently common to all Years Intercurrents. 

But how great ſoever the difference is betwixt theſe two 
forts of Fevers, as to the Cauſes proceeding from the Air, 
yet with reſpect to other external and procatartick Cauſes 
they often agree, To pals by now the Contagion, that 
fometimes occaſions ſtationary Fevers, and ' Surfeiting, 
which occaſions both ſorts ; the evident external Caule of 
moſt Fevers is to be ſought for hence, viz. becauſe the 
Sick either left of Cloaths too ſoon, or after being hot 
with Exerciſe, expoſed himſelfunwarily to the Cold; up- 
on Which account the Pores being ſuddenly ſtop'd, and 
thoſe Vapours retained, which would otherwiſe have pals'd 
through them, this or that ſort of Fever is kindled in the 
Blood, as either the general Conititution, which at that 
time reigns, or the particular diſorder of the Humours 1s 
more enclined to this or that fort of Fever; and I verily 
believe more have dicd on this account,than by the Plague, 
Sword, or Famine altogether : For if any Phyſician hall 

enquire 


Diſeaſes we have treated of above, he will almoſt always 


that upon one of theſe accounts he was ſeized with the Diſ- 


term Stationary, and are plainly Symptoms of them; in 


and by what way that is eaſieſt cured,whether by Bleeding 
” Sweating, or any other Method; for if this be negle&ed 


ly only Symptoms: To this I anſwer, That perhaps they 


always neceſſarily produce them: For inſtance, in an ef- 


that Conſtitution of Years, and depends on it only acci- 


Of the intercurrent Fevers. 187 


enquire ſtrictly of the Sick, concerning the firſt occaſion 
of their Diſeaſe; if it be of the number of thoſe acute 


fd, that either the ſick raſhly left off ſome Cloaths that 
he was accuſtom'd to, or that he expoſed himſelf ſuddenly 
to the cold, when his Body was heated with motion, and 


eaſe; Wherefore I always adviſe my Friends, that the 
ſhould never leave off any Cloaths, unleſs it be a Mont 
before Midſummer, or a Month after : I likewiſe care- 
fally 2. 59 them to avoid cold after being heated with 
Exercile. 

But here it muſt be noted, That though theſe Diſeaſes, 
which I am to treat of under the Title of Intercurrents, are 
moſt of them, if not all, eſſential Diſeaſes, yet often ſome 
diſorders reſembling theſe as to their Phenomena, and allo 

called by the ſame Names, come upon thoſe Fevers which 


which Caſe that Method, which ought to be uſed when 
they are Eſſential Diſeaſes is not proper, but rather that 
which the Fevers requires, the Symptoms whereof they 
now are, and for the Cure of them, the Method which is 
peculiar for them muſt be only lightly rouch'd upon; but 
in general, we muſt carefully mind the Fever of the Year, 


weihall often err, to the great hazard of the Patient, If 
any one ſhould object, that theſe very Diſorders, which TI 
call Eſſential Diſeaſes, and of which I now treat, are real- 


may be Symptoms, with reſpec to the Fevers to which they 
delong , yet. atleaſt they are Symptoms of Fevers Which 


tential Pleuriſie, the Fever is of that nature, as it always 
puts off the Morbifick Matter upon the Pleura. In an eſ- 
ſential Angina, it is ſo diſpoſed as to put off the ſame upon 
the Jaws, and ſo of the reſt, When either of the afore- 
laid Di ſeaſes comes upon a Fever, Which belong to this or 


dentally, and is not neceſſarily produced, upon this account 
they are very different one from another, But now, that 
Eſſential Diſeaſes, as I call them, may be rightly diſtin- 

guiſhed 


eier 


188 Of the intereurrent Fevers. 


guiſhed from thoſe which are only Symptomatical, it i; 
very neceſſary for us to conſider, that what Symptoms ac. 
company at the invaſion of this or that Stationary Fete 
ſuch always come at the beginning of a Pleuriſie or a Oui. 
fie, when they are only the accidents of ſuch a Feber, 
which was perceived in the 'foreſaid Sy mwtomatick Pleny;: 
fie, which came upon the Fever that Raged in the Winter 
of the Year 1675: For as many as were afflicted with this 
Pleuriſie had Pams, when they were ſeized, in their Heads, 
Backs, aud Limbs, which were the moſt certain and moſt 
common Symptoms of all thoſe Fevers which invaded be. 
fore the Pleurifies began, and continued after they went 
off; whereas when either of theſe Intercurrents were Eſſen. 
tial Diſeaſes, that proceeded in the ſame manner in all 
Vers, having nothing common with the ſtationary Fever, 
the igned at that time. Moreover, all the Symptoms 
whic © "iſe afterwardsare more conſpicuous, when they are 
not obicured and confounded by the mixture of other Ph 
#omena, Which are of a different nature, and belong to a. 
nother Fever, Beſides, the time of the Year wherein moſt 
eſſential Intercurrents, though not all, come, ſhews often to 
what kind ſuch a Diſeaſe is to be referred. Bat laſtly, he 
is fitted to find out the Diagnoſtick of theſe Diſeaſes, and 
all others, who by daily and dilligent Obſervation, has 
fearch'd throughly the I en of them, ſo that upon 
firſt ſight he knows preſently how to diſtinguiſh the kind, 
though perhaps the Characteriſtick differences of ſome of 
them are fo ſubtle and delicate, that they cannot be ex. 
prels'd in Words to another. 

But foraſmuch as theſe various kinds of Fevers, as far as 
we can underſtand, by weighing the Phenomena that be- 
long to the Diſeaſes, and to the merhod of Cure, owe 
their Original to ſome peculiar Inflammation of the Blood 
tht is proper to every Diſeaſe, I count the chief buſineſs of 
Cure co.:{iſts in cooling and qualifying it ; and I wholly en. 
deavour to eject the morbiftick Matter by ſuch a Method 
as is agreeable tothe Genius of the Diſeaſe, and prov'd by 
Experience to cure the Diſeaſe readily. And truly in cu- 
ring of all Fevers, he hits the Mark who certainly knows, 
by what way the febrile Matter is to be excluded, viz. Þy 
Bleeding, Sweating, Purging, or any other more proper 


Way, 
TU CHAP; 


— _ _ — 


CHAT U 
Of the Scarlet Fever. 


H E Scarlet Fever, though it may happen at any time, 
yet it moſt commonly comes at the latter end of Sum- 
mer; at Which time it ſeizes whole Families, but eſpeci- 
ally Children. At the beginning they ſhake and ſhiver as 
in other Fevers, but they are not very ſick; afterwards 
the Skin is Spotted with ſmall red Spots; they are more 
frequent, and much larger and redder, but not fo uniform 
as thoſe of the Aea/les; they continue two or three Days 
and then vaniſh: After them ſome Scales like Bran are 
ſprinkled over the Body, and theſe Scales come and go 
ſucceſſively twice or thrice. 
I reckon this Diſeaſe is nothing elſe than a moderate 
Efferveſcence of the Blood, occaſioned by the heat of the 
foregoing Summer, or ſome other way; and therefore I 
do nothing to hinder the Deſpumation of the Blood, and 
the cjecting of the peccant Matter through the Pores of the 
Skin, which is eaſily done by the Blood it ſelf ; wherefore 
1 forbear Bleeding and the uſe of Glyſters, by which 
Forms of Remedies, Revulſion being made, I think the 
: offenſive Particles are more mixed with the Blood, and 
the Motion that is more agreeable to Nature is obſtru- 
ed : And I alſo on the other hand forbear giving Cordi- 
als, by the heat whereof the Blood is more impetuoully 

agitated than is agreeable to that gentle and quiet ſepara- 
tion, whereby the whole buſineſs is done. Moreover a 
violent Fever may be occifioned by this means, « I think 

it is ſufficient, that the Sick abſtain wholly from Fleſh and 
from all ſpirituous Liquors whatever, and that he keep al- 
Ways within, but not always a Bed, But when the Scales 
are quite gone off, and the Symptoms ceaſed, I think it 

Proper to purge the Sick with ſome gentle Medicine that is 
- *grecable to his Age and Strength; and by this Juople, 

an 


190 Of a2 Pleuriſie. 


and plain natural Method, this Name of a Diſeaſe, for i 
is ſcarce any thing more, may be eaſily and ſafely removed: 
Whereas on the contrary, if we diſturb Nature more, e. 
ther by keeping the Sick continually in Bed, or by Cori. 
als, and other needleſs Remedies too Learnedly, and as it 
commonly appears thruſt in above Meaſure, Secundum As. 
tem, the Diſeaſe is preſently heightned, and the ſick dis 
by the over officiouſneſs of his Phyſician, 

But you muſt take notice, if Epileptick Convulſions, or | 
Coma come upon this Diſeaſe at the beginning of the 
Eruption, which ſometimes happens to Children aud 
young People that have this Diſeaſe, a large and itrony 
Bliſter muſt be applyed to the Neck, and a Paregorick d 
Diacodium muſt be preſently given, and mult be repeated 
every night till the Patient recovers; and he muſt ber: 
dered to uſe for his ordinary Drink Milk boyled with thrice 
the quantity of Water, and mult forbear Fleſh. 


$ 


. 
Of « PLEURISIE. 


T Hs Diſeaſe, that is as frequent as any other, comes 

at any time, but eſpecially betwixt Spring and Sum. 
mer, for at that time the Blood, heated by the nearnels ol 
the Sun, runs violently into Efferveſcences and inordinate 
Motions, it chiefly falls upon thoſe that are of a ſanguine 
Conſtitution, and frequently Country 3 and thoſe 
accuſtomed to hard Labour. It ordinarily begins with a 
ſhaking and ſhivering, and then heat, thirſt, reſtleſneh, 
and * Symptoms of a Fever follow, ſufficiently known. 
After a few hours, (though ſometimes it is much longer be. 
fore this Symptom comes) the Patient is taken with 
violent pricking Pain in one of his Sides about the Ribs 
Which ſometimes creeps towards the Shoulderblades, ſome 
times towards the Backbone, and ſometimes towards the 
Breaſt ; he coughs frequently, which occaſions great Pail 


by Reaſon of the diſturbance of the Inflamed Parts, 8 


Of a Pleuriſie. 191 


tat ſometimes he holds his Breath to prevent Coughing. 
The Matter which is ſpit up at the begining of the Diſ- 
| \eaſe is little and thin, and often mixed with Particles of 
-W Blood; but in the Proceſs of the Diſeaſeit is more concoct- 
lt ed, and alſo mixed with Blood; the Fever in the mean time 
i I keeps the ſame pace, and is help'd on by thoſe Symptoms 
„that proceed from it; and the ſaid Fever, with all its Con- 
i comitants (namely, the Cough, the ſpitting of Blood, the 
Pain, and the like) is leſſened by degrees, according to 
the degree of free Expectoration of the morbifick Matter. 
he But the Matter occaſioning this Diſeaſe, does not always 
d In the proceſs of it attain the Concoction that is due to 
e Expectoration ; for it frequently happens that the Matter 
0! Which is ſpit up is yet little and thin, as at the beginning 
of the Diſeaſe, and conſequently the Fever and other Sym- 
7 W-ptoms do not at all remit till they have killed the Patient 
t Wand in the mean while he is ſometimes bound in his Body, 
and ſometimes too looſe, the Stools being frequent, and very 
liquid: It ſometimes happens, when the Diſeaſe is very 
violent, and Bleeding has been omitted, the Patient is 
pot able to Cough, bur labouring under a great difficulty 
dt breathing, is in a manner ſuffscatec by the violence of 
the Inflammation, which is ſometimes ſo very great, that 
he cannot expand his Breaſt large enough for Reſpiration 
Without great pain, andiſometimes when the Inflammation 
Is violent, and when Bleeding has not been uſed, which 
dught to have been done at the beginning of the Diſeaſe, 
an Impoſthume is preſently ocoaſioned, and the Cavity of 
the Breaſt is filled with Matter. In which caſe, though 
e Original Fever either wholly ceaſes, or is at leaſt leſ- 
ned, yet the Patient is ſtill in danger; for an Expyema, 
gr an Hettick Fever following, the poor Wretch dies Con- 

mptive. 

But now, though a Pleuriſie commonly take its riſe 
om the proper and ſpecifick Inflammation of the Blood, 
EW hich is wont to produce it when it is an Original Diſeaſe, 
et it comes ſometimes accidently on other Fevers, of 
Nhat kind ſoever they be, from a Precipitation of the fe- 
ile Matter upon the Pleura, or intercoſtal Muſcles ; 
ind it happens moſt commonly at the beginning of the Fe- 
„ the Febrile Matter being as yet crude, and not ſub- 
Wed by a ſufficient Ebullition, and fo not prepared "= a 
| ue 


192 Of Pleuriſie. 


Aue ſeparation by a more convenient way: But it is wa 


commonly occaſioned by an un ſeaſonable and prepoſtero 
uſe of hot Medicines, ſuch as are often given by Gente 
Women: But their Charity would be better beſtowed g 
feeding the Poor than phyſicking them; and they dg f 
for ſooth, with deſign (if they have any at all) to fore 
Sweat at the beginning of the Fever, little thinking of tj 
ill conſequence of it; for Nature, being diſturbed by tj 
means, is forced to expel the crude Humour any way; an; 
O ſometimes the force of the febrile Mattter falls upon th; 
Meninges of the Brain, and cauſes a Fenſie; and ome 
times upon the Membrane covering the Ribbs, and then; 
Pleuriſie is occaſioned, eſpecially when the Age and Cu 
ſtitution of the Sick, and the Sea ſon of the Year, betwi 
Spring and Summer, contributes to it; for at that tine 
Fe vers are inclined to turn to Pleuriſies. f 

The colour of the Blood taken away by Bleeding, ſem; 
to ſhew, that a Pleuriſie takes its riſe Red ſuch a Precip. 
tation as we have mentioned; for the Blood, at leaſt th 
which is taken away at the ſecond time, is like melted d. 
et, and the Super ficies like true Pus; and yet in this its 
different from it, for it is cloſely knit with the Fibres, lik 


the other Blood, nor will it run like Pus: For that par e 


of another colour, when it is torn from the reſt, is like 
a tough Skin, and perhaps nothing elſe than the fanguine 
ous Fibres, Which having put off their red and natur 
Tegument by precipitation, grow into this whitiſh Men 
brane by Reaſon of the cold of the ambient Air. Butt 
is to be noted by the bye, that if the Blood does not flo 
horizontally with a right Stream from the opened Ven, 
but runs down upon the Skin perpendicularly ; it is oft! 
of another colour, how quick ſoever it runs: But I cont 
Ido not know the Reaſon of it, nor is the Sick ſo much 
eaſed by this kind of Bleeding as by the other jul 


ve 


now mentioned: Yea, when the Blood is taken away aftet 


this manner, if the Orifice be too ſmall, or if any thin! 
elle obſt ructs the free Paſſage, fo that it cannot come ol! 


with a full Stream, it is not like the Blood ct / leurir:cky 


nor is the Patient ſo much ealed. I have likewiſe obſer 


ved, that if the Blood treſh drawn, in what manner ſce. 1 


ver it flow, be ſtirred, the Super fice will be of as rel 
and florid a colour as in any other Diteaſe, But bond 
el 


Of a Pleuriſie. 193 


ml ver the Blood be, this Diſeaſe, though it has an ill name, 
cr and is more dangerous of it ſelf than any other, yet if it 
e be well managed it is eaſily cured, and indeed as certainly 


as any other Diſeaſe. 


4 


Having well conſidered all the various Phenomer of 


tore: | this Diſeaſe, I think it nothing elſe than a Fever occaſion- 


f th ed by a proper and peculiar Inflamamation of the Blood, 
tg + whereby Nature puts off the peccant Matter upon the 
, Pleura, and ſometimes on the Lungs, and ſo it cauſes a 
r Peripmeumonia, which I think differs only from a Pleurifie 


"= 


| 


W 
| 
: 


45 
3 
4 


fe 1 

A 4 
[ 
* 


in degree, and according to the greater height and longer 
"na j excent of the fame Caule, 


Therefore I propoſe this Method for the Cure of it, 


namely, That the Inflammation of the Blood be ſuppreſſed, 


and that the inflamed Particles of it, which have vio- 
lently ruſhed upon the Pleura, and inflamed it, be duly 
evacuated ; Wherefore depending moſt upon Bleeding, I 
order as ſoon as I am called, that ten Ounces of Blood, 
or thereabout, be taken away from the Arm of the affect- 


ed fide; and afterwards I preſcribe the following Potion 
to be taken preſently after Bleeding, 


Take of the Vater of red Poppies four Ounces, of Sal Pru- 
nella one Dram, of Syrup of Violet one Ounce; mingle 
them, and make a Draught, 


At the ſame time I order the following Emulſion. 


Take of Sweet Almons number ſix, of the Seed of Melons 
and Pompions, each half an Ounce, of the Seeds of Whits 
Poppies two Drams : Beat them together in a Marble 
Mortar, pouring gently upon them one Pint and a half of 
Barley water, of Roſe-water two Drums, of Sugar-candy 
half an Ounce , mingle them, and make an Emulſion ; 
give four Ounces every fourth hour. 


I alſo order Pectorals to be taken inivardly : For in- 
ſtance : 


Take of the Pectoral Decottion a Quart, of the Syrups of 
Violets and Maiden Hur, each one Qunce and an half; 
zuingle them, and make an Apozem 1, let him take half 4 
Pint thrice a Day, 

O Tate 


-» 
. — — 
o 


S. nk . 7; — R a . 
. —— =, 


194 Of 4 Pleuriſie. 


Take of Oyl of Sweet Almonds two Ounces, of Syrups if 
Lolets and Maiden- Hair, each one Ounce, of Sugar-cand, 
half a Dram; mingle them, make a Linctus according i 


Art, whereof let the Sick lick often in a Day. 


Oy! of Almonds by it ſelf, or Oyl of Flax-feeds freſh 
drawn is often uſed with good ſucceſs. 

As to the Diet, I forbid all Fleſh, and the Broath of 
it, though it be never ſo thin; and I order the Patient to 
eat of Oaten, and Barley broaths, and Panada, and to 
drink a Ptiſan made of Barley-water, with Sorrel-root; 
and Licoriſh, and the like, and ſometimes Small beer, 
Moreover I preſcribe the following Oyntment. 


Tak? of the Oyl of Sweete Almonds two Ounces, of the Oi. 
ments of Marſh-mallows and Pomatum, each one Ounce, 
aningle them, make a Liniment, wherewith anoint the 
Side affected morning and evening, apply upon it a Cab. 
bage Leaf. 


J alfo order he ſhould perſiſt in the uſe of the ſaid Re- 
medies through the whole courſe of the Diſeaſe. Of the 
lame day I am firſt called, if the Pain is very violent, | 
take away the ſame quantity of Blood, or elſe the day 
following, and fo tne third day: And after this manner | 
repeat Bleeding four times one day after another, (un 
leſs the Patient is well before) when the Pain and other 
Symptoms rage violently. But if the Diſeaſe, being more 
moderate, and leis dangerous, permit me to proceed more 
gently or if the Patient being weak, cannot well bear 
Bleeding repeated in ſuch ſhort diſtances, I do not repeat 
It agaly after it has been twice uſed, till a day or two be 
2 between ſuch Bleeding; in which caſe I always con- 
ider the things that contra-indicarte, viz, on this ſide the 
violence of the Diſeaſe, on the other the weakneſs of the 
Sick 5 and though in curing of Diſeaſes, 1 would always 
proceed as I thought convenient, fo as to order the taking 
away more or 1:1s Blood, according to the occaſion, yet | 
have ſeldom oblerved, that a confirmed Pleuriſie has been 
cured in grown People, with leſs than the loſs of forty 
Ounces of Blood or thereabout, though in Children once 
(I 


Of a Pleuriſie. 195 


or twice Bleeding is moſt commonly ſufficient 5; nor does 


the Looſeneſs, which {ſometimes comes upon this Diſeaſes 


- hinder the foreſaid repeated Bleeding: For, indeed, it 
may be {con ſtop'd by this very Method without any a- 


ſtringent Medicines, 
[ either quite omit Glyſters, -or take care that they be 
injected at as great a diſtance as may be betwixt the Bleed- 


' ings, and they ſhonld be made only of Milk and Sugar. 


During the whole courſe of the Diſeaſe, I take care 
that the Sick be not over-heated, and therefore I order 


that he keep from Bed ſome hours every day, according to 


his Strength, which is of fo great moment in this Diſeaſe, 


that if the Patient be kept in Bed continually, neither 


this large Evacuation of Blood, nor other Remedies, how 


cooling ſoever, will ſometimes do any good for taking off 


- 


the {aid 5ymptoms. 

Preſently after the laſt Bleeding, unleſs perchance it 
happens before, that all the Symptoms abate, and that 
the Patient ( who has been kept hitherto for ſome days 
from all ſpirituous Liquors, and ſtrong Nouriſhment ) ſoon 


F recovers his Strength, it would be convenient to give 2 


gentle Purge. 
But now if any ſhould ſay, that proceeding in this way 


wie ſcarce touch upon Expectoration, ſo far are we from 


diſcourſing largely of the way whereby it is promoted 


through the ſeveral Seaſons of this Diſeaſe, he is to know 


that theſe things were not unwarily paſſed over, but after 
good conſideration deſignedly omitted: For I always 


thought that they were in very great danger, who com- 


mitted the cure of the Diſeaſe to Expectoration; for to 
lay nothing of the tediouſneſs of this Method, whereby 
Nature is buſied in caſting forth the morbifick Matter, it 
is beſides very hazardous; for it often happens, that part 
of the morbifick Matter being concocted, and perhaps ſpit 
up, the reſt remains crude, and ſo ſucceſſiveſy, the beſt 


' Kipening and Expectorating Medicines having been u ed to 


no purpoſe : For ſometimes the Expectoration goes on very 


well, and ſometimes it is wholly {uppreſs'd, the Patient in 


the mean while being in danger on every hand, and for any 
Power I have over Expectoration, (which is indeed none 


ab all) may be adjudged for Life, or Death: Whereas on 


the contrary by bleeding, the morbitick Matter is in my 
Q 2 Power, 


196 Of 2 Pleuriſie. 


Power, and the Orifice of the Vein may ſupply the uſe o. 
the Wind pipe: For I confidently affirm, That this Dis 
eaſe, which if it be treated by the Method we have ſpoken 
againit, is deſervedly reckoned amongſt the moſt : fra 
rous, may be as certainly and as ſafely cured by the Me 
thod I have now prelcribed, as any other Diſeaſe whatever, 
to ſay nothing now of the ſhort time wherein it is cured; 
nor could I ever find the leaſt injury befall any one, by { 
large an Evacuation of Blood, though unskilful People 
think otherwiſe, 

I have, indeed, often endeavoured to find out ſome o- 
ther Method that might be able to do the buſineſs without 
ſo great a loſs of Blood, viz. either by reſolving the Hu- 
mour, or by ejecting it by Expectoration. But 1 never 
could find any equal to the Practice above mentioned, by 
the help whereof, notwithſtanding the dreadful Progno- 
ſtication of /ppocrates concerning a dry Pleuriſie, I free 
the Patient from the violence of the Diſeaſe by Bleeding, 
and ſo cure him, not waiting for Expectoration. 

But becauſe the cure of this Diſeaſe almoſt wholly con- 
ſiſts in Bleeding repeated, which being performed in places 
far diſtant from populous Towns, by unskilfull Surgeons 
and Farriers, por People are often in danger of loſing 
their Arms, and their Lives are often hazarded by the 
pricking of Tendons, I thought it proper here to add the 
Cure of ſuch PunQures when they chance to happen, 
They whoſe Tendons are pricked do not preſently feel any 
Pain; but twelve hours after they complain of it, not | 
much in the Orifice lately made, as in the parts tendiny 
to the Arm-pits, where at length the Pain fixes, and s 
chiefly perceived when the Arm is extended. But there 
isn great ſwelling upon the place where the Orifice was 
made, that ſcarce exceeding the bigneſs of an Hazle- Nut; 
an Ichor continually flows from the Orifice, which indeec 
is r-.Roned the chief ſign of a pricked Tendon, I has 
knc n it Cured after this Manner. 


Take of the Roots of white Lillies fear Ounces, boyl then 
till rizey ire ſoft in a Quart of Cows Mili; then take i 
Cat-meal, and the Mealof Flax Seeds, each three Out 
ce, voyl the Meal to the conſiſtence of a Pultiſe in 5 
ſufficient quantity of the Milk trained from the hy 

oel. 


9 


Of a Baſtard Peripneumonia. 197 


Roots, and mingle the Roots waſhed ;, make a Cataplaſm» 
applyit hot Morning and Evening to the part affected. 


— 


K 


Of a Baſtard Peripneumonia. 


A Fever, accompanied with many Peripneumonick Sym” 


proms, invades yearly about the beginning of Winter, 


but oftner at the end of it: It chiefly ſeizes thoſe that are 


of a groſs habit of Body, and middle-Aged, or, which of- 
tner happens, thoſe that are older, and too much addicted 
to ſpiritious Liquors, eſpecially to Brandy; for when the 
Blood in ſuch Men hath been burthened with flegmatick Hu- 
mours heap'd up in the Winter, and put in motion by the 
approaching Spring, a Cough is preſently occaſioned by 
this means, whereby the ſaid flegmatick Humours ruſh up- 
on the Lungs; at Which time, if the Patient chance to 
live irregularly, and continues to drink freely ſuch ſpiri- 
tnous Liquors, the matter grows almoſt thick, which 
occaſions the Congh, and ſtops the paſſage of his Lungs, 
and the Fever conſumes the Maſs of Blood. At the begin- 
ning of the Fever the Sick is ſometimes hot and ſometimes 
cold, is giddy, and complains of lancing pains of his Head, 
when he Coughs, and ſometimes when he does not; the U- 
rine is thick and very red; the Blood taken away is like 


that which is drawn in a Pleuriſie; he is often ſnhort- 
| breathed, if he be ordered to provoke his Cough ; his 


Head akes juſt as if it were cleft in pieces, for ſo the Pati- 


ent terms it; there is a pain of the whole Breaſt, at leaſt 


a preſſure of the Lungs, which is perceived by the by- 
ſtanders: When the Patient Congh, the Lungs not ſuffi- 
ciently dilating themſelves, the vital Paflages, are as it 
ſeems, ſhut by the ſwelling, and the Circulation on that 
account is ſo intercepted, and the Blood fo ſtopp'd, that 
there are no Signs of a Frogs eſpecially in people that are 

ot 


— Lg 
* . 


. ©. 


= 
— > 
— * 


| * Rus TERS 
r 


257 


198 Of a Baſtard Peripneumonia. 
of a groſs habit of Body; though this may alſo happen h 
reaſon of the abundance of Flegmatick Matter, whereby 


their Blood is fo burdened that it cannnot riſe to a Perfect 


Ebullition. 


In curing this Fever I am obliged to take away that 
Blood which occaſions the Suffocation and Inflammation 
the Lungs, and to ventilate and open the Lungs with he 
Ctoral Remedies, and to mitigate the heat of the whose 

dy With a cooling Diet : But whereas on the one Hand, 
the heap of flegmatick Matter contained in the Veins da; 
ly lupplying Matter for the Inflammation of the Lungs, 
may ſeem to indicate Bleeding often repeated; yet on the 
other hand 1 found, by the beſt Obſervation I could make, 
that Bleeding often repeated has ſucceeded very ill in feve 
Tiſh People of a groſs habit of Body, eſpecially if they had 
paſt the Flower of their Age; and therefore I forbore the 
repetition of it, and inſtead of it uſed frequent Pouring, 
Which is well enough ſubſtituted for thoſe that abhor large 
and repeated Bleeding, 

Therefore I proceed in the following manner : I order 


that the Patient ſhould be Blooded in the Arm when he 


Was in Bed, and that he ſhould not riſe till two or three 
hours after; for Bleeding ſomewhat weakening and dit 
ordering the whole Body, may by this means be the ef- 
er born ; for the Patient lying in bed can better bear the 
taking away of ten Ounces, than'of fix or ſeven when he 
is up. The next Day | give the following Potion in the 
morning. „ : 


Take of the Extract of Caſſia one Ounce, of Licoriſh tis 
Drams, of fat Figs number four, of Senna two Drans 
and an half, Agarick trochiſcated one Dram +, boyl then 
in a ſucfficient quantity of Water : In four Ounces of tie 


ftr uned Liquor d ſj lve one Ounce of Manna, and hat 


an Ounce of Syrup of Roſes ſolutive; mingle them, male 
a Potion, 


The next Day I uſed to Bleed a ſecond time, and tht 
next day ſave one I ordered the purging Potion abc? 
to be repeated, and to be taken every other Day wh\e 
the Patient is quite well, When the Patient does not 
purge, 1 order him to uſe a Pectoral Decoction, and O. 
of Sweet-Almons, and the like. | | 


NE nm Gr UT 9 IF _ FU 


tyous Liquors inſtead of which I allow him for 


Of Baſtard Peripneumonia. 199 
1 forbid Fleſh and the Broth of it, but 11 ſpiri- 

| is ordi- 
nary Drink a Ptiſan of Barley and Licuoriſh, and Small- 


beer, if he delire it. 


And by this Method indeed the Baſtard Peripneumonia 
is to be cur'd,,. occaſioned by a great deal of Flegmatick 
Filth heap'd vp in the Blood, ard, by reefor of the Ana- 
logy of the Winter, caſt upon the Lungs ; wherein not 
only repeated Ble:ding, but alſo Purging is indicated, 
otherwile than in a trus Peripneumonsa, Which | ſuppoſe is 
purely of the ſame kind with a Pleuriſie, and that it only 
differs from it in this, vsz, that a Per ipneumonia does 


more Univerſally affect the Lungs. And both Diſeaſes 


are cured by the ſame Method, viz. by Bleeding chiefly, 
and by cooling Medicines, Sor 


Though this Baſtard Peripneumonia is ſomewhat like a 
dry Aſthma, both as to the difficulty of breathing, and 
ſome ohter Symptoms, yet it is ſufficiently diſtinguiſhed 
from it; for in it there are manifeſt Signs of a Fever and 
Inflammation, which never appear in this; though in this 
kind they are much leſs and obſcurer than thoſe which ac- 
company a true Peripueumonia, 


But it is to be carefully noted, that it is by no means 
ſafe to forbid the drinking of Wine, and ſuch Liquors, 
all of a ſudden when the Sick has uſed them a while; but 
they mult be left off gradually; for there is danger of a 
Dropfie from a ſudden Change, which ought to be ob- 
ſerved in all Diſeaſes that come on this occaſion. And 
ſeeing thete has been mention made of Spirits of Wine, 
{ will ſay by the bye, it were tobe wiſhed that they were 
either wholly forbidden, or at leaſt uſed only for refreſhing 
the Spirits, and not for extinguiſhing them, or that the 


internal uſe of them was wholly prohibited, and that 


they ſhould be only uſed by Surgeons in Fermenta- 


tions, to digeſt Ulcers, or to cure Burns; in which laſt 


Cale they are better than any other Medicine yet found 
out; for they preſerve the under Skin from Putrefaction, 


and ſo perform the Cure (not waiting for Digeſtion 


Which requires a conſiderable time,) a Rag being dipp'd in 
O 4 Spirit 


200 Of a Rheumatiſm. 


Spirit of Wine, and preſently applied to the Part hurt by 
(calding Water, Gunpowder, or the like, and moiſtneg 
with the foreſaid Spirit now and then, till the Pain from 


the Fire be quite gone, and afterwards only twice 2 
Day. 


* 


— 


— 


CHAP 1 
Of « RHEUMATISM. 


T HIS Diſeaſe comes-at any time, but eſpecially in the 
Antumn,and chiefly ſeizes thoſe that are in the Flower 
of their Age: It moſt commonly comes by taking of cold, 
at er the Sick has been heated by violent Exerciſe, or an 
otner way. It begins with ſhivering and ſhaking, and pre- 
ſen 1) heat, reſtleſneſs, and thirſt ; and other Symptoms 
follow which accompany a Fever, After a day or two, and 
ſometimes ſooner, the Patient is troubled with a violent 
Pain, ſometimes in this, ſometimes in that Joynt, in the 
W iiſts and Shoulders, but moſt commonly in the Knees; 
it no v and then changes place, and ſeizes elſewhere, lez- 
ving ſome redneſs and ſwelling in the Part it laſt poſſeſsd. 
Ar firſt, for ſome days, the Fever, and the Symptoms a- 
tove mentioned, happen ſometimes together; but the F- 
ver goes off by degrees, the Pains remaining, and ſome- 
times rage violently, the matter of the Fever being put 
off to the Joynts; which is manifeſt, for that the Fever 
frequen:iy returns when the morbifick Matters repelled 
by the unſeaſonable ule of external Medicines. When 
this Diieaſe is nor accompanied with a Fever, it is often ta- 
ken tor the Gout, though it differs Eſſentially from that, 3s 
plainly appears to any one that well conſiders both Dil 
eales ; {» that it may be asked, why Phylical Authors have 
not touch'd upon it, unleſs it be ſuppoſed this is a new 
Ditcaſe. however it be, it is frequent enough now, and 
though i: ſeldom Kills any one when the Fever is off; yet 
upon the acci.ut of the violence of the Pain, and the con- 


tinuance of it, it is not contemptible for if it be ill ma- 


naged, 


naged, it many times laſts all the life long, though in this 


zs in the Gout, coming forth more in the internal 


1 well. 
monly thought to be another thing; it is properly called 
it ſeems to be a nephritick Pain, only the Sick does not 
> vomit: For beſide the intolerable Pain about the Reins, 


ſometimes alſo the Urete: s all along to the Bladder are af- 


account I have been heretofore miſtaken, thinking it was 


right, rocking himſelf continually, 


> Pleuriticksz. and no Man ever doubted that thoſe labour 
of an Inflammation: Theſe things being ſo, I think the 


188 ought to be managed by Bleeding, the Blood in the 


EF eonvenient Diet. 


Of a Rheumatiſm. 201 


caſe not always fo violent, But it comes now and then 
er odically: And it may ſo happen, that the 'foreſaid 
Pains may go off of themſelves, when they have a long 
while much tormented the Sick, he being for ever depri- 
ved of motion of the Members, the Joynts of the Fingers 
peng as it were inverted with knotted Protuberances, 


arts of the Fingers than the external; the Stomach 
nay be very good, and he may be as to other things very 


There is another kind of this Diſeaſe, though it is com- 


the Rhumatical Ach of the Loins, a violent Pain being 
fixed there, and ftretching ſometimes to the Os Sacrum, 


flicted with the ſame, though not ſo violently : Upon which A 


produced from Gravel ſticking in thoſe Parts; whereas in 
truth it owed its riſe to the peccant and inflamed Matter of 
the Kheumatiſm, which afflicts indeed only thoſe Parts, the 
reſt of the Body being untouched. This violent Pain con- 
tinues as the other Species, if it be not cured after the ſame 
manner, grievouſly afflicting the poor Patient, fo that he 
cannot lie in his Bed, but is forced to leave it, or to fit up- 


Now, ſeeing both theſe ſpecies of this Diſeaſe ſeem to 
proceed from an Inflammation, which may be ſuppos'd by 
reaſon of the foreſaid Phenomena, and eſpecially becauſe 
the Blood taken away is of the ſame colour with that of 


mean While being attemperated, and its exceſſive heat al- 
lay'd by cooling and thickning Medicines, and allo by a 


And therefore as ſoon as I am called, I order ten Oun- 
ces of the Blood to be taken from the Arm of the ſide affect- 


ed, and I order a cooling and thickning Julep, after this 
manner: Tk 
ake 


202 Of Rheumatiſm. 


Take of the Waters of Purſlain and Water-Lillies, and i 
Lettice, each four Ounces, of Syrup of Limons ny 
Ounce and half, of Syrup of Violets one Ounce ; ming 
them, make a Fulep, of which let him drink as he plex: 
ſes, or of the Emulſion deſcribed in the cure of a Plex 


viſie. 


To mitigate the Pain, a Pultis of White-bread an! 
Milk, tinctured with Saffron, or a Cabbage leaf may be 
applied to the part affected, and frequently renewed, 
to Diet, I forbid all Eleſh, and the Broths of it, how wezk 
ſoever it be: Inſtead whereof I order Barley and Ox. 
meal Broths, Panada and the like; and for his ordinary 
Drink I allow Small-beer, or what is better, a Ptiſan d 
Barley, Licoriſh, Sorrel, and the like, boyled in Fountain 
water; and I adviſe the Patient to keep ſome hours from 
Bed every day; for keping Bed continually promotes and 
augments the Diſeaſe, 

he next day I order the ſame quantity of Blood to be 
taken away, and aday or two after, according to the 
ſtrength of the Patient, I bleed again; and then alter 
thre? or four days I bleed the fourth time, which is com. 
mon! the laſt, reſpect being had to the Strength, Age, 
and Conſtitution of the Patient, and, the other Circum- 
ſtances. I rarely Bleed aiter the fourth time, unless to 
hot a Regimen went before, or hot Medicines were uled 
without occaſion : And truly the uſe of Anodyne Medi 
cines requires larger Bleeding: Wherefore, how violent 
ſoever the Pain be through the whole courſe of the Dil. 
eaſe, Tby no means uſe theſe, if I deſign to cure the Dil. 
eaſe by bleeding alone; for by them the Diſeaſe is fix d 
ſo that it does not ſo ealny yield to bleeding, which by rea- 
ſon of theſe too officiouſly uſed, muſt be repeated oftner 
than otherwiſe was needful; neither do they give that 
Eaſe which the Titles promiſe at the ſtate of the Diſcaſe. 
While the Remedies above-mentioned and Djet are 
carefully uſed, I now and then inject a Glyſter made i 
Milk and Sugar, on the day the Patient is not let Blood: 
Ana 1 admaoniſh that all thele things be diligently obſerved 
for eight days at leaſt after the laſt bleeding. Afterwards 
Lorder a gentle purging Potion to be taken in the morn 
ing 


Of Rheumatiſm. 203 
ing, and the following Evening a large Doſe of Diacg- 
df Jun in Cowllip water, to reſtrain the fury of the Blood, 
one for otherwiſe a Relapſe may happen; Which being done, 1 
ne MW agviſe the Patient to return gradually to his wonted way 
lex of living, with reſpect to Diet, Exerciſe, and Air; yet 
ex MW with this caution, that he ſhould not at all taſte Wine, or 
any ſpirituous Liquor, nor ſalted, or ſpiced Meats, nor 
any thing of hard digeſtion, till along time after, 


and After Bleeding repeated as often as I have mentioned, 
y be tte Pains will be much leſſened, yet they will not altoge- 
ider 20 off, but when the ſtrength is recovered, Which 
ek Nas caſt down hy Bleeding, eſpecially the next Seaſon of 
Dat. the Year approaching, which conduces more to the reco- 
ary very of ſtrength, than that in which the Patient was firſt 


E ſeized, all the Symptoms will go off, and the Patient will 
recover perfectly. 
gut now, tho' by the abovementioned method, or the 
like, uſed ſeaſonably at the beginning of the Diſeaſe, the end 
is moſt commonly, as we have ſaid, yet it frequently happens, 
that when the Sick hath been erroneouſly treated after a 
quite contrary Method, he is miſerably afflicted all his Life 
long with wandring Pains, ſometimes ſharp, ſometimes 
more moderate; by which the unwary are eaſily deceived, 


\ge, and they are commonly accounted Scorbutical Symptoms. 
um:. And here by the bye, 1 ſpeak freely, that though I do not 
too WF doubt but that the Scurvy is really to be found in theſe 
= E Northern Countries, yet I am perſwaded it is not fo fre- 
edi 


quent as it is commonly imagined; for many of thoſe Di- 
ſtempers of the Body (not to ſay moſt) which we call 
= Scorbutical, are the effects of approach ing Ills, not yet 
| formed into Diſeaſes, nor having yet taken a certain Type, 
% or the unhappy Relicks of ſome Diſeaſenot yet conquered, 
rex by which the Blood and other Humours are vitiated: 
net WW tor inſtance z various Symptoms appear in thoſe Bodies, 
12 which ſome Matter is newly generated, fit to produce 
the Gout, but not yet caſt upon the Joynts, which ſeems | 
to be Scorbutical, till the Gour is formed, and actually ex- 


1 erts its ſelf, and then it plainly appears what the Diſeaſe is: 
5 Neither are we ignorant that as many Symptoms reſem- 


bling the Scurvy, afflict Gouty People, after the Fit is over; 
rs namely, when Evacuation untimely uſed, or the declining 


mn WF ze, orany other Cauſe has obſtructed Nature, fo 172 


* 


204 Of Rheumatiſm. 


ſhe cannot well put off the gouty Matter on the Toyr 
which being retained, and yer of no nſe, infects the Maß 
of Blood, and afflicts the Man on all Hands with a prey 
Crowd of ill Symptoms: And this may be ſaid not only q 
the Gout, but alſo of an Incipent Dropſie; though it is com. 
monly ſaid, where a Scuruy ends, there a Drophe begins, yet 
moſt commonly this Rule is to b: underſtood no other. 
wiſe than that when a Dropſie is apparent, the pre-con- 
ceived Opinion of the Scurvy vaniſhes : And the ſame may 
be affirmed of very many other chronical Diſeaſes, as yet 

rowing in the Body, and having not yet aſſum'd any 

ype, orof thoſe which are partly ſubdued, yet not tv. 
tally vanqiſhed and expelled ; and indeed, unleſs we al. 
low this the Name of the Scurvy, will hugely encreaſe x 
it is at this Day, and will in a manner compriſe all lort; 
of Diſeaſes. Where as if we ſo diligently penetrated into 
the ſecret Receſſes of every Diſeaſe, as to be able to diſco- 
ver it lying hid under irregular Symptoms, it will preſen. 
ly appear of what Species it is, and be eaſily referred to 
the {ort to which it belongs. Moreover the Method where. 
by ſuch Diſeaſes are to be cured, muſt be accommodated 
not to counterfeit Symptoms, But to the Diſeaſe it {lf 
Whatever it is, as if it were perfectly formed, and actually 
exiſting. 

But here it is to be noted, that it is not fo proper to 
bleed oſten, when the Diſeaſe has taken deep root by 
ſome Years continuance, as at the beginning; but it 5 
better that ſome Weeks ſhould paſs betwixt each bleeding, 
Which will at length either quite carry off the morbifick 
Matter, or at leaſt ſo far conduce, that the Relicks of it 
may be extirpated by an Iſſue made in one of the Leg, 
8 by any volatile Spirit taken morning and evening in 

anary. 

But now, how great ſoever the difference is, as is men- 
tioned above, betwixt the true Kheumatiſe and the Scurty, 
yet it muſt be confeſſed, there is another Species of 2 
Rheumatiſm near a-kin to the Scurvy \ for it reſembles the 


chiefeſt Symptoms of this Diſeaſe, and is cured in a man. 
ner the ſame way, and therefore I ſhall call it a Scorbutics 
Rheumatiſm. The Pain ſeizes ſometimes this part, ſome- 
times that, but ſeldomer occaſions Swelling than the other 


kind, neither is it accompanied with a Fever, nor $ F 


Of a Rheumatiſm. 205 


JYrite 

77 $x'd ſo long, but is of a more wandring Nature, and has 
ere regular and dilorderly Symptoms; now it afflicts this or 
ily of bat Member, by and by it only ſeizes the inward parts, 
com. Wand occaſions Sickneſs, which goes off again when the 
5, Yet — returns to the outward parts, and ſo afflicts the 
ther. atient by turns, and continues a long while, like thoſe 
con. Diſcaſes that are reckoned moſt Chronical. It chiefly 
may {ſeizes Women, and Men of a weakly Nature; fo that [ 
8 yet oa imagine it ought to be reckoned among Hyſterick 
any {WDilcaſes, had not I] often found it would not yield at all 
t to $0 Hyſterick Remedies, 

e . WW They who have uſed the Peruvian Bark for a long time 
ſe x pre ſubject to this Diſeaſe, which by the bye is the only in- 
ſortz convenience I ever knew follow upon the uſe of this Re- 
into medy: But however it be, whether the Diſeaſe take its 
iſco- riſe on this occaſion, or from any other cauſe, it is very 
ſn. eaſily cured by the following Remedies, which ſhould 


have been concealed if I had greater regard to my private 

advantage than to the publick good; for by theſe alonel 

ated have cured many afflicted after the manner I have deſcri- 

ih bed, to whom bleeding though repeated, Purges, a Milk 

ally Diet and teſtaceous Powders, and the like, have done no 
good; and they are theſe. 


r to | 

Tale of the freſh Conſerve of Garden Scurvy-Graſs two 
tis Ounces, of Wood-ſorrel one Ounce, of the compound Pom- 
ng, der of Wake-robin fix drams, make an Electuary with 
fick 4 ſufficient quantity of Syrup of Oranges; the Doſe, is 
u two Drams to be taken thrice a Day for a Month, drinks 


eps, ö ing upon it three Ounces of the following Water. 


in 5 
= Take 7 Garden-Scurvy Graſs eight handfuls, of Water. 
en. creſſes, and Brooklime, of Sage: and Mint, each four 
55 8 handfuls, the peels of fix Oranges, of Nutmegs half an 
UE | 


Ounce, infuſe them in fix 98 of Brunſwick Mum, 
and dijtil them in a common Still, and draw off but three 


Cuarts for uſe, 


Ihe exact Doſe of compound Powder of Wake robin 
her i- mu be exactly obſerved, at leaſt it muſt not be leſſen- 
> If © 8 


T4 2 CHAP. 


4 . 
— ä _ „ 


En r 


Of an Eryſipelatoſe FEVE R. 


His Diſeaſe ſeizes every part of the Body, and at any 

time, but eſpecially the Face, and chiefly at the lu. 
ter end of Summer ; at which time the Sick is often fi. 
zed when he is abroad, his Face is ſuddenly ſwelled wit 
great Pain and redneſs, and full of ſmall Pimples; and 
when the inflammation is more encreaſed, Bladders ſome. 
times ariſe afterwards over the Forehead and Head, and 
the ſick is blind with it: (the Country People call this: 
Blight ) nor is it much different, only there are Puſtles 
like thoſe that accompany the ſtinging of Bees. The mot 
noted and common Species of an Eryſ/pelas was in this man- 
ner. | 
But whatever part it ſeizes, and at whatever time d 
the Year, -ſhaking and ſhivering, unleſs they did precece 
(which ſometimes happened a day or two before) molt 


com monlyaccompanied this Inflammation; alſo Thirſt, Reſ- 


leſſneſs, and other Signs of a Fever, The Diſeaſe pro 
ceeding, as the Fever firſt occaſioned the Pain, Swelling, 
and other Symptoms, (which encreaſing daily, ſometumes 
end ina Gangrene ) lo theſe in like manner do not a little 
e the Fever, till both are removed by proper Re 
medies, 

There is another ſort of this Diſeaſe, though it ſeldo- 
mer happens; this invades at any time of the Year, and 
moſt commonly it is occaſioned by the too free uſe of ſub- 
tle and attenuating Wines, or ſuch like ſpirituous Liquors; 
a ſmall Fever begins, and is preſently followed by an E- 
ruption of Puſtles, almoſt over the whole Body, Which are 
like the ſtinging of Nettles, and ſometimes turn to Blad- 
ders; they ſoon ſtrike in, and hide themſelves under che 
Skin, and itch intolerably; but after a little ſcratching 


they appear again, As to the Cure, 1 ſuppoſe the 2 


3 Of the Eryſipelatoſe Fever. 207 


cant Matter mix'd with the Blood, muſt be evacuated, and 
ad the Ebullition of the Blood ſhould be ſtopped by Reme- 
"I pot that qualific it; and laſtly, That the Matter thruſt out 
ppon the Parts ſhould be diſcuſſed. 
That theſe things way be done, as ſoon as I am called, 
order a large quantity of Blood to be taken from the 
Arm, which almoſt always is like that of Pleuriticks; the 
next day I give my common Cathartick Potion, and at 
Bed-time, if it has worked too much, ſome Paregorick 
ponent: Diacodium in Cowſlip-Hower-water, or the likez 
arg ing being over, I order the part affected to be foment- 
ed with the following Decoction. 


Tate of the Roots of Marſh- mallows, and Lillies, each two 
8 Ounces, of the Leaves of Mallows, Elder, and Mullein, 
each two handfuls, of Mielilot, St. John's Wort, and of 
* the leſſar Centaury, each one handful, of the Seeds of 
Flax and Fenngreek, each half an Ounce, boyl them in a 
ſufficient quantity of Water to three Lints; Strain the 
Liquor, and when you ſe it, add to each Pint two Oun- 
ces of Spirit of Mine; bath the parts affected twice a day 
with this Decoction hot, with joft Flannels dipp'd in it: 
and after the Fomentation anoint the part daily with the 
following miæeure. 


| 
Tate of Spirit of Wine half a Pint, of Venice-Treacle two 
& Ounces, of Cloves and long Pepper powdered, each two 
\ Drams, mingle them, cover the part affected with Brown: 
paper dipp'd in this mixture, 


: 
Moreover, I order the Patient to be dieted with Oat- 
cal and Barley-broths, and roaſted Apples, and that he 
ould drink Small beer, and that he ſhould keep from Bed 
ne hours every day. By this Method the Fever, and o- 
er Symptoms moſt commonly ſoon go off, if not, I 
led again, and ſometimes a third time, a day being be- 
Nixt each bleeding; namely, if the Blood be ill diſpoſed, 

d the Fever high- Of the days 1 do not bleed, 1 order 
Clyſter of Milk and Syrup of Violets, and cooling Ju- 


lad- 15 made of the Water of Water-Lillies, and the like, de- 
che Wribed in the Cure of a Rheumatiſm, to be taken every 
— four ; but moſt commonly once bleeding, and the follow- 

1 ing 


208 Of the Eryſipelatoſe Fever. 


| ſoon go off by Bleeding and Purging repeated; yet (on; 


ing Purge, if they are uſed in time, do the byſne: 
hat fort which reſembles the ſtinging of Nettles Wit 
itching, is to be cured the ſame way, only the outy;:; 
Medicines are not ſo neceſſary. 
[ will ay here by the bye, that tho“ not only this D, 
eaſe of which we now ſpeak, but moſt others whic 
ſieze the Skin, and are accompanied with ſome Eruptic, 
if they are Chronical, eaſily yield to this Method, . 


33 „„ 
© p< — 


MLS We A 
— —. 


of them are to be treated in a quite different manner 
For the Evacations now ſpoken of, though repeated, 30 
teſtaceous Powders deſigned for ſweetning the Blood, © 
no good when ſome Recrements that are ill diſpolcd !; 
deep in the Skin, and cannot be removed by any thing ba 
Remedies that ſtrengthen th Blood, and are fit to ops 
Obſt ructions of the Pores. 1 hive uſed the following M; 
thod with good Succeſs in the violent Itch, and in invetcrz: 
Eruptions of the Skin of that kind, 


Take of Venice-Treacle half a Scruple, of the Eleftur, 
of the Egg one Scruple, of the Roots of Virginian Suck 
weed finely powdered fifteen Grains, of Oriental Bed. 
ftone five Grains, with a ſufficient quantity of the m 
of candied Citron; make a Bolus to be taken in the Mm 
ing and at Bed time, for one and twenty days, drintin 
upon it fix Spoonfuls of the following Fulep. 


Take of the Waters of Carduus Benedict. fix Ounces, i 
Epidemick and Treacle water, each two Ounces, of WF 
rup of Gilly flowers one Ounce , mingle them, male 
Jule P. 


142 


CY, ov By Ke jon fn pre by OA ww 3D 


EN . 
a. Addis 


Every Morning after taking the Medicine, let hin 
ſweat an hour or two, or rather, being covered with ma 
Cloaths than he uſed to have on, let him indulge the b [ 
thing Sweat in Bed for the time aforeſaid. 1hefe thing 
being done, if the Puſtles do not yet vaniſh, anoint u {i 


Parts affected with the following Liniment. E p 

Take of the Oyntment of ſharp pointed Dock two Ounces, I 

Pomatum one Ounce, of Flowers of Sulphur three Dru | 

of Oyl of Rhodium half a Scruple; make a LM 1 
ment, ; 


B: 


Of tlie Quinſie. 209 


* Bot the Medicines before preſcribed muſt hot be uſed 
before Bleednig and Purging duly premiſed; which 
1 though given alone, they do not perform the Cure, yet 
they lecure the Patient againſt a Fever, which might o- 
* therwiſe happen by reaſon of the uſe of hot Medicines. 
There is another fort of Ervption, though leſs fre- 


tion, quent; for the Cure whereof no Evacuations are direct- 
„ 1y proper. This, though it appears in other parts of 
lon: WS the Body, yet it moſt commonly appears in the Breaſt, 
nner: and fixes it ſelf in ſome determinate place; it ſcarce 
» at riſes higher than the Skin, and ſhews it elf like a board 
, < Spot, only it ſeems ſomewhat of a yellowiſh colour, by 
ede realon of Scales that are fo tinctured: This Spot, when 
g bu itis out, Keeps the Man well; but when it vaniſhes, he 

has often a light Sicknels, and his Urine is rendred thick 
M and ted, but inclining lomewhat to a yellow. In this 
tra Diſcaſe allo you muſt proceed the ſame way, and after 


univerſal Evacuations, with the fame Remedies as in the 
violent Itch above mention'd. And moreover, which muſt 


tur not be forgot, the ule of Wine and Fleth of eaſie Digeſtion, 
Sat muſt by all means be allow'd ; for all cooling things do 
more hurt than good: And fo this laſt Species of Erup- 
So tions is cured ; but ſometimes it will not go off without 
_ drinking of Steel- waters for a long While. 
int; 
es, | 
of 5 CHAP: VII. 
ale! 

? Of the Quinſie. 
L lun * 

mote = LE | 8 

bre II comes at any time of the Year, eſpecially between 
thing Spring and Summer; it chiefly ſeizes young Men, and 


ſuch as are of a ſanguine Conſtitution, and Red hair'd Peo- 
F p ( which I have often obſerv'd ) more than any others: 
They ſhiver and ſhake preſently at the beginning of the 
| Diſeaſe, a Fever follows, and a little after a Pain and 
| Inflammation of the Jaws; and if the Patient be not ſea- 
ſonably relieved preſently, he _ neither ſwallow nor wu 
| 175 


OS. a” 5 - _ . — * . 
— * - o a4 
g — A e A Y , 14 *. 
1 K r — — 7 — yy 
— * 3 — 2 
b 2 - - 


210 Of the Quinſie. 


his breath thro his Noftrils, ſo that he is under the ay 
rehenſion of 1 by reaſon the Jaws are ſtoppd 
by the Inflammation and Tumours of the Uvula, Almond, 
and Larynx, and is indeed in a manner ſuffocated. There 
is great danger in this Diſeaſe, for it ſometimes deſtroy, 
a Man in a few hours; namely, when a great deal of the 
febrile Matter is caſt upon the foreſaid Parts, and when 
the violence of the Diſeaſe is not timely prevented by the 
uſe of proper Remedies, | 
In order to the Care I preſently take away Blood plen- 
tifally from the Arm, and preſently after from the Veins 
under the-Tongue; and then I order that the inflamed 
Parts ſhould be touched with Honey of Roſes, made very 
ſharp with Spirit of Sulphur, and that the following Gar- 
gariſm ſhould be uſed, not after the common way, but 
that it ſhould be kept in the Mouth without any agitation, 
until it wax hot, and then that it ſhould be ſpit out, and 
that it ſhould be repeated now and then. 


Take of Plaintain-water, and red Roſe- water, and of the 
Water of Frogs-ſpawn, each four Ounces, the Whites 
three Eggs turned into Water by beating, of white Su. 
gar-candy three Drams; make a Gargariſm. 


I likewiſe order the Patient to take daily of the Emul- 
ſion preſcribed in the cure of a Plueriſie, or the like. 

The next Morning I bleed again, unleſs the Fever and 
difficulty of breathing abate, and defer Purging till the 
next day; but it both theſe are leſſened, I preſently give 
a lenitive Purge, which I have found very neceflary 
by manifold Experience, above all other things after 
bleeding: If the Fever and other Symptoms are like to 
be troubleſome after Purging, Which 1s very rare, they 
are to be quell'd by bleeding repeated as before, and by 
applying a large and ſtrong Bliſter to the Neck, a cooling 
aud emollient Glyſter is to be injected every Morning, 
except When the Patient purges, through the whole 
courie of the Diſeaſe. I forbid the uſe of all forts of Fle(h, 
and their Broaths ; and the Patient ought only to eat Oat- 
meal and Barley Broaths, roaſted Apples, and the like: 
Let © m drink a Ptiſan, or Small-beer ; let him keep up 
fome hours every day, for the warmth of the Bed avg- 

ments 


ma 4 7A = hoe SS — = 


A. az A a wa . ,CX yX X yea 


Of the Quinſie 211 


ments the Fever, and other Symptoms, which I endea- 


vour to Cure by this Method, But it is to be obſcrved, 


that ſuch a Quinſie, which is only the Symptom of a Fever, 
[ call ſtationary, is to be cured by that Meehod which is 
requiſite for the Fever, and ſo is either to be removed by 
Sweat and Tranſpiration, or by any other Method of Cure, 
which is neceſſary for the primary Fever, on which it de- 
pends, Which is worthy to be noted. 


There are Other Fevers which are to be reckoned with 


Intercurrents, which becauſe they immediately go another 


way, and end in this or that Symptom, are not common- 
ly accounted Fevers, tho' they were originally ſuch: And 


the diſorder from whence the Diſeaſe takes its name is 


only the Symptom of the Fever, which ends in it. I will 
at preſent ſpeak only briefly of bleeding at the Noſe, and 


of ſpitting of Blood, 


Bleeding at the Noſe comes at any! time of the Year, 
and afflifts thoſe chiefly that are weakly, and of a very 
hot Conſtitution, and more frequently when they are old 
than when they are young. At firſt there is ſome Signs of 
a fever, Which goes off ſuddenly, making way for it ſelf 


through the Noſtrils; there remains nevertheleſs a pain 


and heat in the forepart of the Head; the Blood flows 
ſome hours, then ſtops a while, ane ſoon breaks out again, 


and fo by turns, till at length it wholly ceaſes, being re- 


| ſtrained either by the uſe of Medicines, or ſtopping of it 


* 2 9 * 
7 1 88 * 4h 
r 1 * * 


ſelf, by reaſon a great quantity of it has has been loſt; yer 
the Patient is in danger of a Relapſe every Year, if the 
Blood happens to be much heated by ſpirituous Liquors, 
or any other occaſion. 

In this caſe I do all I can to reſtrain the violent Heat 
and Ebullition of the Blood, from whence ariſes the ſaid 
unuſual Extravaſation, and to turn the force of it another 
way; and to which end | bleed often in the Arm, and 
take away Blood freely, which is always of the ſame co». 
lour with that which is drawn in a Pleuriſie. I order a 
cooling and thickning Diet, as three parts of Fountain- 
water and one of Milk boiled together, and drank cold, 


| roaſted Apples, Barley-Broaths, and ſuch things as are 


| and Emulſions: An 


made without Fleſh, alſo cooling and thickning Juleps 
d * the Sick to keep bm Be 
| 2 al 


WF 
* 
1 


N 6 
4 — * $ - 4 _ 
ä - to» 
A, — * 
3 88 1 1 E * * 


212 Of the Quinſie. 


daily for ſome time, and that a gentle cooling Glyſter be 
injected every Day, and not once omitted; | allo orcer'd 4 
Paregorick Draught of Diacodium at Bed time to quell 
the fury of the Blood. But becauſe a ſharp Humour often 
accompanies ſuch Hemorrhages, which beiug mingled 
with the Blood furthers its motion, and opens the Orifice 
of the Veins. Beſides Revulſion and cooling, | uſually gire 
a gentle Purge, when the Diſcaſe is even at his heighth, and 
after it has done working, an Anodyne in a larger Duke 
than ordinary; and when the Symptom is quite gone of 
I give another Purge. As to the external Applications, 2 
Linnen bolſter dipp'd in cold Water, where Sal Prun:l- 
la has been diffolv'd, and gently preſs'd out, may be ap- 
ply'd to the Nape of the Neck, and to both fides of it of 
ten in a Day; and after general Evacuations, the follow: 
ing Liqnor may be applied. 


- k 


WW. ow & = — ww os Ge 


Take of Hungarian Vitriol and Allum, each one Ounce, f 
Flegm of Vitriol half a Pint; boyl them till ail is diſ 
Jolved ; filter the Liquor when it is cold, and ſeparat? 
it from the Cryftalls, that ſometimes wiſe, to the re. 
maining Liquor ad. a 12th part of Oyl of Vitriol, and put 
a "i ent aipp'd in this Liquor into the Nojtril from where 
the Blood flows, ana keepit two Days, 


Rags moiſten'd with this Liquor and applied, ſic 
Blood from what part foever it flows, 


Spitting of Blood, which betwixt Spring and Sum 
mer befalis Weakly People of a hot Conſtitution, whol? 
Lungs are infirm, and rather Young People than Old, 
is almoſt of the fame Nature with the Bleeding at the 
Noſe I have juſt now treated cf; for this is allo a Fe 
ver, that puts off its Name and Eſſence by the Criſis it 
is diſcharged, with this only difference, in a manner, 
that in the former Diſeaſe, the Blood being too muck 
agitated, ruſhes violently into the Veins of the Noſtrils, 
but in this, upon the Lungs: And as in that, during the 
Flux, there is continually a Pain and Heat in the tore: 
r the Head, iv in this the Breaſt is aMlifted with 

vth, together with ſome Weakneſs; and this Diſeaſe 
requires almolt the ſame Method of Cure, only u will 
nor 


Of the Quinſie. 213 


bot bear Purging; by which, eſpecially if repeated, the 


dick is apt to fall into a Conſumption: But Fleeding 


' uſed often, a Glyſter injected every day, Diacodium ta 


zen at Bed time; moreover, Medicines, and Diet thick" 
ning and cooling will do the buſineſs effectually, And 


” theſe are the things Which J have hitherto obſerved 


concerning the numerous Tribes of Diſeaſes divided in- 


to various Kinds, which are reckoned under the Name 


of Fevers, and cf thole Symptoms which depend cn 


then; in Which J have acted fo carefully, that ] have 
not impoſed upon the World my own Fancies and Ima- 
F ginations, but have delivered faithfully the Hiſtory of 
them, and their Ph@nomena, Without reipecting any Hy- 


potheſis. I have allo treated of their Cures with the 


like Sincerity and Care: And if an earneſt Delire of 
E finding out, and eſtabliſhing a more certain Method of 
Cure has forced me to go into untrodden Paths, I nope 
| ncn2 of the Learned will charge me with either deſpiſing 
their Judgment, or truſting too much ro my own, or 
that affect Novelty; for the good ſucceſs that I have 
had in dilcuvering theſe things has hitherto much en- 
| couraged me, and the Experiment of thoſe that come 


after will undoubtedly clear my Reputation. And truly 


this deltructive Troup of Diſeaſes is not to be oppoled 
F lazily, Which wages deſperate War with Mankind every 
Ley and which deſtroys two thirds of Men at leaſt, 
if you except thoſe that die of a violent Death. The 
| cuntioval force of theſe Diſeaſes, and the daily deſtru- 
ction of the ſtrongeſt and yuungeſt Men eipecially (not- 
| wWithitanding thote Helps, which hitherto thoſe ſpecious 
Methods which are confidently deſcribed in the Books of 
| Speculative Writers, have hitherto afforded us) much di- 
ſturbed my Mind, while I was conſidering theſe things 
| for really 1 found, that thoſe vain Speculations did fo 


little conduce to the recovery of Health, that they 


| Which fled to them as an Aſylum, whatever theſe dogs 
matical boaſters promiſed, were no more ſecure than 


thoſe, Which neglecting all Art, left the buſineſs to Na- 


| ture, If I have done any thing whereby the Dangers, 
| which ofcen occur in curing Diteales, may be any way 
| leſſened (which at leaſt, I hope l may modeltly pro- 
miſe my ſelf) 1 have in fome fort my Ends, and the 


P35 pleaſing 


214 Of the Quinſie. 


pleaſing Reward of my * Labour rightly beſtowed 

on ſeeking the Good of my Neighbour. Theſe are 

the chief things which I have hitherto found, or which 

I could reduce to a Method about the Fevers and Sym. 
toms, Which depend on them, to the zoth of Decen- 
er 1075. 


" es... 


Dr. Syden- 


Dr. Sydenham's Two Epiſiles : 


The Firſt, of Epidemical Diſeaſes from 
the Year 1675, to the Year 16 80. 


To the Learned and Worthy Dr. Brady, Maſter 
of Caius College, and the King's Profeſſor 
of Phyſick in Cambridge, 


The Second, of the Hiſtory and Cure 
of the French- Poz. 


- 
- * — 
5 _—- - = EEE - — — 2 2 — — * - 
a 4 = __- . N : 2 5 - — 4 2 — . 
"> « 5 T3 0 N 3 — „ * — — — Ly” » * 7 
. — — J © N — — — 2 1 Jy A - 2 
- - — 2 + >. > 
. - . 2 - _ 4+- — % * _— — =” of L — 
—Uä́ʒ:̃ — 2 — — - = © - w 
. — _ a _ — = - © = * = 
* 2 2 + ' — rr = r= — Y 


y—_— 
- —— 


* 
— 


q 
| 
: 

1 


ww — — — — = 
— 2 w— 


To the Accompliſhed and Worthy Dr. Henry Pa- 
man, Fellow of St. John's College in Cambridge, 
the Univerſity Orator, and Profeſſor of Phyſick 
in Greſham College, London. 


* — 


D——_OAOlwl.eo_ af coo 4 
—— —ê 


To the Famous Phyſician Dr. Thomas Sydenham. 


P —— „ » — — 
"% n -* XX 


Worthy Sir, | 


O Phyſician as yet, Learned Sir, befides your 
Self, has duly conſidered the force of the Air, 
and the influence of it upon Human Bodies, nor 

has any one well conſider'd, how it Acts for 

preſerving of our Lives, nor has any one obſerved how 
much it conduces towards the Fermentation, Alteration, 

and Circulation of the Blood, and to all Animal Motion 3 

nor have any Writers of Natural, or Medicinal Hiſtory 

Ss touched 


2 =. - - I 2 * l 
US ns x" „ù — — ( fr  oeiey — 917 Goo. 


>=. 0 
— — 4 * — 1 
TE EISE 4 


216 Of the Quinſie. 


touched lightly, fo far have they been from ſearching 
throughly mto 1ts natural Temper, various Alterations 
and Changes, which Conſtitutions you have well diſcover. 
ed; for truly it cannot be, but that when the Air inſinu- 
ates its ſelf into all, and the remoteſt parts of the Body, 
it ſhou'd imprint, and communicate the Alterations arid 
Changes, it undergoes by the things wherewith it is im— 
pregnated, to the Juices and Blood : Upon which account 
moſt commonly, from this or that ill Fe of the 
Air, ariles this or that ill Diſpoſit ion of the Blood 3 there- 
fore you have excellently well inſtituted your medicinal 
Obſervations, of the Hiſtory and Cure of accute Diſeaſes, 
according to the various Conſtitutions of Years, and the 
arts of them : for by them, the Actions of the Air upon 
the Blood, Juices, and eſpecially upon the Spirits (which 
per haps they are the matter of) are perceived, and I do not 
at all doubt but that the Genius of Fevers obſerved from 
the Temper of the Years, wherein they raged, is the beſt, 
if not he only Method to eſtabliſh Practice. Go on 
therefor: , and if any Obſervations yet remain of the fe- 
vers of the Years laſt paft, be pleaſed to publiſh them, 
and in ſo doing you will very much further the Health of 
Mankind. 5 | 
In the Fifth Chapter of the Firſt Section of your Book 
you ſaid ſomewhat of the uſe of the Jeſuits Powder; in- 
deed, I know ſome Phyſicians of good Note give it in 2 
large quantity, and repeat it often, and others that make 
E tracts, and Infultons of it, and of the Infuſtons, Ju- 
leps and Emolſions, whereby they affirm they can cer- 
tamly Cure Agues, and alſo ſome continual Fevcrs: 
Wi hout doubt it is an excellent Remedy to cure Agues, | 
indeed have uſed it about Twenty Years in various Forms, 
and g repared it ſeveral ways with very good Sücceſs; it 
you know an thing peculiar about the uſe of it, I deſire 
you vou « publith u. 
in rhe Cure of a Rheumatiſm, you have propoſed fre- 
quent and large Bleeding as neceſſary 3 1 defire to know, 
whether it may not he as certainly cured ſome other way, 
as hy hat cruel and ſevere way of Bleeding: But worthy, 
Gr, in doing chsſe things, you muſt expect to be calumni- 
arcd and reproached by ill Men; but ſuch Treatment, and 
ſuch Men are very diſpleaſing to the Ingenious 10 i 
I e | they 


the Tear 1675, to the Tear 1680. 277 


they would ſearch out an Hiſtory of Fevers approved by 
long uſe, and the Eſſences, Cauſes and Differences of 
them, and the true method of Cure, they muſt rake you 
fr their Guide for the nature of them, ard their method 
of Cure can be found no other way; be therefore Coura- 
gious, and deſpiſe theſe inſignificant Slanderers, and go on 
to promote the Ingenuity of honeſt Men ; you have ſhewn 
the way, and if what you have done does not pleaſe z let 
| thoſe that cavil ſhew a righter and bettergway, Farewel 
| worthy Sir, in performing thele things, you have obliged 
the whole Province of Phyſick, and among the reſt, 


Tour obliged Friend 
R. BRADY. 


| From Camb, the zoth. 
| of Decem. 1679, 


\ 
To the Learned and Accompliſh'd Dr. Brady. 


Worthy Sir, | 

; I. is certainly very reaſonable, That I, if I have any 
| + whit advanced the Cure of Diſeaſes, ſhou'd impart 
| freer than other Men to any one that ask me about it; 
| for if I know only thoſe things which other People know, 
(which Jam well ſatisfy d of) it is no injury to me to di- 
vulge ſuch Trifles and common things; but if J have ob- 
| tained any thing that is beneficial in Phyſick, and that 
| renders the Cure of Diſeaſes more certain, ſo much 
| praiſe is not due to me for publiſhing it, as wou'd be to 
| any other; for having been afflicted with the Gout for 
about Thirty Lears; and a long while ſeverely handled 
by the Stone, I can eaſily imagine how heartily I ſhou'd 
rejoyce, if any one would ſhew me how I might be freed 
from my Miſery; but there being very few to whom 
God Almighty has granted this great Privilege of be- 
ing beneficial to the Publick in this Caſe, and it is only 
to be done ſucceſsfully, by thoſe that are made of better 
| Clay than Jam; for, indeed, I have not Power enough 
to dp it; bug haye always thought, and not without rea- 
| lon, that there is more Happineſs in diſcoyering a cer- 
| tain method of cuxing, though bat of the leaf Diſeaſe, 
i than 


* 


—— — 


—— — 2 — 
* 


— 2 — 2 


—— 


- , 2 * * 7 _ 
== = 2 A. 
< - 4 N Ss 
— _— .. = » — RR —— 1 ————z 
— — . 
* " — ” 


— — — 


— 
— — 


218 Of the Epidemick Diſeaſes from 


than heaping up the Treaſures of Tantalus, or of Creſu;, 
More Happineſs, I ſay, and more Wiſdom too; for why 
better Specimen can any one ſhew of his Wiſdom ang 
Goodneſs than to do continually all he can rather for the 

ablick Good, it being part of the common Nature o 
Mankind, than for himſelf, he being ſo ſmall, and fo con- 
temptible a part of the whole? for to ſpeak according tg 
my Cicero, the great Maſter of ſpeaking and thinking, the 
Genius of his Age, not to ſay of the Nature of Men in 
* ; the Laws poſtpone the good of particular per. 
ons to the good of all, ſo a good and wiſe Man, and one 
that is obedient to the Laws, and knows his Duty, endes. 
vours the good of all Men more than of any one, or f 
himſe'f; and, indeed, every one knows it is the part of x 
wicked Man to deltroy Men; but the Duty of a good Man 
to preſerve them, and to inſtruct others, ſo as that they 
may be able to free them from Death, after he is dead; 
and this is a very wicked and abomniable Saying, vi. 
Come what will when I am in my Grave, 

But thele things being paſt over for the preſent, I muſt 
confeſs, that I ought to diſcover plainly to you, thok 
things that I have thought of the Diſeaſe you enquire 
bout, how ſmall ſoever they be, to you, worthy Sir, that 
deſerve the Office that you have, and I render with the 
Univerſity wherein you flouriſh, the Encomiums of Learn. 
mg, Honeſty, and Candor of Mind, and muſt mention 
with thanks the Senſe you have of the Affronts that are 
offer d me by ſome, of whom I muſt ſay thus much 
that if the harmleſs Life of a Man, that has injured 
none in Word, or Deed, could have ſecured me, they re- 
ver Wou'd have rav'd againit me ; but ſeeing it happens 
fo, when I am not to blame, nor 1 hope never ſhall be, 
Jam reſolv'd not to be troubled for their Faults, ſuppo— 
fing that all that I have to do is to perform the Duty of 
A Man, and of 4 good Phyſician, as far as | am 
able. 

Therefore I will ſet down the Obſervations I have 
made concerning the Diſeaſes you enquire about; and 
firſt-I will treat of the Agues, that are now Epidemical 
with us, and in doing which, I think it will not bes 
miſs to run through thoſe Years orderly, though briefly, 
Which followed that, wherein I finiſh'd my Hiſtory ol 

acute 


the Tear 1675, to the Tear 1680. 219 


Lente Diſeaſes ( ſuch as it was,) which raged for Fifteen 
Years laſt paſt, and to mention briefly by the bye, ſome- 
thing that I have mention'd before, of the Cure of them, 
hich being done, we may better underſtand at what 
time, and in what manner the Conſtitution that now pre» 
rails ſtole upon us. 

The Year 1676, 8 the ſame Diſeaſes, that 
be were generated by the Conſtitution laſt treated of, in 
the ſaid Obſervations, viz. of the Years 1673. (in the 
Autumn whereof it firſt began) 1674, and 1675; but 
this Conſtitution decaying, the Diſeaſes that broke out 
were gentler than they were wont to be, and were not 
ſo Epidemical, notwithſtanding the peculiar diſpoſition 
Jof the Year, as to the manifeſt qualities, of the Air, 
whereby it was much different from the r 
Years, for the heat of the Summer, and the cold o 
the Winter were much greater, than had been known 
in the Memory of Man, and ſeeing fo great a diffe- 
rence in Seaſons produced the ſame Diſeaſes, it is ma- 
nifeſt from hence, that the occult temper of the Air cauſes 
Diſeaſes more, than the manifeſt Quali:ies of it. But 
it muſt be confeſſed that the ſame Diſeaſes, as to ſome 
| om, depend ſometimes on the manifeſt diſpoſition 
lof the Air, which appears plain from the Meaſles, and 
the Cholera Morbus, which invaded in this Year, whereof 
| will ſpeak briefly. 

For the Meaſles that broke out at the beginning of 
the Year, tho' they were not very Epidemical, yet this 
was remarkable in them, viz. they continu'd longer; 
for whereas according to their Cuſtom they began in 
January, and created till the vernal Equinox, and then 
decreaſing by degrees, they vaniſh'd in a moment 
about Midſummer; this Year they laſted almoſt to the 
Autumnal Equinox, being ſtrengthen'd as I conceive by 
the heat of Summer, ſo as to laſt longer, and yet they 
did not require a new method of Cure. At the end of 
Summer the Cholera Morbus raged Epidemically, and 
being heightened by the unuſual heat of the Seaſon, the 
; Symptom of Convulſions that accompanied it were 
more violent, and continued longer than ever | obſer- 
ved before; for they did not only ſeize the Belly, as 


© they were wont, but now all the Muſcles of the Body 
F and 


ad — 
o — ASI 


4 > 


_ 


. 
. _— — — —— * — - - - - — — — 2 — 
- > * . — aww * = * 
- — - F * — 2 I. — — — — — . 2 "> =_ 
m * = — = . 
- - 2 4 

— ROOF —„-ꝛ A © ie — 2 = — 

— — — 

*. n 5 — 
ws * - — -— * 
8 2 * _ - = bf 


P — — — 
. = o : n 9 


r — " — 
2 * = by * 
Canfas ww & 2 
e - 

py = - 


_ — 


0 


— = 2 — A 
— * 
— e ZEiéei—̃ — —ę—ę.ä— — 


* 
— 


— 
« 


EIS Fond —_— — _— _ 


226 Of the Epidemick Diſeaſe from 
and the Arms and Legs were eſpecially fiez'd wit, 
dreadful Convulſions, fo that the Sick would ſometimes 
leap out of the Bed, endeavouring by ſtretching hi 
Body every way to ſuppreſs the violence of them. BA 
though this Diſeaſe did not require any new method gf 
Cure, yet ſtronger Anodynes and oftner repeated tha 
were uſual, were plainly indicated: For inſtance, being 
called to a certain Patient, that was almoſt deſtroy! 
with this dreadful Symptom (Dr. Goodall accompanizg 
me, w hoſe Candor, unſpotted Probity, his great kindne 
to me, and his indefatigable endeavours to find our, ang 
cure Diſeaſes, always come into my Mind, when | 
mention his Name) and with violent Vomiting, was juf 
dying by reaſon of the violence of the Convulſions, fe 
was in a Cold Sweat, and his Pulſe could ſcarce be fel. 
I gave him Twenty five Drops of my Liquid Laudann 
in one ſpoonful of ſtrong Cinamon-water; for I did va 
dare to give a larger Vehicle, leaſt it {hould occaſion Vo 
miting (as it often happens when there is a great inclinz 
tion to Vomiting ) and fitting by the Bed about half ar 
hour, and perceiving the ſtrength of the Medicine was ng 
ſufficient to ſtop the Vomiting, nor the Convaulſions, | 
was forc'd to 9 it, and to increaſe the Doſe ſo, bt 
there was ſuch a ſpace as that I might know what was to 
be hoped for, from what was already taken before I gan 
any more) as that the violence of Symptoms was at length 
quell'd ; but yet they were apt upon the leaſt motion to 
rebel, and therefore | ſtriatly order'd tha. the Body ſhoud 
be kept very quiet for a few Days, and that he ſhou'd take 
now and then the foreſaid Medicine in a ſmaller Dok, 
when he was well to confirm the buſineſs, and this ſuc 
ceeded according to my defire. 

Nor is there any reaſon why any one ſhou'd count me 
too bol d, becauſe J venture to give ſo great a quantity 
of Liquid Laudanum ; for it is plain by Experience, that 
for thoſe Diſeaſes, Preparations of Opium are indicated 

and they are three, violent Pain, Vomiting, or a great 

ſneſs, and great Diſorders of the Spirits) in theſe both 
the Doſe of the Remedy, and the Repetition of it mull 
be according to the Greatneſs of the Symptom, for that 
Doſe which will be ſufficient to quell a ſmall Symptom, 
will be overcome by a ſtronger, and that which wo 
i other: 


the Tear 1675, to the Tear 1680. 227 


ptherwiſe indanger the Life of the Patient, will in ſuch a 
Ef (ave his Life. 

| And theſe are the Diſeaſes which raged this Year, viz; 
he ſame With theſe of the three foregoing Years, but 
What thoſe were that raged the following Year, viz. 1677, 


' can't ſay, for at the beginning of the Year, I was 
5 much troubled with a bloody Urine upon the leaſt mo- 
on, and not long after with the Gout, which was not 


Wo much in my Limbs, as in my Bowels, where I was 
Soricvoully tortured: I was alſo weak and without appe- 
Kite, and my Legs ſwelld; I had alſo other Symptoms 
What were no leſs dangerous, ſo that I cou'd willingly 
Shave dy'd then; upon this account J kept at home three 
Months, and afterwards was forced to go into the Coun- 
try, for the recovery of my Health, and to continue 
Ethere almoſt as long ; but returning in the Autumn, my 
Friends told me that there were a few Agues here and 
there, but chiefly in the Country, but being by reaſon of 
Sickneſs unable to viſit Patients, I cannot write any thing 
of this Year, 

| The next Year 1678, the conſtitution of the Air being 
Wholly changed, ſo favoured Agnes, that they became 
again Epidemical 3 whereas they had in a manner whol- 
Bly left the City for the Space of thirteen Years, from the 
ear 1664, only here and there they ſeize ſome, or 
per haps were brought with them out of the Country, and 


xz 
= 


ey will not continue as they are, but will increaſe till 
b 1 diſpoſition of the Air comes to its height, on whicli 
4 they depend; for though there were few of them in the 


Spring, yet they did fo rage above all other Diſeaſes at 
the latter end of Summer, and in Autumn, that they a- 
lone were Epidemical; but in the Winter they gave way 
to the Small pox, and to other Epidemical Diſea les, llit 
a fit Seaſon for Agues returned. 

But now that I may deliver what I have carefully ob- 


ber ved, concerning the Nature and Cauſes of theſe Agues, 
a WW f 

h muff be firſt noted, though Quartan Agues were here- 
dcofore moſt common, now they were either Tertians or 


x WW Wotidians (unleſs the laſt be called double Tertians) and 
„ likewiſe, that though theſe Tertians and Quotidians, 
d bmetimes invading with ſhaking and ſhivering, and then 
„ Heat firſt following, and icon Ater Sweat, and in a pr 


222 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 


fect Apy rexy, and return again afreſh, after a tated p 
riod, yet they did not keepthis Order above three or fi; 
Fits, eſpecially, if the Patient was kept a Bed, and tod 
hot Cordials, which add Oyl to the Fire, as they ſay; for 
then the Diſeaſe was ſo heightened even contrary to its N 
ture, that inſtead of an intermiſſion, there was only ae 
miſſion, and coming daily nearer to the Species of continy 
al Fevers, ſeizing the Head, deſtroyed many. 
As to the Cure, it has now been well known to me fir 
many Years, how dangerous a thing it is in Tertian 
and Quotidians, (which when they are new, and hau 
put on no Type, are ſtill next door to continual Fevers) 
toattempt the removal of them by Sudorificks ; for thy 
it is very well known, that as ſoon as the Sweat break 
out, Reſtleſſneſs and other Symptoms* vaniſh immediately, 
and Apyrexy ſucceeds, and therefore of conſequence i 
muſt be indulg'd a little, at leaſt not hindred, when th 
Fit is going off; yet it is very evident, that if Sweat h. 
orced more than it ſhoa'd, the Fever which intermitted 
will prove continual, and the Life of the Sick is ina bz 
zar deus condition; one is ſaved and the other dies: th 
reaion is this, unleſs my conjectnre fails me, ix. that 
this profuſe Sweat, when it exceeds the degree of the 
febrile Matter, exalted fo far by the heat of the Fit, a 
that part of it anſwering to one Paroxyſm may be er 
Fed, it waſts the reſt of it in inflaming the Blood. 
Therefore whilſt I contidered how ineffectual this methol 
was, and alſo other Evacuation, that is, Bleeding and 
Purging, both whereof by relaxing the Tone of the Biood 
protract the Diſeaſe, the Peruvian Bark gave me the 
moſt certain hope; concerning which I can ſafely fay 
not withſtanding the prejudice of the common People, 
and of ſome of the Learned, I never ſaw, nor cou'd re 
ſonably fo much as ſuſpect any miſchief wou'd happen bo 
the Sick from the uſe of itz only they who have uſed i 
a =og While, as I have ſhew'd in the Chapter of a Rhet 
matiſm, are ſometimes ſubject to a Kheumatick Scur'); 
but this very rarely happens on this account, and when 
it does it is eaſily cured by the Remedies there deſctr #2 
bed; and truly, ifI were as well aſſured of the durat- Þ 
on of its eſſects, as I am of its innocence, I ſhou'd not 
doubt to give it the firſt place, among all Medicines that 


ale 


the Tear 1675, to the Tear 1680. 223 


tre yet known; for it is not ouly found to be of excel 
ent Virtue in this Diſeaſe, but alſo in the Diſeaſes of 
Uthe Womb and Stomach; fo little reaſon has any one to 
complain of the unwholſomneſs of it. 

But the ſaid Bark has got and ill Name, I ſuppoſe for 
Itheſe Reaſons, chiefly; Firſt, becauſe all the dreadful 
Symptoms that attend an Ague, when it has tormented 
a Man a long time, are imputed to the Bark, when he 
has ſcarce aſed it once; Secondly, becauſe many ſup- 


or pole, ſeeing it drives away the Diſeaſe by an occult Vir- 
ang tue, and not by ſenſible Evacuation, that the matter cau- 
ave Wing the Diſeaſe, which ſhon'd have been caſt out, is 
5) Wot up by the aſtringent Virtue of the Bark, like an 
” Enemy Within the Walls ready to give new diſturbance, 
aks 


nd that the Patient is not quite free, for he drags his 
Chain after him ſtill ; but theſe Men do not conſider, that 
the Sweats, which come at the End of the Fir, have caſt 
the off all that, that was gathered on the well days, there 
b remaining only the Seeds of the Diſeaſe to be ripened in 
tel time, ang that the Bark purſuing the flying Fit (when 
all the proviſion or ſuſtenance of the Diſeaſe, which 
Us WJhould have been ſent in, is intercepted ) cannot be ſaid 
hat to retain that in the Blood, which cannot be found there, 
tie unleſs in Embryo, and therefore muſt not be thought 
5 W-epuilty either of thoſe Fits, or Obſt ructions which are com- 
13 5 objected. | 

% But by what means do we find that the Bark drives 
0! away Agues, by its aſtringent Faculty? he that wou'd 
prove this, maſt neceſſary firſt produce other aſtrin- 
0! ents indued with the like Virtue. Indeed 1 have tryed 
in: the ſtrongeſt of them, cou'd never yet obtain my 


end; yea it cures ſome, who after the taking it, go as 
le, pften to ſtool, as if they bad taken a ſtrong Purge. But 
* When all is ſaid, it is the trueſt Wiſdom for every one to 


Keep Within his due Bound, but if any one will deceive 
aimſelf, and think he is indued with other Faculties, than 
I hat are ſubſervient, either to natural Religion, that is 

That due Veneration be given to God, the Maker an 

Povernour of all things, with the profoundeſt Proſtration 
Sf Mind, which he of right deſerves, or to moral Philo- 
Jophy, that he may exerciſe Virtue, and become ſervice- 
Able to Human Society ; or laſtly, to the Art a 
athe - 


224 Of the Epidemick Diſeaſes from 
Mathematica), or to ſome other Mecanical Trade, which 
are beneficial to Mankind; let this Man firſt draw 3 
Hypotheſis from the natural School Philoſophy, whereby 
he can explain, but only one Specifick Difference 9 
things in Nature; for inſtance, let him glve a reaſon 


Why all Graſs is every where found to be green, and ne. 


ver otherwiſe, and the like; if he can do this, I wil 
readily ſubſcribe to his Judgment; but if not, I wil 
not fear to lay, that all a Phyſician's Care and Induſtry 
ſhou'd be beſtow'd in ſearching out the Hiſtory of Di 
ſeaſes, and in uſing thoſe Remedies, which, Experience 
being his guide, are able to cure them, ever obſerving 
that method which right Reaſon founded, not on ſpecula- 
tive Imagination, but theright and natural way of think- 
ing ſhall dictate; I will therefore briefly ſet down, what 
I have learned by practice concerning the method of gi. 
ving the Bark, 5 | 

The Peruvian Bark, Which is commonly called the 
Jeſvit's Powder, about 25 Years ago, if I remember wel, 
firſt became famous at London for curing Agues, and 
eſpecially Quartans; and indeed for very good reaſon, 
ſeeing theſe Diſeaſes were rarely cured before by any 
other Method or Medicine, wherefore they were calle 
Opprobria Medicorum, and were truly a reproach tv 
Phyſicians; but not very long after it was damned for 
two Reaſons, and thoſe no {mall ones, and ſo was wholly 
diſuſed: Firſt, becauſe it being given a few hours be. 
fore the Fit, according to the received cuſtom of that 
time, it ſometimes killed the Patient, and ſo J rement 
ber it happened to a Citizen of London, one Aldermiat 
Underwood, and to Captain Potter an Apothecary Il 
Black-friars;, this Tragical effect of the Powder, tho 
very rare, did yet deſervedly withdraw the beſt Phyſics 


ans from the uſe of it, Secondly, becauſe tho' the Patient 


was rid of his Fit by it, which wou'd otherwile have 
come, and it ſeldom fail'd, yet within fourteen days It 
relapſed, that is, when the Diſeaſe was new; and had no- 


ent it ſelf by length of time. Moſt Men being fway'd by 


theſe Reaſons, quite caſt off the hope they had former 
eonceived of this Powder, neither did they ſo value tif 
keeping off of a Fit for a few Days as to endanger their 
Lives by taking the Powder: But having for fever 


Jen, 


1 * 1 
—B RW" * 


_ 
* * 3 * 
. N rere { _ 4 *. 5 


> SORE; IE: On} ks. a 6 ; 
a -—= Mw tows f ... Ao _ &X 


my ma, wy go os. 


mm», OD 


mw OO © 2 W» Q 


2 — £3 


A vr © —- my 


the Var 1675, to the Tear 1680. 225 


Years ſince ſeriouſly conſidered with wy ſelf, that the 
Virtne of this Bark was not common, | was copfident 
Agues cou'd better be cured by no other Medicine than 
this Herculean one, if it were uſed with care; therefore 
] confider'd a long time how I might prevent the dan- 
ger impending from the Powder, and the Relapſe, which 
followed in a few Days, which were the two Inconve- 
niencies to be avoided, and by the help of it to promote 
the Patient to 4 degree of perfect Health, 

Firſt of all, | ſuppoſe, the danger that was threaten 
ed did not ſo much procceed from the Bark, as fron: the 
unſeaſonable uſe of it; for when great ſtore of Feb ile 
matter is gathered in the Body on the days of inter miſ- 
fion, the aforeſaid Powder, if it be taken immediately be- 
fore the Fit, hinders the Morbifick matter from being 
ejeted according to Nature's method, that is, by the 
force of the Fit, and being contrary to all reaſon ſhut. 
up, uſually endangers the Patient's life; now I reckoned, 
| cou'd prevent this miſchief, and alſo put a ſtop to the 
breeding of Febrile matter anew, if after one Fit is off, 
| preiently gave the Powder, that the following might 
be ſtopt; and if on the days of intermiſſion at ſet times 
repeated now and then the ſame till a new Fit were 
coming, I night gradually, and therefore ſafely, through- 
ly tinge the Maſs of Blood, with the Salutiferous virtue 
of the Bark. 

Secondly, Since the relapſe, which uſually happens 
within fourteen Days, ſeemed to be occaſioned, becauſe 
the Blood was not ſufficiently ſaturated with the Virtue 
of the Febrifuge, and for that reaſon was not efficacious 
enough, therefore 1 thought nothing wou'd be fo good 
for preventing a relapſe, as the repitition of the Powder 
at due inſtances, before the Virtue of the preceding 
— * quite ſpent, though the Diſeaſe at preſent was 
quelled. | 

My mind therefore, ſwayed with the weight of theſe 
realons, dictated to me the method | now uſe: being cal- 
led to one ill of a quartan Ague, ſuppoſe on a Monday, if 
the Fit is to come the ſame day, I meddle not, but only 
put him in hopes that he ſhall be treed from the next; and 
therefore the two well Days, that is Tueſday and IVed- 
neſaay, ] gave the Bai k in the following manner, 

Take 


6 CE WIEN OS 


226 Of Fpidemick Diſeaſes from 


Take of the Peruvian Bark finely powdered one Ounces 
male an Eleftuary with a ſufficient Cu intity of Syrup 
of Gilliflowers, or of dried Roſes, divide it mto twelve 
parts, wher eof ler him take one every fourth Hour, he- 
ginning immediately after the Fit, and let him drink; 


Glaſs of Wine immediately after it; Or if the Sick like 
Pills better; 


Take one Ounce of the Peruvian Bark finely pomdered, 
male midling Pills with a ſufficient Quantity of Sig 
25 Gill flowers, whereof let him take fix every fourth 

our, 


But one Ounce of the Powder may be mingled with a 
Quart of Claret with the ſame ſucceß, and lels trouble; 
and eight or nine Spoonfuls may be given at the ſame di- 
ſtaace of time we mention'd before: On Thurſday, at 
which time the Fit is fear'd, J order nothing, becauſe 
uſually none comes, the relicks of the Febrile matter 


being deſpumated, and ejected out of the Blood by the 


uſual Sweats which compleated the preceding Fit, and 
the gathering a new Minera, or Fumes, b-ing prevented 
by the repeated uſe of the Powder of the Days between 
the Fits. | | 

But however, leaſt the Diſeaſe ſhould return, which 
was one of the foreſaid Inconveniencies, on the eighth 
Day preciſely after the Patient had taken his laſt Doſe, | 
certainly gave him the ſame Quantity of the ſaid Powder, 
that is, one Ounce diviced into twelye Parts, in the ſame 
method | gave the former: but tho' the Bark once repeat- 
ed in this manner often cures the Diſeaſes; yet the Pa- 
tient is not wholly out of danger, unleſs he follows his 
Phyſitian's directions, when he preſcribes him the fame 
method at the ſame diſtances, a thud or a fourth time, 
eſpecially when the Blood has been weakened with ſome 
preceding Evacuation, or the Patient has unadviledly 
Expoled himſelf to the cold Air. 

But tho this Medicine has no purgative Virtue in it, 
yet by reaſon of the peculiar Temper,znd Indioſyncraſie of 
lome Bodies, it often happens that the Patient is vio- 
lently purged, as if he had taken a ftrong Catharcick, *. 

Ru ; this 


, * _ — o 
- * 1 + $ a F ff I» * 2 'as 
LO 32 3 . _ 


4.4." 74 35 Was LATER” N — n — 


VW 


any JT a _« rw VA] us 


+ ww, 6 


92 — Og. + * 2 4 3 7 i : 3 
q ee 


1 +» - = 
r n r avs * 


8 


tbe Powder if the Jooſeneſs continues. 


the Year 1675, to the Tear 1680. 227 


this caſe, it is altogether neceſſary to give Laudanum 
with it, that it may not purge, Which is plainly contrary 
both to its own Nature and to the Diſeaſe, but that it 
may be retained until it has done its buſineſs; therefore 
in this Caſe I order ten dr: ps of Laudanum to be drop'd 
into Wine, and to be taken after every other Dole of 


proceed in the ſame Method with other Agues, whe? 
ther Tertian or Quotidian; for upon the ending of the 
Fi, | immediately fall upon be hb, and I follow ard preſs 
them as much as their Nature will bear by the Repitition 
of the Medicine, in the ſpaces be:w:xt the Fits, yet with 
th's difference, that Whereas a Quartan can be very rare- 
ly taken off with leſs than an Ounce divided into Doles 
the other may be ſo ſubdued with ſix Drachms, that they 
will grant a Truce at leaſt. 

But tho' Tertians and Quotidians, after a Fit or two 
may ſeem to intermit, yet often times, they afterwards 
turn into a kind of continual Fever, as I have noted be- 
fore, and come only to a remiſſion, even on thoſe Days 
they promiſed an intermiſſion, eſpecially when the Pati- 
ent has been kept too hot in Bed, or has been puniſh'd 
with Medicines to carry off the Ague by Sweat; in this 
caſe, taking an opportunity from the remiſſion, be it 
never ſo ſmall, for that is all is left me, I gave the Pow- 
der juſt after the Fit, as near as I can guels, viz. every 
fourth Hour, as I ſaid, making no matter of the Fit, be- 
cauſe otherwiſe in ſo ſhort an interval, the Alexiterick 
ho of the Bark cannot be communicated to the 

00d. 

And tho' the Agues which are now frequent amongſt 
us, after one or two Fits, incline to continual Eevers, yet 
lince chey muſt be referred to Intermittents, I make no 
ſcruple to give the Bark, even in thoſe that are moſt con- 
tinual of this kind, which being repeated in the manner 
aforefaid, will undoubtedly bring the Patient to an A- 
pyrexy, if the conſtant Heat of the Bed, and the unſeaſon- 
able ule of Cordials have not made it a contiuual Fever; 
in Which Caſe, 1 have more than once obſerved, that the 
Back will do no good. I never found that Wine, where- 
in the Bark is given (which one might well ſuſpect } 
cid any Harm to one in an Ague ; but on the le 
1 2 Sat 


4 


228 Of the Epidemick Diſeaſes from 


Heat, Thirſt, and other Symptoms of the Ague, did pre- 
ſently vaniſh after taking a ſufficient quantity of this Re. 
medy, notwithſtanding the Wine. But here it is to be 
noted, that the nearer the Ague comes to a continual Fe. 
ver, either of it ſelf, or by reaſon of too hot a Regimen, 
ſo much the more need is there of a greater quantity of 
the Bark; fo that ſometimes I have found it neceſſary to 
ive an Ounce and an half, and ſometimes two Ounces, 
efore the Diſeaſe wou'd go off. 

And whereas there are ſome that cannot bear this Bark 
in form neither of a Powder, nor of an Electuary, nor 
yet of Pills, I give them an Infuſion made in the Cold; 
that is, I infuſe for ſome time two Ounces of the Bark 
groſsly powdered in a quart of Rheniſh wine: This Li. 

vor being ſeveral times paſs'd through Hippocrates's 

leeve, is of a clear colour, and not fo offenſive, but that 
it may be taken by the molt delicate Palate 3 four Ounces 
of the ſaid Infuſton having ſtood ſeveral days, ſeem to 
contain the virtue of one Dram of the Bark given in 
Powder; which, becauſe it is neither ill taſted, nor bur- 
thenſome to the ſtomach, may be taken twice as often 
as any other form of this Medicine, *v:z. till the Fits are 

ne, | 
* ſometimes it happens, that when this Diſeaſe has 
not come to a regular Type, the Patient, by reaſon of Vo- 
miting almoſt continually, cannot retain the Bark in his 
ſtomach, in whatſoever form it is given; and in this caſe, 
the Vomiting muſt firſt be ſtopt, before tlie Bark can be 
uſed; to which end [ order, That he take a Scruple of 
Salt of Worm-woocd in a Spoonful of the freſh Juice of 
Lemons, fix or eight times in the ſpace of two hours, and 
afterwards ſixteen drops of Liquid Laudanum in one 
Spoonful of Strong Cinnamon- water; and ſoon after, if 
the Vomiting ceale, let him begin the Uſe of the Jeſuits 
Powder. e 
For Children whoſe tender Age can ſcarce bear that 
this Remedy be taken in any other form, at leaſt in ſuch 
a quantity as may be ſufficient to cure the Diteale, I uſed 
to preſcribe the following Julap, 


Take of Black-Cherry-water and Rhenifh-wine, each to 
Ounces ;, of the Feruvian-bark finely JR, three 
ram., 


rr oY cat, Ew, TD ww eee 


ey 


© twixt the Fits in Tertians and Quotidians, do not allow 
time ſufficient to tinge the Blood throughly with the Febri- 
ſuge virtue of the Bark. Therefore it cannot he ſuppo- 
E ſed, that the Sick ſhould fo certainly'miſs the next Fit 7 oe 
his taking it, as it uſually happens in a Quartan, for in 
E theſe, the Medicine often will not perform the promiſed 
Cure under two days time. 


E ſtanding the Caution above delivered, does nevertheleſs 
relapſe, which ſeldomer happens in a Quartan, than in 
> Tertians, and Quotidians, yet it will be the part of a: 
- prudent Phyſician, not to inſiſt too pertinatiouſly upon 


to attempt according to his judgment the cure by ſome 
other means; to Which, above the reſt, the bitter deco- 
> tion is generally held to conduce much, 


: ther kept from Meat nor Drink, of what kind ſoever 


cold Liquors only excepted, for they weaken the Mals of 
Blood, and are apt to occaſion the return of the Ague : 
Let him therefore eat Fleſh of eafie concoction, and of 
good juice, and let him aſea little Wine for his ordinary 
F drink, whereby alone I have ſometimes reftored Sick 
© Perſons, even thoſe whoſe bodies being weakned with 
the frequent return of the Ague, have eluded the virtue 
of the Bark, 


3 — cold Air, till the Blood has obtained its preſtine vigour 
* alll, 


| | ing of Agues, we admoniſhed that the Patient was to be 
well purged after the Diſeaſe went off: This is to be un- 


© wn accord, er were cured by ſome other method, and 


the Tear 1675, to the Tear 1680. 229 


Drams ;, of Syrup of July flowers, one Ounce : mingle 

them, and make a Julap; let him take a Spoonful or 

two every fourth Hour according to the Age, till the Fits 

go off drop into every other Doſe, if there be a Looſe* 
neſs, one or two drops of Liquid Laudanum. 

0 

It is to be noted moreover, that the ſhort diſtances be- 


And you muſt oblerve, that if the Patient, notwith- 


the method of giving the Bark at the ſaid diſtances, but 


As to Diet and other Regimen, the Sick muſt be nei» 


it be, that gratifies his Stomach, Summer fruits and 


Nor ought the Patient unadviſedly to commit himſelf. to 
But it is to be noted here, that when heretofore treat- 


derſtood only of thoſe Agues that either went off of their 


Q3 not 


230 Of the Fpidemick Diſeaſes from 


not by the Jeſuits Powder ; for when the Cure was per. 
form'd by this Remedy, of which we now ſpeak, there 
was no need of Purging, nor truly wou'd it bear u, 5 
powerfully does the Bark reſiſt the Fits, and that ill d 

ſition which they 1 upon the Body; therefore z 
s of Evacuations are by all means to be avoided: fer 
the gentleſt Purge, yea, a (lyſter of Milk and Sugar will 
Cecr.ainly put the Patient in danger of the return of the 
 Dileale, and perchance of Death it ſelf, 
And here is to be remembred, that a certain great 
Symptom ſometimes came upon theſe Apues the firli 
years of this Conſtitution namely, their Fits did not 
come With ſhaking and ſhivering, and afterwards the 
Fever following; but the ſick bad plainly the ſymptoms 
of an Apoplexy, though indeed it were nothing elle, how 
like ſoever to this Diſeaſe, than the Fever filling on the 
He. d, as was ſufficiently evident by other figns, as wel 
as by the colour of the Urine, which in Agues is com- 
monly of a decp red, as is the Urine of People affected 
with Jaundice, though not quite ſo red, and likewiſe 
puts off a Sediment like Brick-duſt ; in this caſe, though 
all evacuations of every kind {eem to be indicated for 
the revullion of the humours from the Brain, as is wont 
to be done in a true Appoplexy, yet they are who)ly to 
be omitted, becauſe they are very injurious in the Ague, 
t' Origmal Canſe of this Symptom, and moreover haften 
Death, as I have known; but on the contrary, we mult 
Wait till the Fit goes off of its one accord, at Which tim? 
the Bark is preſently to be given, if it could not be ti 
ken before. and muſt be carefully repeated in the ſpaces, 
that re free from the Fits, of this kind, till the Patient 
is quite wall. ET 

Somerimcs it happens, though very rarely, that old 
Men, that have had a long time this Diſeaie, and have 
beer unskiljully vun ſlied with Bleeding and Purging, fall 
into a Diabete, ; wren the Fever is perfectly cared ; for 


bled, cannot afli».vlate the Jvices brought to it, an 
they are put eff crude and unconceaed, by the urmary 
Paſſages, and by realun of a prodigious quantity of U- 
ri” v.1d.d as often as they make it, the ſtrength 15 by 


degrees 1mpared, and the ſubſtance of the Body . 


their Blooi weakened on this account, being quite diſa. 


the Tear 1675, to the Tear 1680. 231 


were waſl.ed away: In this caſe, as well as in every Dia- 
betes, by which means ſo ever occaſioned, the curative In- 
diciions are wholly to be directed to the invigorating and 
f engrbening the Blood, and likewiſe to ſtop the Preter- 


natural Flux of the Urine. 


Take of Venice-T reacle one Ounce and an half, of the Con-. 
ſerve of the yellow Peel of Oranges one Ounce, of Diaſ- 
cordium half an Ounce, of Ginger and Nutmegs cau- 
died, each three Drams, of Gaſcoins Powder one Dram 
and half, of the ourward Bark of Pomegranates, of the 
roots of Spaniſh Angelica, of red Coral prepared, and of 
the Troches of Lemnian Earth, each one Dram, of Boles 
Armenick two Scruples, of Gum Arabick, half a Dram, 
with a ſufficient quantity of Syrup of dry'd Reſes, make 
an Electuary : let him take the qu intity of a large Nut- 
meg in the Morning, and at five in the Evening, and at 


Bed time, for the ſpace of a Month, drinking upon it 
fix ſpoonfuls of the foll wing Infuſion, 


3 Tale 7 the Roots of Elecampane, Miſterwort, Angelica, 
BY and C& 


entian, each half an Ounce, of the Leaves of Ro. 


* man Wormmwood, white Horehound, of the leſſer Centau- 


ry, and of Calaminth, each one handful, of Juniper-ber- 


1 ries one Ounce; let them be cut ſmall, and infuſed in 


five Pints of Canary; let them ftand together in a cold 
Infuſion, and ftrain it as you uſe it. 


Let him be fed with Meats of eaſie digeſtion, as with 
Veil, Mutton, and the like; let him forbear eating of 
Herbs, and all Fruit whatever, and let him drink Spa- 
niſh Wine at every Meal. 

That laſting and obſtinate Diſeaſe, the Whites in Wo- 
men, is cured almoſt the ſame way, and by the ſame Re- 


medies as is the Diabetes juſt now mentioned ; for the cu. 
rative Indications are in both the ſame, how different ſo- 
ever theſe Diſeaſes may ſeem to be; but in the cure of 
the Whites, bleeding muſt be uſed once, and purging 
thrice, with two Scruples of Pil. Coch. Major before cor- 
roborating Medicines are preſcribed ; but in the whole 
proceſs afterwards they muſt be no more uſed; for all 
forts of Evacuations render the Virtue of corroborating 
Medicines ineffectual. But this by the bye. 


24 1 


A * anne, ä — = T © 
: - * - : * — 
4* * Ac ko - — * p 0 — 7 
* 


232 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 


| thought it neceſſary to ſay thus much briefly concern: 
ing ine ue of the [eruvian Bark, for I did not interd to 
1:4ulge the Pomps of Kemedies; and indeed hey that add 
any ching to the Bark heſides a Vehicle necc ſary tocarry 
it to the Sromach, cicher doit ignorently, or decentfolly 
in my Opini:n, which any good Man ou'd abhot, and 
{liou'd be drawn to nuch à Fraud by no private advantage, 
he being part f the common Nature. As to what re- 
mains, if Men had pleaſed to turn to what I bad written 
four years ago in the Hiſtory of accute Diſeaſes, (which 
Jah knew before that time) viz. in What manner the 
Bark was to be given in the ſpaces betwixt the Fits, and 
how it was afterwards to be repeated, when the Sick te- 
Covered, perhips not a few of thoſe had been living which 


are now avad, how much ſoever men contemn'd my en- 


d:avours for ihe publick good, and deſpiſed the Admoni- 
tion there delivercd in the following Words, Wherein are 
briefly contav.ed thoſe things, which have been treated 
here la: gely, viz, 3 

But g1 *4t care muſt be taken, that the Bark is not gr 
ven too , con, namely, before the Diſeaſe has ſomewhat 
waſted it ſelf (inlets the weakneſs of the Patient requires, 
that it ſhould be given ſooner ) for it is not only to be 
feared, that it ſhould be rend red ineffectual by the too 
Early ule of it, but allo leſt it ſhou'd endanger the Pati- 
ents Liſe, if a ſtop ſliould be ſuddenly put 10 the Blood, 
whilſt it is endeavou. mg its Deipumation with all its 
might, In rhe next place, no part of the febrile Matter 
15 :v be drawn away by Purging, much leis by Bleeding, 
that the Bk may perform its buſineſs the beiter; for 
by eitlet ot them the Occonomy of the Body is weakned, 
and ſo the Fits may more icadi'y and certainly return. 
When he Vircue of the Powder 1s gone, it ſcems to me 
mere beneficial ro Tu-Quie the Bloc d leifurely with the 
atoreſ.nd Re ine, and a good while before the Fit, than 
to cnacuvour at once to hinder the Fit juft approaching, 
fo: by this means the Kemedy has more time to perform 
it» bulinets chocoughty, and then the Patient is freed 
roh LNG danger that might happen by a ſudden and un- 
leaſonable itop by which we cndcavout to oppꝛ eſs the Fit, 
that now about VERtTLILS ſelf wich all its Might. Laſts 
ly, the Per 23 t be iepeated in ſuch ſnort lter 


8 Y 3 3 


my 


AN EIIS 2.750 r 


— 


E 
2 


0 
* 
© 


this Method more than any other, 


4 


the Tear 1675, to the Tear 1680. 237 


| of time, that the Virtue of the former Doſe be not whol- 
4 Iy ipent before the other 1s given; for by the frequent Re- 
. __ a good habit of Body will be recovered, and the 


jene wholly vanquiſhed, and for theſe Reaſons 1 ike 


the of Jeſuits Powder one Qunce, of the Syrup of red 

Take 9 , mingle them ; let the Sk to e the 
quantity of a large N rmeg Morning and Evening daily 
of theſ: days the genuine Fit does not come, till he 
has raken all the Confetticn, and let it be repeated once 
in a Fortn:ght for thrice. 


But though the Bark above-mentioned excels all other 
Medicives, Which have been hirherio found out, yet in 
Vernal Tertians, if the Patient be of a Sanguine Conſti- 


tution, and in the flower of his Age, I have obſerved the 
Core has been perfurmed by the following Remedies; for 


© inſtance, Let the Patient he Bluoded in the Arm on his well 


- 


day, and ſome hours after in the ſame day, give a Vomit 


ol the Infuſion of C ocus Metallorum, and ſo order the time, 


4 
= 


$ 


7 


. K e 


that the Vomit may have done working before the lnva- 
ſion of the following Fit, and preſently after it is off, let 
him erter upon the ule of the following, 


Take of the extract of Gentian, Wormwood, and the leſſer 
Centuary, each two Drams, mingle them, and divide 
them into nine Deſes, whereof let him take one every fourth 
hour, drinking upon it of the bitter decoction without 
Purgers, and of white Wine, each three Ounces, 


There is another method of Curing theſe Tertians in 
poor People, who are not able to bear the Charge of a 
long Proceſs, 7 


Take of Virginian Snakeweed finely powdered one Scruple, of 
white Wine three Qunces,, mingle them, let the Sic 
take it two hours before the Fit, and being well covered 
with Cloaths, let him Sweat three or four hours, and let 
it be repeated twice, when the Fit approaches. 


The 


234 / Epidemick Diſeaſes from 
The following Year, namely 1679, at the beginning 
of F:.ly, the ſame Fevers returned again afreſh, and in 
crealirg daily, raged very violently in Auguſt, and were 
very deſtructive; but having now treated largely of theſe 
I will add no more, only that they gave way to a new F. 
pidemick depending on the manifeſt diſpoſition of the Air 
in November \, for at the beginning of November Covghs 
entred, that were more Epidemical than others! obe 


Con? 
Matt 
mak. 
ficul! 
ſtec 

the 

on C 


| er. WE 
ved in other years, for they ſeized almoſt all in every = 
Family > ſome of theſe did not much require Phyſick, ür 
bur others did ſo violently ſhake the Lungs, that the Sick H wbe 
did fometimes Vomit up wha: was in his Stomach, and *F 


if was giddy by realn of the violence of the Cough. On 
C the firſt days moit commonly, the Cough was dry, and 
brought up nothing; but when it continued a while, alt 
tle Matter was expectorated: In a word, upon the ac. 
4 count of the little Matter that was expectorated, and the 
5 violence of the Cough, and the duration of the Fits, it 
ſeemed like the Convulſive Cough of Children, only it 
dd not rage ſo violen:ly : But in this it exceeded the Con- 
valſtve Cough, viz. it invaded the Sick With a Fever, ac- 
comp nied with the uſual Symptoms of it, which ! never 
ye berv#} in Childrens Coughs, | 
Tho:igh Coughs ulually are troubleſome at the beginning 
of nter, yet all wondered that they were ſo very fre 
quent this year: And I ſuppoſe it chiefly bappened for 
this reulon ; October being more rainy than uſual, for 
indeed, it was almoſt continually raining, and Mens 
Blood agreeing With the Sealon, fucking in plentifully 
crude and watry Particles, and Tranſpiration through 
the Porcs being hindred by the firſt coming of the Cold, 
+ Nature endcrvoured te caſt them out by the he'p of a 
Cougn, through the Branches of the Arterious Vein, of 
as (me will have it, through the Glands of the Aſpers 
Av- teria, I was well ſatisfied, that the Cure multi de 
erformed, wien there was occaſion of a Phyfician, both 
by Evacuation, by Bleeding and Furging 3 nor can tht 
ſuperfl on Particles uf the Serum be fo commodioully el 
fet.u by any other M2. hod, as by bleeding and purg: 
ing, »hich dy miganily empiy the Veins. * to Pecto- 
: ral K: nedies, beſi ſes that they pleaſe the Patient, I 0 
1 not ice What good ther do in removing the Fouls of N 
ä Rh "Cough; 


the Tear 1675, to the Year 1680. 235 


congh; for their main buſineſs is either to thicken the 
Matter, when being too thin it cannot be ſpit up, or to 
make it thin, when by reaſon of its Clamminels it is dif- 
Kcoltly Coughed up; this I am ſure of, much time is wa- 
ſted to no purpoſe about theſe things, and that ſometimes 
the Maſs of Blood is ſo much weakned by the retenti- 


105 Ion of the Particles of Serum, that they are offen ſive to 
ler. Nature, and that moreover, the Lungs provoked by the 
17 ]W Cough are ſo ſhaken by the violent, and almoſt continual 
ik, Motion, that a Conſumption is often occaſioned, from 


Ewhence the Sick ought to be freed by haſtening the Curez 
nor are Sudorificks much ſafer uſed, by the uſe Whexeof, 
the Sick ſometimes falls into a Fever, and ſometimes alſo 
the Particles of the Blood, that are eaſily inflamed, are 
thruſt upon the Pleura, and fo a Pleuriſie is occaſioned, 
which through the Courſe of this Epidemick Cough hap- 
© ened to a great many Men, and was very dangerous, 
Wherefore I took a moderate quantity of Blood from 
E the Arm, and applyed a large and ſtrong Bliſter to the 
E Neck, that ſome part of the Peccant Matter might be 
carried another way; afterwards I gave daily a gentle 
'«= WW Purge, viz. Sena, Rhubarb, Manna, and Syrup of Koſes 
Soluti ve, till the Patient was quite well, or till the Sym- 
pioms were very much leſſened; or if Pills pleaſed the 
| Sick better, I ordered him to take two Scruples of the 
Pil. coch. Major, every day at five in the Morning, and 
to lleep after them. : 
And with this Method, viz. By Bleeding and Purging, 
and by this alone the Childrens hooping Cough is cured, 
which is otherwiſe very laſting, and almoſt incurable, 
= What others are able to do in this caſe I know not, Iam 
| ſure I have ſpent much time to no purpoſe, in trying vari- 
= ons, and almoſt all kinds of Medicines; but only gentle 
& Purges muſt be uſed, and they muſt be taken by ſpoonfuls 
according to the Age, which gentle Evacuation cures this 
Coagh, as I ſuppoſe, becauſe though not much ſerious Hu- 
mour is found in the Lungs, yet hot and ſpirituous Va- 
4 2 being tranſmitted from the Maſs of Blood to the 
7 Lungs, at ſet times, occaſion theſe violent Fits of Cough- 
„ing in Children, and the violent force of theſe upon the 
3 Lungs can ſcarce be ſo well ſtopt or prevented by any 
*F | ®ther Method, as by this, whereby a Motion contrary ow 
p . 7 e 


R — 


—_— Page. 
„ I ICY 


— 


_ — — 


236 Of Epidemick Diſcaſes from 
the former, to wit, by the Bowels, turns the cauſe of thy 
Diſeaſe. 

But in Epidemick Diſeaſes, of what kind ſoever they 
are, if they have newly ſeized the Sick, great care muſ} 
be taken, that he be not purged before Bleeding; for 
the Diſeaſes that depend on an Epidemick Conſtitution 
of the Air, are either Fevers, or upon the leaſt occaſiq 
turn to them, for the Fever is eaſily kindled by the Ty. 
mult, raiſed in the Blood and Humours, by the gentle| 
Purge, and by the heat that follows it, which otherwiſe 
Nature had carried off by the accuſtomed Evacuations d 
the Morbifick matter; as in a Cold, or in the Epidemick 
Cough, of which we now treat, or in a Looſenels, when 
a Fever raging Epidemically is diſpoſed to it. The {ame 
may be ſaid of any other Conſtitution of the Air, where: 
m the Body is determined to ſome certain kind of Fe. 
ver, Which does not always actually invade, but by the 
Guidance of kind Nature, the Fomes of the Diſeaſe i; 
caſt out of the Blood, by the help of ſome Evacuatiqn, 
that is agreeable to its Genius. This I conſtantly affirm, 
though it be the cuſtom to give Purges before Bleeding, 
or Which is worſe, that being wholly omitted; althoughit 
may be objefted, that the Feculencies lodged in the fir 
Paſſages, are carried to the empty Veins as often 28 
Blood is drawn before Purging; yet it is moſt certain 
that the Evacuation which goes before Bleeding, can no 
way compenſate the injury, brought =_ the Blood by 
the Tumult raiſed by the Purge, and it cannot be de. 
nied, that a Purge taken preſently after Bleeding, works 
much as it uſes to do, when it has been uſed before 
Bleeding ; and [ ſuppoſe not a few, eſpecially Children, 
have erithed by reaſon this was either unknown, or neps 
lected, and this is very manifeſt to me by much Exper 
ence: Experience, I ſay, the beſt Guide, by whose 
Laws and Rules, unleſs Phyſick be exerciſed, it were bet: 
ter there were no ſuch thing; for the Life of Man is too 
much trifled with, when on this hand Empericks, that 
are ignorant of the Hiſtory of Diſeaſes, and the method 
of Cure, ſet up only with Receipts; and on the other M& x 
band, vain Triflers, that place all their hope in Specu- t 
lations, aud ſo both deltroy more than the Diſeaſes wool 0 


the Tear 1675, to the Tear 1680. 237 


& they were left to themſelves. But that is Practice, 
und that alone will help the Sick, Which draws its cu- 
rative Indication from the very Phenomena of the Diſea- 
ſes, and confirms them by Experience; by which means 
the great Hippocrates obtained his height; and if by this 
jethod the medical Art had been delivered by any one, 
hough the Cure of one or two Diſeaſes might have been 


> Known by any of the common People ; yet the whole 
el Art would then have requir'd more skilful Men, than 


Mow it does, nor would it have been any whit degraded 
thereby; for there is much more ſubtilty in the Opera- 
tions of Nature, on the Obſervation wherein true Pra- 
ctice is founded, than is found in any Art that is ſup- 
ported by the beſt Hypotheſis, and the medical Art, which 
Nature teaches, would much more ſurpaſs an ordinary 


4; Capacity, than that which is taught by Philoſophy, Fe- 
TR ; . 
i. ers will confirm what I ſay, which take up two parts 


in three of the Phyſical Practice, and I appeal to a- 
ny one, that is but moderately thinking, whether I ſpeak 
true or no; for which of the moſt ignorant Quacks will 
confeſs himſelf unfit to cure this Diſeaſe, if according 
to the common Opinion, theſe two Indications are only 
to be minded, viz. that the Matter occaſioning the Diſ- 
eaſe be ejected by the help of Sudorificks, and that 
care be taken to remove thoſe Symptoms which come 
upon ſuch Evacuations; for he is very ſure that Venice- 
'0. WF 7reacle, Compound- powder of Crabs-eyes, and the like, 
taken inwardly, together with a hot Regimen, will force 

Sweats, which is all he propoſes to hinlelt in the Cure of 
ks WW this Diſeaſe, eſpecially if he has been acquainted with the 
word Malignity z and as to mitigating the Symptoms, he 
has Diacodium in readineſs to cauie lleep, when the 
Lick cannot reft; and a Gliſter when the Body is bound, 

and fo of the reſt; but he is not able to underſtand 
of himſelf, nor by his File of Bills, what ſort of Fever that 


is, which he endeavours to cure, if we believe (future 


Ages perhaps will believe it) that there are various forts 
0 ot Fevers, where each requires a method of cure dif- 
4 ferent from others, and moreover, that one and the ſame 
p Fever, whatſoever it is, requires one way, When it firſt 
1 reaks out, and another a little contrary through all its 
Y degrees, as long as it laſts, And by what means ſhall be 


tba 


1 
* 
4 
— 
N 
14 


* * 1 * _ * * 1 P A 
WAW p 
N ö ä 


5 - — > - 


rr 
" „ 


238 Of Epidemick Diſeaſss from 


that is ignorant of the natural Hiſtory of the Diſeaſe ey; 
le the curative Indications of this or that Phenomeny 
that is not very remarkable; (for the Hiſtory of the Li 
eaſe can only ſhev the true method of cure) for he cam 
j"dg? whether this or that Phenomenon proceeds fromthe 
DiCaſe, or from his method of cure. A day would ſcares 
ſuffice to reckon up the various Subriities which are to h 
obſerved in the curing of this and other Diſeaſes, and there 
being ſo many things, and of fo great moment requir'd u 
free Men from Death, there will be always room for Poſt; 
rity to add ſomething to thoſe Obſervations, wherein is de 
livered almoſt the infinite Variety of Operations of Np 
ture in the Production of Diſeaſes, and the curative Indy 
cations are enumerated which are drawn from the ſam: 
Fountain. The Art wou'd not therefore become con. 
temptible, if things of this Nature were publiſhed, but be 
rather more Illuſtrious, and being rendred more difficult, 
none wou'd be accounted legitimate Phyſicians, but ſuch 
6 were wiſe and of a ſound Judgment. But this by the 
e. 
"The Conghsaforeſaid, if they were ill managed, occaſiv- 
ned a Fever like that which raged ſo Epidemically inthe 
Winter, in the Year 1675, an account Whereof I gave in 
the fifth Section, Chap. 5. of my Book of accute Diſeaſes; 

but this Fever only proceeding, and being an effect of the i 
Fpidemick Cough, I cur'd it by the ſame method, which ee. 
was uled for the Cough above-deſcribed, namely, by 1 
0 


r 
20 


5 
3 


bleeding, by applying a Bliſter to the Neck, and by 
parging thrice: For tho'in a Congh without a Fever no Hu. 
time was ſet, how long the Sick ſhou'd be parged ; for s * 
I noted above, it is to be continued till the Sick was ei: Wer 
ther quite well, or till the Symptoms were much leſſened; Ne. 


but in the Fever, which proceeded from the Cough, pur- Wi 
ging ordered for three Days was ſufficient to quell it, Ne. 
which I have often obſerved in the Conſtitution we now tr: 
treat of. bo: 


But here it is to be noted, that tho' this Fever when hr! 
it firſt began was accompanied with troubleſome Defluxi- | 
o on the Lungs, yet after a Month or two, when then heap n 
of the Serum was leiſurely ejected from the Blood, tie Wat 
Fever was plainly of the ſame Nature, tho' it was not ac- 
companied with any Cough, (the impreſſion of 5 5 

ry 1 5 


the Tear 1675, to the Tear 1689, 239 
pi poſition remaining yet in the Blood) and therefore it 
vid not require a Cure different from that which the 
Covgh accompanied. | 

But this Fever continued in the ſame manner we have 
id till the beginning of the Year 1680, wherein I wrote 
Wheſe things, at Which time alſo, as the Year proceeded, 


"cl loves began to appear, and from that time, till the be- 
1 Winning of the Year 85, in which 1 publiſh this Edition, 
1 Whey continued the ſame; for now tho' they are not ſo E- 
V. pidemical in this City, as they were the firſt four Years, 
Th nd are alſo milder; yet in other places here and there, 
. Whey rage as much, and are as violent as before; and the 
„ eral Conſtitution does ſo much favour Agues to this 


Wery Day, that I can affirm, that for this time I have 
Wot obſerved one continual Fever, unleſs by ill manage- 


1 Wnent it was made ſo; nor was there one of theſe I call 
4 Ytercurrents, tho* they moſt commonly come every 
ck ear, ſo mightily inclined was this Conſtitution to pro- 
the Noce Agues, and the force of it undoubtedly muſt be a- 


— 


Wired before that which I call the depuratory Fe ver can 
Fave Epidemically ; for in the ſpecies of Agues, Nature 
ems to make too much haſt, and to run through, by 
Wreaſon of the quicknefs of its motion, the ſeaſons of pre- 
Waring the Morbinck Matter, and of its deſpuration, too 
on, Which is otherwiſe in the depuratory Fever, Where- 
In the ſigns of the concoction of the Febrile Matter to be 
Fected, ſometimes by Sweat, or rather by plentiful 
Transpiration, do not appear before the thirteenth or 
Wourteenth Day. Theſe things being well conſider'd, with- 
. doubt thoſe depuratory Fevers, Which reigned in the 
Wi cars 61, 62, 63, 64, Were, as it were, the Feces of 
Wome Agues, which raged before that time for a certain 
Peries of Years, $ but hoy long they prevailed I do not 
E&n0w )for when the Conſtitution, Which favoured Agues 
Peganto grow mild and old, the Fevers Which it after- 
Wards porduced were more humoral, and” earthy ; and 

r that reaſon, they were {lower in purifying the Blood, 

'hereas thoſe in the firſi Years of the Conſtitution” were 
pounded upon more ſubtile Principles, and being Inter- 
uttents, were Wont to run their Courſe! quickly. Now 
things are fo, it teems prubable to me that this Fever, 


3 


Conſti- 


* 
: 
2 (> 
5 
=} 


mean Depuratory, will return zs ſoon as this preſent: 


240 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 


Conſtution a little ahates, and that it will continue fin 
a certain Series of Years, before the Plague breaks oy 
But through all thele Years how many ſoever they ſhi 
be, wherein £1115 ever ſhall rage, Agues may now rg 
then ex-rt themſelves; and perhaps ſomerimes for a (hg: 
while become Epidemical, namely, when ſome manife 

uality of the Air ſhall favour them. I cannot ſay whether 
the Peravian Bark will as certainly cure this Fever, ax 
does the Agues that are now; but in curing the Pla 
and continua Epidemicks which will orderly follow thi 
no other effects are to be expected from it, than thoſe we 
now find in a Pleuriſie, Peripneumonia, Angina, and fu 
like inflammatory Fevers,. wherein it does not only do n 

ood, but it is Fung injurions. But however it be, on 

pidemick w ll ſucceed another for the future, in the wy 
we have laid, if Nature keep the ſame order ſhe has d. 
ſerved for theſe twenty tour Fears laſt paſt. 

And this is in a manner all, worthy Sir, which I ban 
obſerved concerning the Epidemick Diſeales of the Year 
laſt paſt, As to che cur: of a Rheumiatiſni, for that 
you inquired alſo, J have often been troübled as well s 
you, that ir conld not be performed without the loſs 
a great deal of Blood, upon which account, the Sick i 
not only much weakened for a time; but if he be of 
weakly Conſti-ution, he is moſt commonly rendred more 
obnoxious to other Diſeaſes for ſome Years, When after 
wards the Matter chat cauſes the Rhenmatiſm falls up 
the Lungs, the latent indiſpoſition in the Blood being pit 
into motion by taking cold, or upon ſome flight occal- 
on. For thcle reaſons I endeavour to try for ſome othet 
method different from bleeding, ſo often repeated to cute 
this Diieaſe; ther:for- well conſidering that this Diese, 
proceeded from an infl.mmatian, which is manifeſt fron 
other Phenomena, but eipecially from the Colour of tht 
Blood, which was exactly like that of Pleuriticks; | 
thought it Was probable, that this Dileale might be # 
well cured by ordering a {imple, cooling, and moderate 
ly nouriſhing Diet, as by bleeding repeated, and tho 
inconveniencies might be avoided, which accom pani 
the o her method, and I found that a Whey-diet uk 
inſtead of bleeding did the buſineſs. 


del 


umme OTE FUIITGELN 


TIE * 
2 4 


ns pw Um 2 5 —— — 2 of Wy — 2 Py — Ar 


* e * a 


Djs” 


* 
£ 
k 
= 
2 
Y 


the Tear 1675, to the Tear 1680. 241 
After the laſt Summer, my Neighbour Malthus the 


| Apothecary, and hoveſt, and ingenious Man, tent for me; 
He was miſerably afi'Qed with a Rheumatiſm accompa- 
pied with thele Symptoms; he was fiſt lame in the 
| Hip for two Days, afterwards he had a dull pain upon 

his Lungs, and a difficulty of breathing, which alſo 


went off in two Days time; afterwards his Head began 
to pain him violently, and preſently the Hip of the Right- 


E fide, which was firſt ſeized, and afterwards according to 
the Courſe of the Diſeaſe, almoſt all the Joynts, both of 


the Arms and Legs were affiited by turns; he being of 
4 weak and dry habit of Body, I was afraid, that by ta- 
king away much Blood, his ſtrength before but infirm, 


{| would be wholly vanquiſhed, eſpecially the Summer be- 


ing ſo far ſpent, it was to be feared, Winter would come 


before he could recover his ſtrength waſted by frequent 


leeding, and. therefore I ordered, that he ſhould feed on 
nothing but Whey for four days; afterwards I allowed 
him — the Whey, White bread inſtead of a Dinner, 
namely, once a Day till he was quite well ; he being con- 
tented With this thin Diet continued the uſe of it eighteen 
Days, only at laſt I indulg-d him Bread at Supper too, 
he daily drank eight Piuts of Whey made at h:me 

wherewith he was ſufficiently nouriſhed, After theſe 
Days when the Symptoms did no more vex him, and 
when he walked abroad, I permitted him to eat Fleſl:, 
namely, of boiled Chickens, and other things of eaſie Di- 
geſtionz but every foutth day he was dieted with Whey 


alone, till at length he was quite well, the inconvenien- 


cies Which I men: ion'd above being remedied by this me- 
thod, with which he was grievouſly afflicted ten Years 
before, bleeding being then uſed by my order for his Cure, 
and often repeated, 

if any one ſhall contemn this method, becauſe it is 
plain, and m-artificial, I would have ſuch a one know, 
that only weak people deſpiſe things for their being ſim- 
ple and plain, and that J am ready to terve the Publick, 
tho'l loſe my Reputation by it; and 1 will ſay, that [ 
do not at all queſtion, were it not for common prejudice, 
that the ſaid method might be accommodated ro other 
Diſeaſes, the Names whereof I conceal at preſent, and 
tht it would be more * to the Sick than the com- 


mon 


8 Of Epldemick Diſeaſes from 


mon pomp of Remedies, that are uſed for the . when 


„ fro juſt a dying, as if they were to be ſacrificed li: 
eaſts. 

And that thoſe things, which are counted viſe and q 
no worth, may ſerve to free Men from Death, when they 
are managed by a skilful Phiſician, I will ſhew by one 
Obſervation, which, tho? it have no relation to the Dil. 
eaſe we are now treating of, is not wholly different 
from the Scope I propofe. Two Months ago, one in my 
Neighbourhood deſired me to viſit his Servant, Who had 
taken a great quantity of Mercury ſublimatez that was 
melancholy upon the Account of Love; I came about 
an Hour after the poyſon was taken, and the Mouth and 
Lips were very much ſwelled, and he was violently fick 
with a burning Pain in the Stomach, and was almoſt ki 
ted with Heat; I ordered that he fhould drink three Gal. 
lons of warm Water, as ſoon as poſſibly he cou'd, and 
that as often as he vomited he ſhould fill his Stomach 
agam with it; I alſo ordered that his Bowels ſhou'd be 
waſhed with warm Water without any thing elſe, being 
plentifully injected; when h@#firſt perceived by Gripes, 
that the Poyſon went downward, the Wretch obeyed, 
being now very deſirous to live, and drank more Water 
than I ordered ; his Friends that were by, learn'd of him, 
that the Water which he firſt vomited was very acrid, 
by reaſon of the poyſonous Salt; but that which was 
from time to time vomited up was leſs acrid, till at 
length it became inſipid, and the Gripes were taken off 
by the Water-gliſters, and without any more ado, by the 
Bleſſing of God he recovered in a few Hours, only his 
Lips did not preſently aſſwage, and his Mouth was yet 
ulcerated by the Particles of the Poyſon, which were 
brought up with the Water by vomiting, but theſe Symp- 
toms went off in four days time by a Milk diet, only, | 
preferred the Water before Oyl, (Which ignorant People 
are wont to throw away with their Pains) and any other 
Liquor, becauſe it being very thin, it ſeemed to me fitter 
to abſorb the ſaline Particles of this Poyſon, than any other 
Liquor, that was thicker, or impregnated before With Par- 
ticles of ſome other Body, 


Bus 


* * 
* a 14 8 wr ä 


the Year 1675, to the Tear 1680. 243 


But to return to the Rheumatiſm, how convenie vt fo 
| over a Milk diet may be for young Men, and for thoſe 
| that have lived Temperately, and by meaſure, yet it is 
| not ſafe to treat People in Youth with this Method, or 
ſuch as have been for a long while too much addicted to 
Wine, and other ſpirituous Liquors ; for it injures ſuch 
Mens Stomachs, and by reaſon of the great Chilneſs it 
brings upon the Blood, it makes way for a Dropſie; 
therefore in this Caſe, it is beſt to cure the Patient al- 
moſt in the ſame manner I have ſet down in Chap. 5. 
of the ſixth Section of my Book of acute Dileaſes, tho” 
fince I wrote that, I have found by experience, that it 
| js better after the ſecond, or at moſt after the third 
E Bleeding to give Catharticks often, and to repeat them, 
till all the Symptoms go off, than to do all by Bleeding; 
for Purging aſſiſting Bleeding in the cure of the Diſeaſe, 
the buſineſs may be carried on without a great loſs of 
” Blood, and beſides by this means, there will be room for 
& Paregoricks, from which otherwiſe we muſt abſtain, how 
great ſoever the pain ſhould be; for by them the Diſeaſe 
is fixed, nor does it fo eaſily yield to Bleeding. But 
thoſe Purgatives are to conſiſt only of Lenitives, as of 
E Tamarids, Sena, Rhubarb, Manna, and Syrup of Roſes 
E ſolutive, whereas others made of Scammony, Falay, and the 
like, cauſe a Tumult and heighten the Pain. At Bed- 
time every Night after the Purge has done working, you 
2 * gwe an Ounce of Diacodium, ſomewhat earlier than 
is uſual. 


But here it is io be noted, that I have obſerved a cer- 


© tain Symptom, ſometimes like a Nephritick pain, as to 
the intollerable Pain of the Loyns, which being wont to 
follow Agues, ariſes from a Tranſlation of the Febrile 
matter upon the Muſcular parts of the Body,; but this 
Symptom requires no other Method of Cure, than the 
Ague whereou it depends, for it is heightned by frequent 
{ Bleeding, and any other Evacuation, and the Patient's 
+ life is endangered thereby. I thought good to mention 
thus much of this Symptom, that it might not impoſe on 
F any one, | 


R 2 And 


N 


OI — 


— * — - Sas 
r 
— — * . 


w* ” AT ISS 


—— l 
. „„ 
. U 


* — 


— . 
© dow , 
- 


- 
E 
— 


244 Of the Epidemick Diſeaſes from 


And theſe things, worthy Sir, are what I h ave < 
ſerved of the Diſeales, you inquired about, and if they 
ſhall pleaſe you and profit others, I have my Deſire; 
however I have done what I could to perform my 


Duty- SIR 
Your Devoted Grand, 
Tho. Sydenham, 
q To my very good Friend, the Learned 
1 Dr. Sy denham. 
. Worthy Sir, 


'$; 8 8 H E Art of Phyſick has been much improved by your 
* excellent Hiſtory of acute Dilzaſes, eſtabliſhed by 
'Þ diligent Obſervation, and faithful Experience, not writ: 
ten to gain Money or Fame, but with great Integrity and 
by Honeſty ; for you only endeavour to perform your Duty, 
. and to be every way beneficial to the preſent Age. | 
. have hitherto concealed what I was much deſirous to do; 
| but perhaps others at a greater diſtance have done it be- 
fore me; he that praiſes what you do, urges that you 
ſhou'd do ſomething, for which you may be further prai- 
ſed. It is the greateſt difficulty to treat of acute Dileales, 
for they pals ſo ſwiftly, that unleſs they are ſtopt oppor- 
runely, the Life is in extreme danger, and it cannot be 
relieved after by any heip; you have obſerved all the 
Moments of them, and what is neceſſary to be done in 
every juncture, Indeed your Works are fo perfect, that 
nothing cou'd be added to them, if you had not promiſed 
more, v:z. of Chronical Diſeaſes; theſe will bear a truce, 

and allow time to be exaimined and judged of, 
We have often heard of that abominable Diſeaſe the 
French-pox, the ignominious Original whereof the Euro- 
pon Nations carefully endeavour to caſt from them: 
elves, and that the Foot - ſteps of it may be more * 
red, 


By 
\ 
2B 
4 

£ 

75 


* 1 * 1 A * 2 
Las, win 6, paw pw mo wy 2 LH 


: — 7 * 2 n 3 * 
8 oY ey, - og 's . lh. 6% 2 : . * : * — a 
ky N IF. - M * F " ö 4 N þ F . 5 - "1 R * 
. e 1 1 wi. Ab ee; 0 l F * * 5 A Dd EE 83 n 88 whe enen * 


the Tear 1675, to the Tear 1680. 245 
red, they baniſh it to the moſt diſtant Indies. It is à 


very fit puniſhment for Whores for their exorbitant and 


untameable Luſt; and it is perhaps the harder to be re- 
moved, that the Repentance for it may be the more ſe- 


E vere; and he ſeemed to be touched with a Senſe of Hu- 


manity, and of Sin together, who openly wiſhed, that 
this filthy Diſeaſe ſhould be but once cured, But ſee- 


ing naw the Cure of it is chiefly managed by Moun- 
teba 


nks and Empericks, and the like, they either by 
Fraud, or Unskilfulneſs, ſo long deferr, and protract 
the Cure to the great charge, and greater trouble of the 
Sick, that he is very weary of his Life, by reaſon of the 
Severities, and the tediouſneſs of the Cure, and may 


count it better to be ſick, than to be cured; therefore! 
friendly claim your promiſe, and intreat you, that if 


you have any thing to ſay of this matter, you wou'd 
publiſh it firſt, as an earneſt of the reſt, and that you 


would kindly and candidly ſhew, by what method and 
by what means, he that is ſeized with this Diſeaſe may 


be ſooneſt cured, It is enough for the Sick to be puniſhed 


by God; it would be hard if he ſhould be puniſhed moxe 
= by the Phyſician. This would be well received by many, 
and I thall receive ſome part of the Thanks, becauſe 


ſuch a Treatiſe ſo much deſired was publiſhed at my 
requeſt. : 
—_ SI R, 


Tour Humble Servant, 


% +.” 
* 


H. Paman. 


— 


To the Learned Dr. Henry Paman, Fellom of 
St. John's College in Cambrigde, Univerſiry 
Orator, and Profeſſor of Phyſick in Greſham 
College, London. | 


Altho, worthy Sir, you are pleaſed in civility and 
kindneſs to me, to term my Book of acute Diſeaſes 
derſectly accompliſhed, yet 1 am fo ſenſible of my own 
l R 3 weaknels 


= * 
r 


246 Of the Fpidemick Diſeaſes from 
weakneſs, and of the imperfection of that Treatiſe. that 


T count, I have only chalked the way, whereby others of 


better parts may find the Knowledge, and Cure of the ſaid 
iſeaſes. | 


. 


Fungor vice cotis acutum, 


 Redaere que ferrum valet; exors ipſe ſecagdi, 


And truly ſo various, uncertain, and delicate, as I may 
ſay, is Nature, and fo does ſhe vary in producing il 
caſes, that it is not in the power of one Man, how long 
liv'd foever he is, to deſcribe particularly the varions 
Phanomena of them, and their proper Cures: One Man 
did I lay? Ten Men may certainly be well employed, ſuc. 
ceeding one another, for ſo many Ages, and alſo of excel- 
lent parts, and unwearied induſtry, and very converſant 
in Practice, fo far am 1 from thinking that I have obtain- 
ed the Art of Phyſick, or ever ſhall. 


Mecum habito, & novi quam fit mihi curta ſupellex. 


As to theſe Chronick Diſeaſes, which I promiſed to 
write of, I am ſo very earneſt to do it, that if I know 
my own mind, I do not ſo much defire to live upon any 
other Account as upon that, that I may be ſerviceable in 
ſome ſort in this reſpe& to Mankind, But I every Day ſee 
h_w ifficult and hazardous a Task it is, Ye aps for 
me, who have not Abilities enough for ſuch an uder- 
taking) for among Phyfical Writers, if yon except Hips 
crates, and ſome very few others, ſcarce any Footſtcps 
can be fourd whereby | might trace thro' theſe impaſſuble 
vays, obſtructed with. ſo many Difficulties; for the 
bt and helps, which Authors promiſe, are rather 46% 
far, than true lights; W hich rather miiguide ro Rocks 
a: d Precipices, than direct for the finding, the Genuine 
me'hod of Nature, for moſt of their Writings are 
built apon Hypotheſes proceeding from their own 


Fanci-sz; and the very Phenomena of Diſeaſes, of which 
the Hiſtory of them conſiſts, as they are deſcyibed by 
theſe, are modelled in the fame Shop of Suppoſitions, 49 
the very Practice, wherewith they undertake Diſeates 


(which is the certain Plague, and Deſtruction of IT 
in 


oO Oe ae | ett.” tdi. al Rs ens © wwe tc 


$3. £7 ms 


— wat WY 


the Year 1675, to the Tur 1680. 247 


kind) is ſuited to this Kind of Poftulata, and not accor” 
ding do the truth of the thing; ſo reigning are theſe mens 
E iWhimſies, almoſt in every Page, And in the mean while 
the Directions of Nature are ſlighted. And yet notwith- 
ſtanding if God ſhall grant life and leiſure, I will try 
what! can do: For thepreſent, that you may fee, how 
| ready I am to ſerve you, loffer this ſhort Treatiſe of the 
French-Pox, which I have only as yet fitted for the Prels, 
zs a Specimen of the whole. 1 | 

hut firſt I muſt acquaint you, that I have met with ſe⸗ 
veral, that have affirmed ( either upon a good deſign, 
that they might fright incontinent Perſons from fin, by 
the fear of following Puniſhment, or becauſe they would 
be thought very Chaſt that the cure of the French-pox, 
| ought not to be taught: But I do not agree with them, 
E becauſe there would be ſcarce any, room left for Charity, 
or for doing good turns, if thoſe miſchiefs, which unthink- 
ing People do bring upon themſelves by their own fault, 
were not to be kindly remedied; it helongs to God Al- 
mighty to puniſh the Guilt, but it is our Duty to help 
the miſerable, as much as we can, and to cure the Sick, 
and not to ſearch too nicely into the cauſe, or to vex them 
with our Cenſures ; I will therefore deliver, what I have 
E oblerved, and what J have try'd in this Diſeaſe; not that 
I delign to make Men worle, but to cure their Bodies, 


hat 
$ of 


ſaid 


de which is my buſineſs. — 
Yr The Fench pox came. firſt from the Weſt Indies into 
Europe, in the Year 1493, for beforę that time, the 
» mame of it was not ſo much as known amongſt 5 ns up- 
5 on Which account the Diſeaſe is commonly thought to 
c be Epidemical in thoſe parts of America, where we firſt 
e palanted our Colonies : But it ſeems rather to me to have 
- WW fakenits riſe from ſome Region of the Blacks near Guinea; 
s WF for J have learned from many of our Peeple of good 
e Credit, who live in the Caribbe lands, that the Slaves 
e * brought from Guinea, even before they land, and alſo 
: WF thoſe that live there, have this Diſeaſe without impure 


: Copulation, ſo that often a whole Family, Man, Wife 
„and Children have it; nor does this Diſeaſe which often 
J Attflicts theſe miſerable People any whit differ from the 
5 French-pox, as far as I can underſtand, as to the Pains, 
Ulcers, and the like, reſpett being had to the diver 


& 0, 


248 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 


of Climates, thouvh the name is quite different; , 
they call it the Yaws; nor does the method of Cue 
which they uſe differ from ours, for S4livation does the 
bulineſs every where; notwithſtanding what we ſu, 
the great Virtne of Guaiacum, and Sarſa Parilla in th 
places where they grow, which are thought in a wander 
to loſe their Virtues in the long paſſage to us; it teen 
therefore probable to me, that the Spaniards, that firk 
brought * Diſeaſe into Europe, were infected with It 
by the Contagion of the Blacks bought in Africa, t; 
ſome Nation whereof it may be Endemialz for «her; 
are many People that border upon Guinea, amomg whom 
that barbarous Cuſtom of changing Men for Ware pre. 
vails, But however it be, this contagious Diſeaſe creep. 
ing on by degrees, fo infected theſe parts of the World, 
that if it had went on with the ſame Celerity it began, 
it wou'd have deſtroyed mankind within few Apes, ur 
confined them to an Hoſpital, and made them wholly 
unfit for thoſe Offices, whereby humane Society is pre. 
ſerved; oily like Vegetables, being as it were tranlplan- 
ted from its own Country into another, it does not b 
much floariſh in Europe, but languiſhes daily, and. the 
Phenomena grow milder; for widen it firſt came over, 
when any one was leized with it, it preſently contami- 
nated his whole Mais of Blood, with dreadful pains of 
his Head and Limbs, and ſhewed it ſelf in Ulcers in va. 
rious parts. But it is an hundred years ago ſince it ſhew' 
it elt firſt in the Species of a virulent Gonorrhea, and 
does ſo ſt ill, endeavouring to go off that way, and it has 
no other manifeſt Symptom, only in a very few a imal 
Ulcer in the Privities, commonly called a Shanker, is the 
firit-i1,n of the Diſeaſe, the venom whereof, becauſe it 
cannot be carried off by a Gonorrhea, invades and infects Wi 
the Bio preieutly, 

Tins Di.cale is propagated either by Generation, and 
ſo the tender Infant is infected by one of the Parents, 0! 
by the touching of ſome ſoft part, whereby the Vrv- 


- 


lency arid Inflammation infinuate themlelves into tre 


Body, upon occaſtons to be mentioned in this place; 
firſt in » icking, for inſtance, either an Infant mey in. 
fect the Nurſe through the Pores of the Teats, or the 
Nurſe the Infant by its tender mouth. And _ 
5 a Hilden 


the Tear 1675, to the Tear 1680. 249 


; 4 Wctiidren by lying in bed naked with thoſe that are in- 
G ted; for tho thoſe that are full grown, whoſe fleſh 
e becomes firm by Age, can ſcarce be infected if they 
| Jie together, without impure Coiticn, yet the render 
rleſü of Children eafily receives the infection, which I 
© ive obſerved more than once in Children lying in bed 
with infected Parents. But, Thirdly, the ronching of a 
bolt part, eſpecially in impure Coition, and by this 
way eſpecially the Pox is conveyed 5 fu the Yard 
being turgid with Sturits appointed for Generation ſoon 
fucks in the infeftion from a venereal Ulcer, or Puſtle in 
© the ſheath of the Womb. Either of which lying hid 


pre. within, the Woman notwithſtanding may ſeem well ; 
ep. WW namely, the venom being ſo detaied by the moiſture 
rid, WF of thoſe parts, that it lowly invades the Blood; or is 


E oftner diſured, or in fome fort ejefted by the monthly 
I 1 This Contagion in my opinion fi:{t ſerzes 


olly WF the fehy Subſtance of the Glan, arid corrupting it fit ſt 
pre. cccaſiens and Inflammation, and then an uicerovs Diſpo- 
lan ſicen being induced by degrees, it caulrs the Sanies, 
% uch ue fec in a Gonorrhæ 1, to drop gently into the Tres 
the WW , and I am induced to believe it is ſo, becauſe I have 
er, ſcen this kind of virulent Matter 7 2 of the po- 
mi- r0us Subſtence of the Claus, and not caſf out of the Ure- * 
of WW %; and there has b en no Ulcer either in the Glans 
va WE or /repuce ;, but at length penetrating deeper, it cauſes an 
vd WW wntoward Uicer in the Proftare, Which is often teen. in the 
nd Bodies of ſuch as die of this Dileaſe. 
has this Diſeaſe proceeds according to the degrees to be 
all mentioned by and by, the Sick ( tooner or later, accord- 
he ing as the Woman with whom he had C orver lation has 
it been more or leis infected, and according to the Conſti- 
ts tution Which is more or le(s dilpoled to receive the In- 
ſection) is firſt ſeized with an nnuſual pain in the Genitals, 
10 with a certain Rotation of the Tefticles afterwards, if 
ot he be not Circumcited, a ſpot firſt like the Meaſles 
u- coming out, as to the colour and bigneſs, ſeizes {ume 
e vert of the Glaus and preſently: after the rile cf this 
„bot, a Liquor diſtills genily like Seed, Which daily re- 
i WE ceding both from the colour and conſiſtence of 
e Seed, grows at length Yellow, but not ſo deep colopred 
„ © + the Yolk of an Fyp, and in a more virulent and in- 


2 tent 


250 Of Epridemick Diſeaſes from 
tent Pox, it is not only Green but mixed with a watry 
Humour much tinctured with Blood); the ſaid Puſtie 
turns at length to an Ulcer, which is at firſt like the 4 
the in Childrens mouths, which eats daily deeper and 
wider, and the Lips become callous and hard, but it i; 
to be noted, that the Puſtle now mentioned is ſeldom xc. 
companied with a Gonorrhea in thoſe who have either 
before had a Gonorrhea, or are Circumciſed, for their Glan 
being hardened by being often expoſed to the Air, and 
by being frequently rubbed with Rags, does not ſo eaſily 
receive the Infection; and therefore thoſe that are þ 
Circumciſed are ſcarce ever troubled with this Ulcer 9 
the Glans. A Gonorrhea is occaſioned only in this man- 
ner, other symptoms preſently follow, this, as firſt a great 
fenſe of pain in the Yard as often as it is erected, and 
it ſeems as if it were preſt with a ſtrong hand, thi 
chiefly happens in the Night, when the Sick begins to be 
hot in his bed; and this painful Conſtriction of the Yard 
in this State of the Diſeaſe, I count the Pathognomonich 
fign ; the Yard is allo bowed by a Contractition of the 
bridle, which being according to its Nature ſtretched in 
the Erection, occaſions a violent pain; there is moreover Wn: 
a heat of Urigz which moſt commonly is ſcarce per. e. 
ceived in makMy water, but preſently after the Patient Wb: 
is violently ey through the whole Duct of the Ce. Wot 
thra, eſpecially at the Glaus; and ſometimes alſo, the With 
Vrethra being excoriated by the continual Flux of (larp WH) 
Matter, and Nature being over officious in breeding new | 
Fleſh, ſubſtitutes a certam looſe and Spongy Fleth, which In: 
grows dayly bigger and harder makes Caruncles, which WF! 
ſtuff the Urinary Paſſages, that at length the Urine n 
cannot paſs, and theſe Caruncles alſo emit a certain l- 
chor from little Ulcers growing upon them, and much With 
obſtruct the Phyſitian in the cure, and miſerably aftlit : 
the Sick, Morcover it happens often, that the Sauen Wa: 
Which ought to be carried off by the Gonorrhea, being or 
caſt upon the Scrotum, either by reaſon of violent Motion, St 
or by the uſe of Aſtringents, occaſions violent pain, or an d. 
Inflammation of the Scrotum, ſometimes one, ſometimes We 
both fides being much ſwelled ; the Gonorrhea in the 31 
mean While proceeds but ſlowly, but the heat of Urne © 
7 op | 4 4 


* 


the Year 1675, to the Tear 1680. 251 
as bad as ever; and theſe are the common Symptoms of 
Inis Diſeaſe during this State of it. 
gat when by reaſon of the continuarice of the Diſeaſe 
the ſaid parts, the Contagion is carried up, and by de- 
res infects the Blood, or when the Humoars putre— 
De, becauſe the virulent Matter is retamed in the Body 
by the undue uſe of Aſtringents, the true Pox is occa- 
joned, wherein Tumours or Bubo's often appear in the 
roin, and conſtitute the firſt degree of it; - grievous 
ins torment the Head, and the Limbs betwixt the 
Joynts, the Shoulders, Arms and Legs, they come in no 
@rder, and by Intervals, tho' meſt commonly they come 
gs ſoon as the Sick is warm in his Bed, and continue till 
Rowards Morning, there are alſo Scabs and Scurff in 
Farious parts of the Body, and theſe are moſt common- 
By as Yellow as an Hoy comb, and by this Sign they 
nay be known from all others, and ſometimes they poſ- 
es various ſpaces of the Body, with their large Super- 
Wficies like a Leproſie deſcribed in Phyfical Books z and 
Ihe more this Itch is diffuſed, the leſs it troubles the Sick; 
Ball the Symptoms encreaſe by degrees, eſpecially the pain, 
undd it is ſometimes ſo very ſharp, that the Sick cannot 
Bke:o his Bed, but is forced in a reſtleſs manner to walk 
About his Chamber till Morning. | Moreover by reaſon 
Pot the violence of the pain, the Skull, and the Bones of 
tb: Legs and Arms grow up in hard Nodes called Exo- 
1 7 ke the Spavin in Horſes Feet, which Bones, that 
ave Nodes on them, by realon of a continual Pain and 
Inflammation, become at length carious, and putreſie. 
#h:242denick Ulcers alſo ſeize various parts of the Body, 
and moſt commonly begin in the Throat, and are pro- 
pagated by degrees to the Cartilage of the Noſe, thro" 
i" Palate, and ſoon conſumes it, ſo that, wanting its 
pupporter, it falls, The Ulcers and Pain increaſing 
daily, the Sick is devoured by the Ulcers and Eutrefacti- 
n, ſo that he lives a grievous Life by reaſon of the Pain, 
Stink, and Scandal, which is much worſe than auy Death; 
ut at length one Member wrotting after another, the torn 
* rock is hid under ground, being very odious before to 
all above. 
Aas to the intrinſick Nature, and Eſſence of this Diſ- 
a alc, as they ſay, I count J am to ſeek for it in, 
| Tan 


—ͤ—•— — nine — QC, — 


232 Of Fpidemick Diſeaſes from 

than as it appears by the Symptoms we have deſcribez: 
no more than am obliged to ſearch into the Ek 
of any Plant or Animal; but whatever it be, I am ſure 
that the Humour occaſioning it E of no ſmall In. 
flammation, from whence proceeds all the ill; and it 
alſo manifeſt that the ſaid Humour ought to be eyzcy,, 
ted by ſuch means as by Experience the guide of Phy- 
ficians has been found effectual, there being yet no in, 
mediate Specifick found out, whereby without any fore. 
going Evacuation, the' Pox may be cured; for neither 
Mercury, nor the drying Woods can be counted Speci- 
ficks, unleſs it can be proved that Mercury without 983. 
livation, or a decoction of the Woods without Sweat 
ing, have ſometimes cured the Pox; and as I have found 
by Experience, common Sweats do as much good in this 
Diſeaſe, as a Decoction of the Woods; ſo I do not at 41 
doubt, if any thing could be found out, either among Ve. 
getables or Animals, that could raiſe Salivation as wel 
as Mercury, it would cure the Diſeaſe as well. But for x 
much as this Diſeaſe being yet only a Gonorrhea, is much 
different from that which has contaminated the Whole 
Maſs of Blood, and deſerves ſtrictly ſpeaking the name of 
the Freneh-pox, ſo alſo the Evacuation, whereby the mat- 
ter of a Gonorrhea is ejected, is quite different from that 
Whereby a confirmed Pox is Meat 

Fherefore as to the Gonorrhea, Whereof we firſt treat, 

the whole bufineſs of the cure, ſo far as I have hitherto 
found, is performed by purging Medicines, by the help 
whereof the peccant matter is either evacuated, or a di. 
verſion of the natural Juices of the Body, is procured, 
Which would otherwiſe feed the Diſeaſe. But tho' rea- 
fon and experience dictate, that this Diſeaſe may be cured 
by any ſort of Purge given often and a long while, yet they 
ſeem moſt Powerful, which Purge ftrongly from the Blood 
Choler, but eſpecially the ſerous Icor, and therefore | 
have ſometimes cured poor People, where reſpect was to 
be had to their Poverty, only with the Jalap root. Aud 
becauſe this Diſeaſe is plainly accompanied with an lu- 
flammation, and the purging Medicines wherewith it is 
ured, are allo hot, a cooling Diet muſt be ordered throug 
the whole Courſe. 33 s . 


1 


. 
R 
_ 


the Tear 1675, to the Nr 168—. 253 


| therefore uſe to preſcribe in the following manner. 


Take of the Maſs of the Pills of Coch. Maj, three Drams, 
of Taras of rb one Dram, of Raſine of Jalap, 
and Diagrydium, each half a Dram; with a ſuſſicient 
quantity of Opobalſam, make fix Pills of every Dram. 
Let him take 2 of theſe every Morning at four or five 
a Clock, and ſleep after them; for Twelve or Fourteen 
days, or more, namely, till the heat of the Urine, and 
the yellow Colour of the Matter that is like Seed are 
much leſſened, and afterwards I count it ſufficient to 
purge the Patient every other day for a Fortnight, and 
then the Pills may be uſed only twice a Week till the 
matter that is wont to dr from the Uretha quite 
ftops, which moſt commonly does not happen till after 
a long while; for tho it be commonly affirmed, that the 
Ichor after the heat of Urine, and the yellow Colour 
of the Matter diſappear, which is ſeen, eſpecially in 
the 2 at the top of the Tard, a drop or two 
being preſs'd out with the Finger, proceeds only from 
weakneſs, and a Laxity of the parts ariſing from the 
long continuance of the Venom on them. Tet the 
poor Patient finds to his great Damage, that it is the + 
Relicks of the Diſeaſe not quite deftroy'd : for tho it 
be in ſome ſort quelled, yet upon any /light occaſion z 
namely, by drinking too much, or_ by any violent Exere 
ciſe, or the like, it begins afreſh, and the Gonorrhea 
returns, if the Sick has left Purging, before the Diſeaſe 
was quite Eradicated, 


If after ſuch Purging, the Gonorrhea does not ceaſe, it 
| will be convenient, inſtead of the Pills, eſpecially for thoſe 
that are difficultly purged, now and then to give. ſome 
ſtronger Purge, as is the following Potion, which taken 
d 


only once, has ſometimes done more to ſtop a Gonorrhea, 
than gentle Purges given often. 


Take of Tamarinds half an Ounce, of the Leaves of Sena 
two Drams, of Rhuburb one Dram and an half; boyl 
them in a ſuſſicient quantity of Fountain Water, 10 
three Ounces of the ſtrained Liquor; add of Manna, 


and 


— 


1 


© 


254 Epidemie Diſeaſes from 


and Syrup of Roſes ſolutive, each one Ounce, 6 
rrp of Buckshorn, 45 Eleftuary of the Juice Y 15 
ſes, each two Drams; mingle them make a Potion; vp 
f the Cure does not go on well. give eight Grain; i 
Turbinth Mineral, only twice or thrice © (but there u 
be a que diftance brwixt each time, leaſt a Flux A ul 
riſe) and this Remedy, is indeed the chief for Eradic, 
ting an obſtinate Gonorrhea; or twice in a Week ti, 

- following Pills may be given, 


Take of Pill ex du obus half a Dram, of Mercuris Dul- 

cis one Scruple, with a ſufficient quantity of Ops 
balſam, male four Pills to be taken early in the Mom 
ing. 

* 


But ſometimes the Sick does fo nauſeate repeated purg. 


ing that he cannot ſo much as bear the fight or ſmell of 
Remedies, and ſometimes by a certain IAioſyncracy the 
Body does fo obſtinately reſiſt Purging, that a due quan 
tity of the Matter cannot be evacuated ;, and whilſt thi 
is earneſtly endeavoured, without any advantage, the 
Pox creeps on, and very often comes upon thoſe, whoſe 
Bodies ſtrongly reſiſt Purging. When the Caſe is fo, ne 
muſt proceed with Glyſters, by injecting AN we may 


anſwer both Indications, viz. Of purging o 


the Hu- 


mour, and of making Derivation from the part aſſected. 

And moreover, this Method is quicker than the other 

above mentioned, but not ſafe in my Opinion 2 for tho 
$ 


the former required longer time, yet there is le 


danger, 


that any part of the contagious Matter ſhou'd ſtick to the 
Bowels, and ſo cauſe new Troubles: But this inconveni- 
ency may eaſily be avoided, if, Purges taken every day, 
Glyſters are not uſed, aſſiſt them. | 

Therefore I proceed in this way; I take care that the 
Pills above-mentioned, or the like, be given for three 
Mornings following, and afterwards I order the following 
Glyſter to be injected daily at five in the Afternoon, till the 


S 
a 


ymptoms quite ceaſe, only once or twice a Week I ordet 
Purge, and for that day omit the Glyſter. 


Take of the Eleftuary of the Juice of Roſes fix Drain", 
of Venice Turpentine diſſolved in the Tolk of an 100 


the Tear 1675, to the Tear 1680, 255 


eo the ftrained Liquor add two Ounces of the Eleftuary 


* called Diacatholicon : Mingle them, make a Glyfter, 
; of and every Night at Bed-time, I allow him to take 
4 five Drops of Opobalſam, or of the Balſam of Mecha 


ina lump of Sugar. 


And this Medicine indeed being a Liquid and pure 
fort of Turpentine, and of the ſame Virtue, is very 
per for the Ulcerous Diſpoſition of the Geritals; and 
therefore for want of it, the quantity of a Hazle Nut 
of Cyprian Turpentine, may be ſubſtituted to be taken at 
the ſame times, 

In the proceſs of the Cure, whatever Method is uſed, 
the Sick muſt abſtain from all ſalted and ſpiced Meats, 
and others of hard Digeſtion, as Beef, Pork, Fiſh, Cheeſe, 


no Roots Herbs, and Summer-Fruits, and inſtead of them, 
the Ihe muſt eat Mutton, Veil, Rabits, Chickens, and other 

chings of eaſie Digeſtion, and I would have him eat ſpa- 
this ngly of theſe, 49d only ſo much as will ſuffice to keep 
ve o his Strength; I forbid the drinking of Wine in gene- 
hoſe Pal, and all . ſharp Liquors, and I won'd have 
ne rim drink Milk-water, made of three parts of -boyl'd 


ater, and one of Milk : only at Dinner and Supper, he 
may Drink a little ſmall Beer. And moreover, to attempe- 
ate the Inflammation, and to mitigate the hear of Urine, 

order ſome 1 Emulſion made after the following 
ner, to be drank fr equently betwixt the Purges. 


Take of the Seeds of Melons and Pompions, each half an 
Ounce, of the Seeds of white Poppies two Drams, of 


hos ſweet Almonds blanched number eight, beat them toge- 
' ther in a marble Mortar, pour upon them gently a Pint 
- the and a half of Barley water; to the trained Liquor, add 


4 ſufficient quantity of Chriſtalline Sugar, make an Ee 
mulſion. | 


In a very Sanguine Conſtitution, and when the Dif- 
ale is obſtinate, after having purged a Month or there- 
outs, I order that Eight or Nine Ounces of Blood be 
ken away from the right Arm; but 1 would not have 
looding uſed before, left the Contagion ſhou'd be more 
balf rooted 


——— 


— 


ws - 
$mw—__—_ 


— 2 4 . 
PEP 
5 * Dr" 


- AST, — — — 
th * 


* — — — * - — 6 


of 


and occaſions the Pox at length, nor is there more fucce 


256 Of Epidemicſ Diſeaſes from 


rooted, thereby. I do not much ſtand upon Injection: 
into the Urethra, becauſe moſt commonly they do mort 
hurt than good, by reaſon of their Acrimonions Bitin 
or Stiptick Qualities, but towards the end alittle Rog 
water may be injected. This method always ſucceeded 
well in curing a Gonorrhea, and J have not hitherto four 
a better, eſpecially in thoſe that are eaſily purged; fy 
in ſuch as are difficultly purged ; the Cure though it pern 
fails, yet it requires a long time before it can be per. 
fected. In theſe therefore Bleeding muſt be repeates 
and the Purges quickned, and alle oftnef repeated, an 
the uſe of them muſt be longer continu'd, or Glyfter 
muſt be uſed in the manner above. mentioned, for purging 
does all in this Cate, and it is truly affirmed in this Cafe 
if in any other, that he that cleanſes well, cures well, 
he forbear Mineral Waters, which l am very well ſatishs 
retain the Relicks of the Diſeaſe, which ſhould be eject 
out of the Body, and by reaſon of their Aſtr:ngent, ai 
over Sanative Virtue keep it in, and root it more; ups 


which Account I have often obſerved Swellings in tk: « 
Serotum, when they have been drunk in the begining oF | 
ſtate; and. worſe Symptoms, when they have been uM / 
towards the end, and this | confidently affirm, notwith i t 
ſtanding, they are uſually, and frequently þ1 eſtibed in thi 8 

aſe. yo ) 
” I am not ignorant how much ſome Practitioners boi 


of curing this Symptom in a ſhorter time, by Rent 
dies that perform it, which have a great Name, yet | 
have certainly found by too frequent Obſervation, th: 
the ſtopping up of the Matter by Allringents, whit 
ought to be ejected, has been very prejudicial to the dit 
and thereby it returns very often to the Maſs of Blu 


though leſs danger, by the vie of Decoctions of the dry 
Woods; for under the pretence of Specificks, the wh6 
Body, but eſpecially the Parts affected, which were! 
hot befure, are more inflamed, and ſometimes, as | 1 
obſerved, the Gonorrhea Which a little before diſappears 


returned again, | 
But it is to be noted, that if the Clans be cover 


all over with the Prepuce, and the Lips of it are 0 ha 
ſwelled, and callous, that by reaſon of the Intaamati 


the Tear 1675, to the Tear 1680. 257 


it can by no means be drawn back; he ſtrives in vain to 
cure the Gonorrhea by purging Remedies, how ſtrong ſo- 
ever they be, and tho' he repeats them daily until they 


905 become nauſeous, unleſs at the ſame time he endeavour 
ded that the part affected be reduced to its natural State, the 
vnd hardneſs and ſwelling being removed, whereby the Gonor- 


rhea was continually furthered, I endeavour the Cure, 
with the following Fomentation. a 


el 

* Take of the Roots of Marſhmallows and of Lillies, each one 
and Ounce and an half, of the Leaves of Mallows, Mullein, 
ters Elder, and Henbane, of the Flowers of Camomile and 
ging Mellilot, each one handful ;, of the Seeds of Flax and 
Paſe Fenugreek, each half an Ounce ,, boil them in a ſuf. 
ll, if ficient quantity of Fountain-water, and make a Fomenta- 


tion to be applied to the part affected for the ſpace of 


edted half an hour twice or thrice a Day. 
„ and ; * 
open After the uſe of the Fomentation, anoint the part a 


Red with Linſeed-oyl freſh drawn, and then apply the 
Plaiſter of Mucilages ſpread upon Leather, upon the 
ſwell'd Lips of th Prepuce. But if the Ulcer either of 
the Lips of the Prepuce, or in the Glans under it occaſions 
the ſticking by its Calloſity, ſo that the Prepuce is difficult- 
ly drawn back; beſides the Fomentation above mentioned, 


ng (! 
J vie 


s boli | order the following Liniment. : 

Rem 9 

vet! Take of Bafilicon fix Drachms, of Ointment of Tobacco 

„ I; two Drachms, of red Precipitate waſhed m Roſe-water, 

Whic and finely powdered half a Drachm; mingle them, make © 
le Sid a Liniment, ſpread it upon Lint, and apply it always to 

Bloc the Ulcers after the uſe of the Fomentation above pre- 

ſucce ſeribed, a 


But when either by reaſon the Gonorrhea was ſtopt too 


ere Pon, or by violent Exerciſe, or from any other Cauſe, 
sche Scrotun, now the Seat of the Diſeaſe, is much ſwel- 


led, 1 order the foreſaid Fomentation tv be applied twice 
Day to the part affected, and if the Pain and Swelling 
do not leſſen, I order the Pultis commonly known made 
of Oxycrat and Bean flower. While theſe things are 
done without, I alſo endeavour to cure the Diſeaſe by 
S Purges 


—— — , 


1 
; 
Fl 


— 


1 " 2 . 
— 
— tad hy -— 


258 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 

Purges and cooling Remedies, and with the Diet above: 
mention'd, nor do I make any ſcruple to bleed at ar 
time of the Diſeaſe, and to take away nine of ten Our. 
ces from the Arm of the Side that anſwers to the 
fwell'd Teſticle ; if the greatneſs of the Swelling and the 
violence of the Pain require it; and ſo much for the G0. 
norrhea. 

But when the Diſeaſe has ſo far prevail'd, that it comes 
to a conarm'd Pox, we muſt proceed quite another way, 
and in ſuch a. difficult Caſe we muſt ufe Remedies ſuita- 
ble to it; and truly I think no inſtance can be produced 
Where this Diſeaſe was eradicated any other way than by 
Salivation With Mercury, whatever ſome learned and 
unlearned Men ſay of the Cure of it by other means, 
Seeing therefore Salivation does all, all that I have to 
do is to ſet down what reaſon, and obſervation appro- 
ving reaſon, dictates concerning, the raiſing and govern- 

it. | 
But firſt, I cannot imagine to what purpoſe, we are 
ſo frequently admoniſhed to take a ſpecial Care, to pre- 
pary the Body well with purging and digeſting Remedies, 
athing for inſtance, and the like, to ſay nothing of bleed- 
ing, Which ſome count the chiefeſt thing; whereas if we 
were to diſpute for the truth of the matter, this muſt be 
the queſtion, viz. that if Salivation is to be procured by 
Poijon (for we do not as yet know any wholſome Me- 
dicine, whereby it may be raiſed, nor can the Sick be cu- 
re without it) whether it is better to uſe it when the 
Body is ſtrong and brisk, and ſo abler to reſiſt the Ene- 
my, or When it has been weakened by Bleeding, and a lo 
Diet; without doubt any Judicious Perſon will think it 
is better to do nothing than todo hurt, by being fo un- a 
ſeaſonably buſied ; and moreover Experience teſtifies that 
thoſe bear Salivation better, that have not been weakned 
by Evacuations, or any other way, than thoſe that have 

been weakned before the Conflict. | 

Therefore all this inſignificant flouriſh being laid aſide, 
aſſoon as I am called I preſcribe an Ointment made © 
two Ounces of Lard, and one Ounce of Quickſilver, not 
do J mingle any of the hot Oyls on any thing elle, for 
the Ointment is made worſe if that which is added hin- 
ders its Operation, and it is made no whit more effectua, 


— 


— ou PS ww — OR $©5 — — — — 2 — ts —.— BY 


— — 
a 


2909 - ke 3 


- wi} 


2 


me 2 wn CA 


way 


— — 


— . a re 


7 


a 
7 <5 


I SITY P-— 


— 
© 


260, Of the Epidemick Diſeaſes from 


Se "all. 2 
* - 


wardly, till theſe Symptoms quite go off; and moreoyey 
the Looſeneſs, which moſt commonly happens before the 
Salivationriſes well, muſt be ſtopped by Liguid Laudanum, 
and you muſt fo increaſe the Doſe, and repeat it, as the 
Symptom urges, or you may give a Drachm and an half 
of Diaſcordium ſometimes upon occaſion. The Looſeneſs 
being at length ſtopp'd, the Salivation, which before ſcarce 
appeared, uſually proceeds well. | 

be Sick beginning to grow well, only that his Mouth 
is yet ulcerated, (which is the genuine Fruit of Salivati. 
on) the Salivation which is now daily leſſened muſt be 
neither {topp'd by purging or any other way. For it may 
happen, that after the Pain is ceaſed, and the Ulcers 
dried, ſomewhat of the Diſeaſe may lie hid in the Body, 
and may occaſion new Troubles, unleſs that moderate 
Spitting be permitted, which will go off. when the Man, 
after heis well, has a while expoſed himſelf to the free Air, 
I ſuppoſe therefore it is dangerous to divert what yet fe. 
mains of the Salivation, that is about to go off of it (elf, 
either by purging, or by drying it up by a Decoction of 
the Woods; by which Practice, which is commonly uſed 
to drive the Mercury out of the Body, or to cor rect its 
malignity, the frequent relapſes are undoubtedly occah- 
oned in theſe miſerable People, who earneſtly expect at 


length Health, after all there Charge and Pains, and they b 
had certainly obtained it, if the Salivation had been let N 
alone to end of it ſelf, It is therefore much more advi- E 


ſable to promote the Salivation by giving Mercurius Dulcis 
once a Week, after they are quite well, and go abroad 
which I have ſometimes done for ſome Months) than to 

op it too ſoon. 
at though ] diſlike purging at the Declination of the 
Salivation, for the reaſon above-mention'd, yet it may 
happen that it muſt and ought to be uſed at the State 
of it, namely, when by ill management it has been ſo much 
heightned, that the Patient's Life is indangered, in which 
Caie it is not only ſafe but neceſſary to depreſs it by a 
Purge, to that degree the Sick can bear, and then it muſt 
be lett to its ſelf, If any one ſhould ask whether we ought 
to be contented with Salivation alone, neither uſing Pur- 
ging, nor any other cuſtomary Remedies, after it is gone 
off, i anſwer, that beſides thoſe things now ſpoken 0) 
Wnic 


the Tear 1675, to the Tear 1680. 261 


which reaſon and experience confirm; I wou'd fain know 
for what reaſon it is more neceſſary to purge after Saliva» 
tion, than to flux after Purging; ſeeing purging Medi- 
cines, ( eſpecially Medicines of Scammony and ſuch acrid 
things ) leave ſomething of malignity in the Body, which 
we leave to Nature notwithſtanding, and by it at length 
is ſubdued, whatever remains of the Poyſon; he that 
was purged returning to his accuſtomed Courſe, Exerciſe 
and the Uſe of the free Air, And moreover | would 
willingly know how it comes to paſs, that we endeavour 
to carry of the Reliques of Mercury by p! rging, When by 
it we do not only neglect, but alſo hinder Salivation, 
which is the genuine, and almoſt the only method, where- 
by Nature is wont and ought to affect it? But ſuch mi- 
ſtakes are to be imputed to thoſe ſmall ſparks of reaſon, 
wherewith we poor Mortals are only endowed, and not 
penetrating to the truth which lies deep, we embrace eve- 
ry Shadow, and inſtead of Juno embrace a Cloud, as they 


i ſay, and then by diſcourſing wich one another we ſo root 
f il founded Prejudices in one another, that at length we 
d would have our Dreams and mad Fancies pals for De- 
ts 


monſtrations, a Sperimey whereof, unleſs I am deceived, 
is now before us. 15 | | | | 

But tho' the Care may be perform'd in the way as. 
bove-mention'd in moſt, viz. by Unction uſed three 
Nights following, and by giving Turbith mineral, if the 
Flux does not proceed well, and alſo Afereurins Dulcis 
ſometi.nes, if it abate too ſoon; yet it muſt be carefully. 
noted, that in ſome, there is a certain peculiar Idioſyns 
crafie or Temperament both in reſpe& of Salivation, as 
well as Purging, (and moſt commonly thoſe that are 
difficultly purged, are alſo difficultly fluxed ) ſo that in 
ſome the method above mentioned will ſcarce make the 


te Gums fore, much leſs procure that Salivation, which is 
ch ſufficient to eradicate the Diſeaſe. In ſuch Patients, the 
ch Phyſician muſt take great Care, that he do not too obſti- 
＋ nately, and unſeaſonably urge Salivation, Nature refiſt- 
- wg and abhorring ſuch a kind of Evacuation, which be- 


mg not well underſtood by ſome, they have kill'd ma- 
ny; for in Bodies fo diſpoſed, as often as Medicines whe- 
tier external or internal have been obſtinately repeated, 
itead of a perfect Salivation, nothing but Gripes, an 
2b S Dyſen- 


— — 2 — — — 


Of the Epidemitk Diſeaſes from 


Dyſenterick ſtools can be obtained, Nature endeay«... 
ing to carry off the Poyſon of the Quickſilver this 9 
or elſe Pains in the Stomach, Sickneſs, cold Sweats 85 
other dreadful Symptoms are occaſioned, fo that the Sick 
is juſt a dying, or does die. Tho' it may be lawful for 
the Phyſician to repeat the Unction, and the Turhith- 
mineral again, after he has expected Salivation in vain 
four or five Days from the laſt Unction; ( ſome Days 
aſſing betwixt each Unction) yet he ought to take z 
ſpecial care, that he do not ſolicite in vain a Salivation 
with ſo much eagerneſs, that he perſiſt to force it againſt 
Nature's inclination ; and therefore in my Opinion the 
Phyſician is ro obſerve this method, viz. as ſoon as ever 
perceives the Sickneſs of the Stomach, or the Gripes, 
he muſt preſently forbear the giving Medicines, till thoſe 
Symptoms are quite gone off; for by many and ſtrong 
Remedies, heaped upon one another to force Salivation 
againſt Nature's inclination, a Dyſentery will certainly 
follow the Gripes, and Death the Sickneſs of the Stomach ; 
whereas on the contrary, if you go on gently, and take 
time, and give a Scruple of Mercurius Dulcis once ot 
twice a Week, either by it ſelf, or with a Drachm of D- 
aſcordium, if the Sick is inclind to a Looſeneſs, you 
will at length do your bufineſs, and cure the Patient; 
for though the Salivation never riſes to the height, yet the 
Sick will ſpit more than he uſes to do, and the Stink, 
the Companion of a right Salivation, will alfo accomps- 
ny this ſmall Spitting, ſo that it appears, that the Blood 
and Humours have attained that Putrefaction or Alterati- 
on, whatever it be, Which either occaſions the Salivation, 
or is produced with it, and by this merhod, you may 
eo all the Symptoms of this Diſeaſe, if you allow a due 
ime, + | 
But it is to be noted, that tho' Salivation is much bet. 
ter for the curing of a confirmed Pox, than any other 
Medicine whatever, yet it cannot cure a Gonorrhea, when 
it accompanies the Pox, nor will that ſtop, when this 
is quite .cured ; from whence we may well gather, that 
there is no ſpecifick Virtue in Mercury, whereby it im. 
mediately cures the Pox ; tho' perhaps it may be counted 
a Specifick mediately, in as much as it cures the Diſeaſe | 
by raiſing Salivation, but it is almoſt as improper, a8! 


1 _ 1 einm 1 * 2 


© £2,040, 40 tf me dd OO Mme mw 


ec 


hays 


the Tear 1675, fo the Your 1680. 263 


have mentioned elſewhere, as to call a Lancet a Specifick 
for a Pleuriſie. But to return to the buſineſs, when the 
Pox and a Gonorrhea are lodged together, the Cure of the 
Gonorrhea is to be attempted before the Salivation, or when 
it is over; but in my Opinion it is ſafer and better done 
after the Salivaticn is dver ; for being accompanied with 
the Pox it is more difficultly cured; but after Salivation, 
being ſomewhat tamed, it is uſually cured with leſs trouble, 
but you muſt be ſure to avoid Purging, as long as any 
thing of the, Salivation remains; wherefore the buſineſs . 
wil be better done, by giving a Doſe of Turbith-mineral 

once or twice a Week, than by any other Purges : for by 
it the Spitting will be ſomewhat promoted, and in the mean 
while, the Matter occaſioning the Gonorrhea will be eva- 
cuated by degrees. | | i 

Moreover it is to be obſerved, that if there be a Tumour 
upon any Book, commonly called an Exoftofis, which has 
continued ſo long, that the Bone is become carions, it is 
altogether in vain to attempt the Cure, either by Saliva» 
tion, or by any other method, unleſs care be taken of this 
Swelling ; Wherefore the Bone muſt be laid bare by 4 
Cauſtick, and the Exfoliation of it, as they call ir; muſt 
be endeavoured by proper Remedies. 

As to the Ulcers of the Mouth, which are very com- 
mon in ſuch as are fluxed, if the Pain is ſo violent that 
the Sick cannot bear it, or if the Mouth be fo excoriated, 
that the Blood flows Night and Day, the Mouth-muſt'be 
often waſhed with Damask- Roſe-water, or with Milk- 
water, or with a Decoction of Barley, of the Roots of 
Marſh-mallows, and the Seeds of Quinces; -and/ this is 
the only Symptom worth notice that happens in Salivati- 
on, if it be well managed. And indeed if the Pain and 
Ulceration of the Mouth cou'd be any way prevented, 
the Cure of this Diſeaſe wou'd be no more troubleſome, 
than of others, that are not near ſo much taken notice 


F 


As to the Diet and other Regimen, they ſhould be alto- 
gether the ſame in Salivation,. at leaſt till it come near 
the End, as is ordered in Purging : for ſeeing he that: 
has taken a Purge is only required to keep himſelf warm 
in his Chamber, and to eat moderately Meats of eaſie 
Digeſtion, I do not know * reaſon, why he that is in 

4 a 


264 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 


a Flux ſhould be kept conſtantly a- bed, or forbid to eat 
moderately, which may ſtrengthen Nature in conflictin 
with the Poyſon; for many have been miſerably deſtroy- 
ed, Nature. ſinking under the Burden, and their Spirits 
and Strength being at length quite exhauſted, by Sweat- 
ing, Purging, and unneceſſary Faſting, beſides the Injry 
occaſioned by the Quickſilver, and alſo often when the 
Diſeaſe is vanquiſhed, the Sick wanting Spirits enough to 
recover Strength, dies of Weakneſs ; or if he chance to 
eſcape, he is accompanied with ſo many Terments, that 


3 — better dye, as a late Poet elegantly defcribes 
uch. 


Graviora morbis patimuy remedia, ; 
Nec vita tanti eſt, vivere ut poſſis mori. 


And here we may readily anſwer that objection, how 

it comes to paſs, that ſome being ſeverely handled, to 
Wit, in the State we now ſpeak of, are forced to travel 
into France to recover their Strength: I think this is the 
reaſon of it; in ſach ſick People, the Oeconomy of their 
Bodies being ſubverted, and their Strength gone, our 
thick and moiſt Air is unfit to recover them; whereas 
that of France being more healthy and clearer, is proper 
io recover. their Spirits and Strength, and not becauſe 
the Phyſicians there, how learned ſoever they be, have a 
better method of Cure for this Diſeaſe, than we in Eng- 
land; but to return to the Diet. hh . 
1 | ſuppoſe therefore ( and Experience confirms the ſame) 
that Water-gruel, Panada, Poſſet-drink, Small-beer 
warmed, Veal and Chicken-broth, and the like, may and 
ought to be allowed in a moderate quantity; and that 
as ſoon as the Swelling of the Gums is ſo much fallen, 
that he can bring his Teeth together, Rabits, Pullets, 
Lamb, and ſuch tender Food, may be allowed ſparingly, 
and he may 14. Bed, or fit by the Fire as he pleaſes; 
for this Diſeaſe being to be cured by Saliyation, and not 
by Sweating, I cannot imagine to what puf poſe, he or ſhe 
ſhould be puniſhed with a great deal of Heat, when there 
is no neceſlity for it. 5 4 

This method, as it is quicker, fo it does not require ſo 
many Days to be waſted unprofitably, in a 


pur 
ons 


3 


at 


5 
* 
ts 


x 


E 


JͥETT!! ͤvv TR. 


the Tear 1675, to the Tear 1680. 265 


© Body before Salivation, nor thoſe frequent Purgings, nor 
© thoſe uſual Decoctions after Salivation: So I am certain 
it is much eaſier, leſs dangerous, and leſs ſubje& to a re- 
lapſe, which any one may find, that having been accu- 
© tomed to the other practice betakes himſelf to this. I am 
© fare it has ſucceeded well with me in very many Patients, 


E ſome whereof have paſſed Salivation more than once to no 


purpoſe, having always relapſed again, upon the occaſi- 
ons and reaſons above-mentioned, | 

But I need not, candid Sir, anxiouſly ſolicit your 
good Opinion, who long ago thought me honeſt, and fur- 
thered my Reputation. I ſhall add no more of this Diſ- 
eaſe, for I never did nor never ſhall delight in making 
things more difficult by many words, that the Fountain 
Jof the River Nile may be more difficultly found, as they 
© ſay. But how little ſoever, or of how little Value ſo- 


ever this Treatiſe is, I intreat you would receive it kind- 
ly; for I wrote it chiefly for the Publick good, and to 
teſtifie my reſpe& to you: And indeed I do not flatter you 


when! confefs, that I always valu'd your Friendſhip as 


a moſt precious thing; for among other things, that I 
have obſerved in the little while | have lived, thjs is an 
excellent thing, (which I would alſo recommend to my 


Son) viz. that the Acquaintance with Men, that were 


remarkable for Honeſty, and other Virtues, have always 
turned to my profit and advantage; and on the contrary, 
& Friendſhip with ill Men, ( unleſs 

called a Combination, or Conſpiracy, when it is not 
founded in Virtue) tho' they never yet injured me, ei- 
ther by their words, or countenance, yet I know not how 
it came to pals, ſometimes at length ſome Damage hap- 
ßpened to me or my Affairs thereby, Farewel, 
and continue to be my Friend. 


s it ought rather to be 


kind Sir, 


* 
. "> 


Tour Devoted Servant, 


Tho. Sydenham. 


| 


- 1 * „„ | » . 
8 1 — . 
ſ * 
_ 1 ® An 
„ 2 , 


„ 
8. 


1 

FR 
[ 
pl 


— 


— 


22 9 2 
— ESL = 


% 24 955 AE 


- 
— l r 


266 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 


— 


** — —_— 


— 


eee eee ——ͤ 
An Epiſtolatory Diſcourſe to the Learned Doct 
William Cole, concerning ſome Obſervation; 


of the Confluent Small-pox, and of Hyſterick 
Diſeaſes : By Tho. Sydenham. 


— — 


To the Worthy Dr. Thomas Sydenham. 


PErhaps you will wonder, candid Sir, what imperti 
nent Diſturber hinders you in your ſerious Affairs: 
But I hope you will pardon me, when you underſtand, 
that I do this chiefly to expreſs my Thanks; for I ac. 
knowledge, I have received ſo much Advantage by your 
elaborate Diſcourſe, about acute Oiſeaſes, that I hold my 
ſelf obliged to render Thanks. You have fo acurately 
obſerved all the Conſtitutions of Years, and of the Air, 
Which you have undertaken to treat of in a manner” alto- 
ether hew, and have propoſed ſuch genuine, and obvious 
ications for the curing every Diſeaſe happening in them, 
and have adorned the whole Work with ſo much Ingenui- 
ty, that we may reaſonably ſuppoſe ſo much Sagacity 


| nod with indefatigable Labour, will for ever oblige the 
; | 


ck, and Phyſicians too. | 
But tho' you have performed all things ſo exaQtly, 
that I can ſcarce forbear to praiſe you ſingly, for every 
rticular, yet eſpecially, I heartily thank you for your 
Method of Cure in the Small-pox, Whereby that dread- 
ful Diſeaſe, unleſs ſome Malignity, or ſome unuſual 
thing happen, may be eaſily a if Nurſes, a fort of 
eople very injurious to the Health of Man, did not ob- 
ruct, who by their hot Regimen and Medicines, con- 
found all things, and kill ſo many before their Time. 
You, learned Sir, the protector of Mankind, ought to 
be eſteemed, who are a Guide to the Sick in the greateſt 
Danger of Life, that they may return to the way of 
Health, if they would follow your Direction. As to my 
felf, cho' for ſome time I was afraid to truſt my own 
| . Reaivn, 


| Reaſon, yet I have of a long while thought, that the E4 
ruption of the Small-pox, as it was not the very Diſeaſe, 


© but the Criſs of the Fever, ſo like other riſer it re- 


all Phyſicians, the whole buſineſs is to be left to Nature, 
if all things proceed well, as moſt commonly they do in 
this Diſeaſe, unleſs the Blood at firſt be too much exa- 


8 fo long were Panick, and I ventured according to your 
pPrecepts, (though ſometimes not only the Vulgar, but 
E Phyſicians oppoſed ) to govern my Patients; and I found 

great advantage by them, when 1 had to do with 


| fury in my hands; and moreover, when I was called to 
thoſe that had the confluent Small-pox, which was not 


| dying, to fly by your Advice to Paregoricks, and I 
had wonderful Succeſs; and indeed you have ſeemed to 


F injurious to Mankind, and to your own Fame; and 


you may prevail any thing, be pleaſed, worthy Sir, to 
prbliſh them. 


| Perſon, that you have ſome choice Obſervations about 
| Hyſterick Diſeaſes, which truly, as they have Exer- 
ciſed and wearied 

| ansof all Ages, fo, alas! they have too often eluded the 
methods of cure delivered by them, and ſhew how un- 


the certainty whereof may be fought for by the Teſti- 
mony of the Senſes. You will, worthy Sir, deſerve 
much from the preſent and future Ages, if you pleaſe 


the Tear 1675, to the Tear 1680. 267 


qnired a Regimen, wherein according to the Opinion o 


gitated. But after I had read your excellent Book, I 
perceived, that thoſe Fears, which poſſeſsd me and others 


thoſe that wou'd ſubngit ; and whatſoever others think, I 
found my ſelf happy, by having got fo great a Trea- 


very often, I did not doubt, tho? they ſeemed to be juſt 


have done ſo much in this Caſe, that I was apt to be- 


| lieve that nothing remained for you, or any other to do, 7 
| till I lately underſtood by the learned Man, my ve- 1 


ry good Friend, Mr. Xendrick, (who much praiſes your 
Civilty) that you had new Obſervations upon the ſame 
Subject, which 1 cannot but think, muſt needs be very 
advantagious in Practice, becauſe you made them; and 
unleſs you impart them to the publick, you will be very 


therefore, if the Deſires of thoſe that are unknown to 


Nor muſt I ſtay here, for I have heard from the fame 


- * * 2 - 
_ wy Pe, * — — > 
” a — E — La. TT... _ - 
2 - — 
—— 1 - X 
; 3 2 = — 
— A 2 a, * < LY m . = 
= - 


— 8 
5 >_> " 4. pa 


the Wits of the learned Phyſici- 


— - 
= — — 


=D 2u2-z K 


— 
= 


ſafe it is to truſt to Philoſophy ; unleſs in thoſe things, 


Oo 0 —' . ——— 
hag - iS _ 


to 


268 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 


to publiſh what you think of theſe things; I deſire at lea 
That you would take in good part, what I, tho unkngyy 
to you, have not bluſhed to ask for my own and the pub. 
lick „and that you wou'd reckon me amongſt the 
Number of thoſe that are your humble Servants. 


Your Devoted Servant, 


Worceſter, Novemb. "PEP 
the 176th. 1681, William Cole 


— — 


. 


To the Learned Dr. William Cole. 


Worthy Sir, 4 | 
JF [ ſhould fa far indulge Self-love, that I ſhould take 

to my ſelf thoſe Praiſes, that no whit belon to me, 
it would be very difficult for me not to be proud, being 
praiſed: ſo much by ſo famous a Man, who is known tg 
the learned World by his excellent Works, but the Face 
of him not ſo much as known to me; but that you hate 
** pleaſed to honour me ſo far, tho I am unworthy, 

count it your Civility, for Nature has fo diſpoſed the 
beſt, and worthieſt Men, that they are not only gentle 
to thoſe that are in ſmall Errours; but that allo they are 
ready upon all occaſions to praiſe thoſe that do indiffe 
rently well, whereof I gratefully acknowledge you have 
ſhewed a clear Specimen towards me, and my {mall En- 
deavours, Which were deſigned for the publick good. 

Be pleaſed to receive thoſe things you ask for, which 
are to be added to the Obſervations. before publiſhed of 
the Small-pox, and my new Treatife of the Hyſterick 
Paſſion. The firſt of theſe I therefore enter upon, that 
What was wanting in it before, might be ſupplied out of 
thoſe things, Which longer Experience hath ſuggeſted, 
But have undertaken the other, becauſe Hyſterick Dil 
eaſes of all others occur moſt frequeutly, except Fevers; 
and alſo becauſe, I think ſome Advantage may be gain. 
ed by theſe my ſmall Obſervations 3; tho I muſt confeſs 
that there is another Cauſe beſides, the hopes of doing 
good to the Pubick, viz. that I might employ my ſpare 
time well, and paſs away honeſtly the * long 

N | | Inter- 


* 


— 


the Tear 1675, to the Tear 168. 269 


witer Evenings; for by reaſon of my old Age, can- 


en © ot any longer ſeek Companions abroad. But whatever 
a Ir was, that firſt provoked me, [| do not find my ſelf ſo 
the It for the Undertaking, as I hoped I ſhould be: For 


That continual Series of Thoughts, which my Mind 
Was always bent on, has for many Years been very inju- 
rious to my gouty Body, eſpecially now old Age approach- 
es, But becauſe I have received your kind opportune 
Hetter, I briefly by way of Anſwer wrote thoſe things 
In ſhort, which before 1 deſigned to treat more largely 


of, 8 

I think I muſt mention firſt, that that Species of Agues, 
hich firſt began, as we ſaid in another place, in the Year 
W677, reign ſtill, namely, in this Year 1681, wherein I writ 
his, Theſe Agues I ſay, according to the Cuſtom of 
Ell Epidemicks, raged chiefly in thoſe Seaſons, which are 
oft agreeable to their Natures, through all thoſe Years, 
herein they flouriſhed. But another Seaſon approach- 
ng they gave way preſently to other Epidemicks, where- 
nto that was moſt favourable; for inſtance, at the com- 
ng of Winter, they always gave place to the Cough 
and the Peripneumonick Fevers proceeding ,from it, an 
alſo to the Small-pox : but in the Spring they returned 
Again; ſo in the Year 1680, after the Ague had raged 
all the Autumn, the Small pox ſucceeded in the Winter- 
time, and raged every where; but in 1681. the ſaid Agues 
began again, but they were not altogether ſo Epid emical 
Ws before, upon Which Account the Small pox broke out 
Were and there with them. But when Summer began the 


ich WSmall-pox increaſed daily, and at length were Epidemical 
of nd were very deſtructive. | 
ick That which Reaſon dictated heretofore was clearly 
nat manifeſted to me in the Year 1681, to wit, that the Pa- 
of ient was not to be confined to his Bed, Night and Day, 
d; N Pefore all the Puſtles appeared; for the Spring time, and 


Pummer continuing longer dry than was ever known 
Bn the Memory of any that was then living (ſo that for 
the moſt pare the Herbs were every where burnt up) and 


es lmoſt all that Humidity was wanting, which the Air uſed 
ng to communicate to the Blood, upon which account the 
e wall-pox then raging, were accompanied with a greater 
ng ; ; Inflam- 


: 1 7 2 - % 4 = . = J * 
is, * - ef * 1 — 1 a4 * * »*. W 
. 4 Is << nd in a. EATS 2 ww Z — => TS 
| 


; pox, or but very few Puſtles coming out; and as theſe ge 


270 V Epidemick Diſeaſes from 


Inflammation, than they were wont to be, and the othe 
Symptoms ariſing from thence, were more violent; andj 
was for this reaſon alſo, if I am able to judge, that the Pur. 
ple Spots many times came before the full Eruption gf 
the Paſtles, and that the violent Inflammation that force 
them out, deſtroying the Cr;fis of the Blood, occafione 
the ſudden Death of the Patient, before there was a die 
Expulſion of the Morbifick matter; and they were the 
more fatal, becauſe the Puſtles did ſo eaſily Flux for the 
reaſon above · mentioned; for now the Intemperance of the 
Air, of its own accord, did that miſchief, which ignorant 
Quacks uſe unluckily to do, at the beginning of the Dil, 
eaſe, by a hot Regimen and Cordials, for (which is di- 
ligently to be noted) after the moſt exquiſite Obſervati- 
on, the chief of all is, that in the Small pox, the great. 
eſt ſafety proceeds frm the Paucity of Puſtles, and the 
moſt danger from the fulneſs of them; and as they are 
few or numerous, ſo the Patient lives or dies; yet we 
muſt confeſs, that a Bloody Urine and Purple Spots, which 
are the moſt certain Forerunnersof Death, ſometimes ha 

penzwhen there is ſcarce any ſign appearing of the Small 


nerally accompanied the Pox that fluxed moſt, fo now and 
then they invaded ſo very early, that they killed the 
Patient before the ſull Eruption, as we remarked before, 

I think it is very eaſie to give an account, why the Ps. 
tient is more or leſs endangered, according to the great. 
er or leſſer number of Puſtles; for every Puſtle is 2 
Phlegmon, t ho' very ſmall, and preſently Impoſt humates, 
and therefore it cannot be imagined, but that the Secunds- 
ry Fever, that depends on the Matter which is now a ma- 
king, is more or leſs exaſperated at the State of the 
Diſeaſe, according to the quantity of the Matter to be 
Concotted, which is uſually performed in the gentleſt 
Flux-pox, on the Eleventh day, reckoning from the firſt 
approach of the Diſeaſe ; in the middle fort on the 14th 
day, but in the ſevereſt kind on the 17th day; for 
Whereas, (which is to be noted) the Flux pox is as much 
more dangerons than the diſtin, as the Plague than the 
Flux; fo alſo the above mentioned three kinds, are more 
dangerous one than the other, which alſo reſpects 28 
well the Age as the Sex; for every one knows, that 3 


young 


272 Of Epidemict Diſeaſes from 
rant Plenitude of the variolous Matter, endeavours 
change the whole Subſtance of the Body into Puſtles. 
But the immoderate Aſſimulation of the variolch 
Matter, is no way more readily promoted than b ſow 
fining the Patient unſeaſonably to his Bed, to wir, efor 
the Sixth Day, or the fourth incluſively from the Frys, 
tion, at which time all the Puſtles appear, neither 25. 
there more to be expected. y 

And tho' the moderate heat of the Bed, even aft; 
thoſe days are paſt, does a little occaſion the Phrenſs 
Watchings, and other Symptoms, yet theſe are (ſuch ;; 
may be (ſubdued by Medicines judiconſly preſcribec 
whereas the great danger of Life, Which comes on the 
Eleventh day, occaſioned b the innumerable Puſtles, ei 
ceeds the help of Phyſick. 

Therefore here I ſeriouſly admoniſh, that the Patient 
by no means confine himſelf to his Bed in the day time 
if he would avoid the great j conflux of Puſtles, till to- 
wards the Evening of the ſixth Day, by which he wil 
find himſelf very much refreſhed: Afterwards he wil 
be ſcarce able to riſe at all, if the Concourſe of Pox be 
conſiderable, by reaſon of the ſharp Pains of the Puſtlez 
and becauſe he is more enclined to Fainting, at ſitting 
up, Which when I had often obſerved, it came into my 
mind, that Nature, according, to the Cuſtom of the Di- 
K eaſe, did firſt point out at the time, when the Patient wx 
} continually to be kept in Bed. 
| But that I may not only confirm the truth of the fote- 
going Problem, Which is of ſo great moment in leſſen. 
ing the impending danger from the Small-pox, but alf 
that in handling them, I take along with me our account 
from the beginning to the end, I think it will be proper 
to draw as it were a Scheme of the whole Diſeaſe, and 
diligently to conſider what is its Nature, and what the 
10 method; ſo that at length we may be able td dilcern 
ky the thing clearly, according to the Judgment of Men, 
. that uſe the molt faithful Obſervations, not by Opinion 
1 built on the uncertain Foundation of Fancy. 

Fo. _ Firſt therefore its Eſſence, as much as we can learn 

the Eſſences of things, ſeems to be comprehended in 2 

Fl certain Inflammation of the Blood, in which Nature is bu- 

fied for ſome Days, at firit in preparing and ſubduing the | 
m- 


* th. n > th 


— tae... AM 


a 1 


t %% . ⅛ '. ac Üũ "anne. - 


the Tear 1675, ro the Tear 1680. 273 


* - Azmed Particles, ſo that they may be the eaſier thruſt 
| info to the#6utward parts of * the Body, at which time 
the State of the Blood being diſturbed, it is neceſſary 
there ſhould be a Fever; for the incenſed and raging Par- 
ticles roving tumultuouſly through the whole Province 
of the circulating Blood, neceſſarily occaſion Sickneſs of 
the Stomach, Lancing Pains of the Head, and all other 
Symproms that precede Expulſion, as in their Motion 
they are driven on this or that part. But wherf triumph- 
ino Nature has driven out the rebellious Particles to the 
habit of the Body, the reſt of the Tragedy is acted in 
the Fleſhy Parts, as before it was in the Blood, and as 
Nature knows no other Method than a Fever to caſt out 
the peccant Matter from the Blood, fo alſo does ſhe free 
the carnous . from any extraneous thing, by no other 
way than that of au Impoſthume ; for inſtance, if per- 
chance 2 Thorn, or ſome ſuch thing, ſtick in the Fleſh, 
the circumjacent Parts are preſently impoſt humated, un- 
leſs that which 1s offenſive be preſently drawn forth ; 
therefore when theſe Particles have lodged themſelves in 
the Fleſh, they cauſe Phlegmons not very viſible, in which 
they abſcond, which increaſing hourly, and growing more 
inflamed, and angry, at length they come to Matter, at 
which time it cannot be but ſome of the Matter will be 
ſucked into the Maſs of Blood, as it returns in its Circu- 
lar Motion by the Veins, and if a great quantity of it 
be poured on the Blood, it does not ny produce a Fe- 
ver, which the Patient's ſtrength is not able to bear, but 
it alſo poy ſons the Maſs of Blood, and yet this is not the 
worſt, for by the intenſe Heat of the Fever, ſtirred up 
in theſe laſt days, by the two great force of the Matter, 
the Salivation, Which ought to be an inſeparable Compa- 
nion of the Flux-pox, is too ſuddenly ſtopt, and fo, the 
Patient dies immediately. But if the purulent Matter be 
ſparingly received into the Blood, the ſtrength of Nature 
eaſily depreſſes the violence of the Secundary Fever, and 
the Puſtles dying off daily more and more, the Patient 
ſoon recovers. 

If this be the true and exact Hiſtory of this Diſeaſe, 
he deſerves to be blind, who will not ſee how that the 
whole event of it, as to either part, depends on the Fotins 
dation of the Cure well or . laid at firſt; for if thei 


27 4 Of FEpidemick Diſeaſes from 


hot a d ſpirituous Part cles are provokedoby the uſe f 
hot (161.25, and eſpecially by keeping the Bed continually 
it is nceſſary that the Aſſimulating faculty (to which be. 
fore they were too much inclined) ſhould be heighined 
andiic eaſed. Mor: over, the Blood and other Humour; 
being hearted by thele means, the eaſier yield to the vic. 
lent impreſſion of the Particles, ſo that more Puſtles brezk 
out than are tequiſite, and the Patient is put in danger of 
his Life, when there is no neceſſity for it; whereas the 
opp ſite and moderate cooling Regimen, and the free uſe of 
the Air, not only quenches the burning Particles, but al( 
| condenſes and ſtrengthens the Humours, fo that they are 
more able to reſiſt the Morbifick Spirits, and to bear their 
violence; and fo there is no gt eater quantity of variolons 
Matter, than what was agreeable to the Nature of the 
Diſeaſe, 

Neither does he ſuffer this Inconvenience only, that i; 
confined to his Bed too ſoon, viz That too great a quan- 
tity of the Morbifick Matter is aſſimulated, and that the 
Ferment of the Diſeaſe is overmuch heightned , but moſt 
commonily bloody Urine and Purple-ſpots, eſpecially in 
Summer, and in thoſe that are y2t in the flower of their 
Age, are occaſioned alſo by the ſame. If I be not miſt» 
ken, both theſe Symptoms ariſe from the heat and fury 
into Which the Blood is put, by the hot and ſpirituous 
Particles, by which being exagicated, and greatly atte- 
nuated, it breaks out of the Veſſels; when it ruſhes in 
up ::; the Kidneys it cauſes bloody Urine z When it 15 

ercolated through the Extremities of the Arteries, ter- 
».111ed im the Maſcles and Skin, it occaſions Purple ſpots, 
\u1ch are like io many Mortifications in thoſe places in 
which ex vated Blood is coagulated; and tho thele two 
ret SyYMNpuns myht have been ealily prevented at the begin- 
; nog of the Diva-e{art which tune they chiefly ſhew them- 
] ſelves) by a c>0/ mg Regimen, and Diet; yer when they 
Th actually apy. a, be ll be as much miſtaken, who endes 
ö Vours o Curc heim by berpins the Patient in Bed, e and by 
as an Old Woman would be, that ſhould 


— wy 


— 


F³˙ ˙ ˙ · ⏑ a+ aan ood ͤ . ones ² nes ES. Rn 


* * Fe 11 A Y 4 _ 


ging 401 U1 1}; 


't it rive to binder the boyling of her Pot by putting more 
740 Fire unkcr jc, 
« But 10 (peak! the truth, let the Dogmatical and thoſe 


petent 


0 8 
that are ignorant of this matter, and therefore incony 

H 

i 

ö 


petent Judges, ſay what they will, it is not only dange- 
rous to keep the Patient in Bed continually, but truly 
ſmetimes it is neceſſary to allow him the open Air, = 
Fit be Summer, and he has not paſt the flower of his 
Age, or has accuſtomed himſelf to ſpirituous Liquors, and 
eſpecially if the Diſeaſe was occaſioned by exceſlive drink- 
ing; indeed I thinkin theſe Caſes roo haſty an Eruption 
ofPuſtles can ſcarce be reſtrained enough by keeping from 
Bed, and abſtaining from Cordials z for the Blood with- 
out the help of theſe, is ſo over ſtored with her Spirits of 
the ſame Nature with the Diſeaſe, that the violent Explo- 
fon of it is unavoidable; and beſides, ſo great a quantity 
of Humours will turn to Puſtles, that the Patient being as 
it were overwhelmed by the abundance of Matter flowing 
back upon the Blood, muſt neceſſarily periſh at the latter 
end of the Diſeaſe. 

But moſt commonly the Ferment immoderately exalt- 
ed, adds fo great violence to the variolous Matter, that 
the Patient dies at the beginning of the Diſeaſe, viz. when 
the Matter that produces it, cannot extricate it ſelf and 
come out, by reaſon of the inordinate and coofuſed Motion 
ſtirred up in the Blood; inſtead of which, bloody Urine 
and Purple · ſpots put an end to the Tragedy: Which alſo 
often happens in the Meaſles and Scarlet Fever, When they 
areanſeaionably forced our, 

Neither does Bleeding, 2s I can find, tho? it be uſed 
early, fo effectually reſtrain the Aſſimulation of the va- 
riolous Matter, as the temperating of the Blood by the 
Air fucked in, eſpecially if the Patient be put to Bed 
preſently after Bleeding, and be injured by hot Cordials; 
for by theſe means, the Blood is more inclined to receive 
the Ilmpreſſions of the Adventitious heat, than it was before 
Bleeding; and | ſolemnly declare, that almoſt the worſt 
Diſeaſe of the Flux kind I ever ſaw, and which killed 
the Patient on the Eleventh day, happened to a young 
Maid, after ſhe had recovered of a Rheumatiſm by the 
uſual Method, viz. by a large and repeated Bleeding; and 
from hence ] learned, that Blood-letting did not ſo much 
conduce to the reſtraining the Small pox in their due 
Bounds as heretofore | imazined, though I have very often 
odſerved, that purging repeated before the Blood 1s infe- 
cted, often renders the Small-pox more diſtin aud fa- 
vourable. 1 2 I 


the Tear 1 675, to the Tear 168d. 275 


monly calumniated, yet they endure it patiently, having 


hand, by too much provoking the Ferment of the Dit- 


276 Of the Epidemick Diſeaſes from 


1 am very ſenſible, that many things may be objected 
againſt this Opinion, of keeping the Patient up a days; 
and thoſe of no {mall moment amongſt the ordinar 
fort of People, and others that are little acquainted with 
this Dileaſe, to whom vulgar Phyſicians are wont to ap. 
peal as fit en by their Authority that they may un, 
der-prop their ill built Theorems; and indeed ſuch bet. 
ter ſuit with their Capacities, than thoſe that are ma. 
turely contriv'd by more ſearching Men. Hence it fol- 
lows, that the far greater part of Mankind, being fitted 
to take up things only upon truſt, but very few able to 
fathom the depth of them, that F unlearned prevail o- 
ver the more underſtanding ſort of men, who are com- 


truth and the beſt, tho' feweſt of men, on their ſide, 
Firſt it is objected, that keeping from the Bed at the be. 
ginning of the Diſeaſe, hinders the Eruption of the Pu. 
ſtles, and by conſequence the Sicknels and other Symp- 
toms arifing frum thence, are protracted; and this I do 
not at all deny, and experience daily teſtifies the ſame: 
But it ovght to be conſtdered, whether it be more dan- 
gerous ſomewhat to ſuppreſs the variolous Matter, and 
upon that account to protract the Sickneſs a little, which 
is occaſioned by its not coming out; or on the other 


eaſe, and Ailimulating ſo great a quantity of the vario. 
lous Miaticr, that the Patient be brought to the jaws of 
Death by the Secundary Fever on the Eleventh day. | 
belie e it will appear, if the thing be rightly weighed, 
that very few 4m therefore died, becauſe the Puſtles 
did not come out looner of later, unleſs perchance in ſome 
of thoſc, whoſe Blood being inrag-d, by too great heat 
and wordinate Motion, had not leiſure to caſt out gently 
the Morbifick /Aatter, Which makes for me, For we need 
not car, tho' we do nothing, the variolous Matter (how 
much ſoever it flies about at the beginning of the Dileale, 
and wearies all the parts it falls upon, from whence pro- 
ceed theſe Symptoms, violent Vomiting, and pains in 
various parts, Cc.) Let at length they will be tamed 
by Nature, and extruded to the habit of Body, eſpe- 
cially the Patients Body being bound hitherto for the 
molt part, gives good aſſurance that the Eruption of Bs 

ule 


the Tear 1675, to the Year 1680. 277 


puſtles will be certain, tho late; but on the contrary, 


nin what = hazard is the erg Ne. the Puſtles are 
| unſeaſona | 

tion them all, I will only handle the chief now, and ney 
| re theſe: Firſt, the number of the Puſtles being too 

© increaſed, the Fever * towards the latter end o 
Diſeaſe, is more or leſs 

number. Secondly, the bloody Urine and the Purple ſpors, 
E both which ariſe from the extravaſated Blood which 
| being too much thinned, and raging, by reaſon of great 
heat, breaks out through the Veſſels. Thirdly, as we laid 
before, a total Suppreſſion of the due Eruption, is ſome- 
times occaſioned by being over cfficious in h ſtening it, by 
E which the deſign of the Phyficiar, is as much fruſtt ted, 
zs he would be, that ſhould endeavour to call our a great 
number of Men, contained in a large Huuſe orderly, one 
aſier another, by flinging a Squib amongſt them, wh ch 
on the contrary would ſo diſturb them, that all enceavour- 
ing to come out at once, the paſſage would be ſo wedged 
© up, that they would all be ſhut in. | 


ly thruſt out, it would too tedious to men- 


C 
he 
angerous, according to their 


If any one ſhould ask me, why a due Separation of 


the variolous Matter cannot as well be performed at the 
beginning of the Diſeaſe, by cherithing the Patient with 
the moderate heat of the Bed, as by taking him out of it? 
On the contrary I demand, whether experience does not 
teſtifie, that any one a-bed in Winter time, mode) ately 
covered with Cloaths, without Fire, is not hotter than 
© if he were taken out of his Bed, and well cloathed in the 
ame Chamber; but if the difference be very ma if it, 
E then I would enquire in the next place, which of th.ſe 
methods is likelieſt ro ſuppreſs the immoderate Motion of 
the various Ferment, at Which, if I am able to judge, 
| the Phyſician ſhould chiefly aim at the beginn ng of the 
| Diſeaſe, and the more or leſs he wanders from the fame, 
o it will be well or ill with the Patient. 


But this chiefly has impoſed upon the unwary in this 


| Caſe, to wit, that they have obſerved that the Patient of 
his own accord is inclined to Sweat, which continually 
$ lowing as long as he keeps his Bed the feveriſh Heats are . 
very much abated, otherwiſe than in thoſe that did not 
eat. Therefore let us conſider, why we do ſo much 
endeavour to reſtrain the Fever, whereas that is Nature's i 
4 T3 uſuay 4 


1 


278 Of the Epidemick Diſeaſes from 


uſual Inſtrument, which-ſhe chiefly uſes in preparing and 
caſting out all offenſive Matter that lies hid in the Blood 
Why who does not perceive, that while we diligently pro- 
voke Sweat to leſſen the Fever, at the ſame time we force 
out z crude and indigeſted Humour, like over-early Fruit: 
And by theſe very Sweats, we afterwards occaſion a vig. 
lent Fever; for by this means the Serum of the Blood 
(with which the Blood it ſelf, and thoſe hot new bred 
Particles are diluted) is driven. out, and in the mean 
while, theſe Particles wax violent, becauſe they are now 
freed from the Serum, which was exhauſted by Sweat. 
In a word, the leſſening of the Fever and other Symptoms 
by Sweat, and the Puſtles for this reaſon being too haſtily 
thruſt out, happen ill to very many, who die upon this 
account on the Eleventh Day. | 

But it is to be noted, that I keep the Patient from his 
Bed at the beginning of this Diſeaſe, only when upon 
ſuppoſition that the Small-pox coming out, are of the 
Flux kind; for as to the diſtin& ſort, if it can be certainly 
known, as there is no neceſſity to keep the Patient conti 
nually in Bed, fo neither to force him from it, for the 
fewneſs of the Puſiltes, ſecures him either way. 

But I do not flatter my ſelf fo much, as to think that 
theſe things which I have here treated of, ſhould be be. 
lieved vpon the Authority of my Judgment, which 
know is very ſmall; and truly I have accounted alwWs)3 
the Opinious of almoſt all forts of Men to be ſo ur 
certain, and of fo little Weight, that I may always 
very well ſaſpet my own, when it is contrary to the 
Sentiments of others; which I alſo ſhould do here, !! 
practical Phenomena, did not as it were With one Con- 
jent, confirm the dictates of Reaſon; for without pre 
ctical Obſervation, that which ſeems reaſonable to me, 
or any other Perſon, pechance will be nothing elſe, but 
the ſhadow of Reaſon, or a Phantaſm, that is, mere Opr 
nion; and the oftner I converſe with Men, I am tte 
more confirmed how dangerous it is, even for thoſe thi! 
are the moſt acute, to wrack their Brains, and as 1 
were inflame them, in the Search of any Arr or Science 
unleſs they conſtitute matter of Fact, as Judge and Ur 
pire of Truth and Falſhood: And ſuch great Opiniato!%, 


as Cicero ſays, infinitely wander from Truth, in dentro 
| | js 


; WE ts oo ba 3x $2 Mt nme, “ littered a IT PF WI DFF EEO ONE One FORT CC EIFS 3 N i 6 — * * an 
* r r Fr ˙ ²˙—A— «... ̃ ͥ -. ²⏑²˙¹ͤ]. ˙ V» Nmm̃ ̃ . EE bo act INES 808 ö enn 
J ² . r . . . we eee © x*F , *# FF = 3Fz + EE , . : © 


the Tear 1675, to the Tear 1690. 279 


ges purely Speculative, whereas he thar applies his Mind 
only to thoſe thin „% Which may certainly be derermi- 
© ned by Practice, if he ſhould chance to have a falle Opi- 
nion, would be ſoon fet right, by proving the Idea's 
E of things, which he has conceived in his Mind by this 
© Toach ſtone. For in this our buſineſs, may not Job- 
© Gree what Regimen chiefly produces a favourable, or 
cruel ſort of Pox, and fo frame an Opmion in my Mind 
© ſnitable to what appears? And if others would Practise 
the ſame, I ſliould be ſatisfied ; but it is ext: camly un- 
jaſt to defime me as an Imp. ſtor; when they never 
try'd ſo much as once in their whole Lives, Whether 
the Method ſo often repeated above, of ke pg the Pa- 
tient up a Days, does either good or hnr' if his cavil- 
ling Humour had heretofore prevailed over the ivat 
found out Truths, though contrary to common Onion, 
no Man would have erdeavourcd for any thing, which 
being found, would have been uſeful to Mankind; and 
truly why ſhould I thus trouble my ſelf, it often rep/rat- 
ed, and almoſt daily experienced did not proclaim, * that 
this method was much more ſafe, than the vulgar one? 
lam not ſo very mad and fooliſh, to ſeek for Fame by 
© exploding the Opinions cf thoſe, which if I courrea ape 
plaule, were to be flattered; neither can it be thougſit 
lam ſo deſperately malicious, as to conſpire the Ruin of 
thoſe that are to be born many Ages after | am dead, 
by the Reputation of this my Method, if it has any, that 
ſo 1 might deſtroy when Jam dead, as well as when 1 
am living, at which I tremble in the very mentioning, 
However it is, I have uſed his method for my own 
Children, my deareſt and neareſt Relations, and all 
others that have committed themſelves io my Care: Ard 
ik am tobe blamed for any thing, it i- becauie I have 
ſometimes yielded to thoſe of a contraty Opinion, leit 
| ſhould be counted moroſe; and tor the Confirm tion 
of this, I appeal to my intimate Acquainiance, Aud ihis 
is another Unhappineſs, that ſometunes ao, When the 
Standers«by have contemned all | have pr pot d hrough 
the whole Courſe of the Diſeaſe, yet they have charged 
me with the Death of the Patient, tho' he was deſtroyed 
dy that Heat, which the Friends aud Nurics promoted, 
and which 1 fo much inveighed againſt ; upon which 

2 Account, 


280 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 


Account, by»reaſon of the inſuperable Prejudice of moſt 
People, I have thought it would be well for me, if | 
were never called again to any that have the Small-pox, 
Truly, I do not deny, but that the Small-pox wil 
flux ſomecimes very much, after what manner b. 
ever they are handled, and therefore they are never 
tree from darger, though the beſt help be procured: 
but this I affirm, (which is enough for my purpoſe) 
That it is apparent by daily and often repeated Fx. 
rience, that he is in much leſs danger, who total 
abſtains from Fleſh, and keeps himſelf from Bed in 
the Day time, at the firſt approach of this Diſeaſe, and 
allows him/elf only Small Drink, than he that preſent. 
ly confines himſelf to his Bed, and takes hot Cordials; 
or this method, as we mentioned before, moſt commonly 
hinders the Flux of the Puſtles, and by conſequence all 
the immoderate Efferveſſence of the ſecundary Fever, 
which does not deſtroy only of its ſelf, but alſo by thick 
ening the Spittle too haſtily of which we now treat- 
ed largely m the Hiſtory of this _ it threatens 
auth to the Patient, at the latter end of this Diſeaſe: 
nd alſo by this method a bloody Urine, and Purple Spots 
may be prevented, both which Symptoms invade at the 
beginning of the Diſeaſe, and often before there is any 
Sign of the Eruption, Which is alſo uſual in the Meaſle, 
and Scarlet · Fever, and other acute Diſeaſes, that pro- 
ceed from a great inflammation. To ſay nothing now d 
that pleaſant Kefreſhment, which the patient perceives 
himſelt encompaſſed with, from the free Approach of the 
Air, as often as he is taken out of the hot Bed; which & 
dne of thoſe that I was permitted to treat after this 
mene, openly declared, being extreamly thankful, asil 
they had ucen recovered from Death, having as it were 
received Life and Spirit from the Air. 2 
From whence I have been induc'd to conſider, how 
much oftner we are milguided, by that which we ſup 
poſed to be Reaſon, than by Senſe, which is molt cer 
tainly known to us, and that in the Cure of Diſeaſes 
we ſhould have a greater regard to the earneſt Deſires 
of che Sick, (if they are not very irregular, and ſuch a 
would U extinguiſh Life ) than to the more doubt. 
ol and fallacious Rules of the medical Art: * in- 
„„ Cw oY Fe 8 | ilancyy 


the Year 1675, to the Tear 1680. 281 


ance, he that has a burning Fever earneſtly deſires the 
ee uſe of ſmall- Beer; now the Theorems of Art that 
ke built upon a certain Hypotheſis that propoſes to it 


' moſi 
* 


x. 

© will ir ſome other End, with which the indulgence of a 
r {© M&oling Liquor does not agree, croſſes the Appetite and 
never ders a Cordial inſtead of it; The ſame Patient being 
Ired; pt from ſmall Beer, loaths all forts of Nouriſhment, 


poſe t Art eſpecially, that which Nurſes and the Friends that 


Ex- and by profeſs, earneſtly requires that he muſt fced, 
total nother upon the ſame Account, fer long Weakneſs, 
ed in ambly petitions for ſome abſur'd thing, and which per- 
and aps may ſeem hurtful, and here again impertitent 


eſent. rt oppoſes, and pronounces Death if he will not be ob- 
dials; rvant, unleſs perchance the Artiſt has well digeſted this 
noni holeſome Aphoriſm'of the wiſe Hippocrates : Meat and 
> al Drink, tho' ſomewhat worſe, if pleaſing is to be prefer- 
ever, Fed before better, that is, diſpleaſing. In all theſe wan 
thick rings of Nature, as it ſeems, any one that is but indif. 
treat WFrently accuſtomed to the Practice of Phyſick, if he ſe- 
atem I fioully conſider, will readily grant, that many Patients 
eaſe: have been better after they have forſook the Precepts of 
Spots heir Phyſician, and have followed their own Inclinati- 
it the Tins ; neither will he wonder at this, who conſiders, that 


s am the moſt wiſe Creator of all things has accompliſhed the 
aſle, I Frhole with ſuch great exactneſs, that even as all the 
pro- Miſeries of Nature, excellently conſpire to compleat the 
w of Harmony of the whole Work, fo each particular is en- 


eie opowed with a certain divine Artifice, inter woven as it 
f the ere to its proper Eſſence, by which the Subject removes 
che thoſe ills from its ſelf; which plainly appears at the na- 
r this MW tural Period of moſt acute Diſeaſes, (Which generally have 
as it God for their Author, as 14 as alſo in 
were thoſe Propenſions which accompany ſuch Diſeaſes, and 
© prepare a way to free the Sick from that danger, which 
how MW Art perfornis, when it is concern'd with Fools: And up- 
> ſup on this Account truly, it Was very well for thoſe, whoſe 
cer whole race had been otherwiſe in a very lad Condition, 
aſs, it the time when the whole Art of Phyfick was incloſed 
fires 5 Within the narrow Bounds of Greece; Which is no more 
h 5 7proportionable to the other parts of the World, than a 
Judt- ſmall Village to our Brittain: And now alſo what would 
in- become of the Inhabitants of ſo many and fo great Re- 
OOO | __ gious? 


— 
282 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 


gions? for all Afizz Africa, and America, (except fim 
late Colonies, that are not very populous) ang wen 
over a great part of Eurote, are altogether «|; 
tute of the medical Art: But as the Comedian elegy; 
ly diſtinguiſhing thoſe that were fi wvons for E eaſ m ang 
Virtue from the Herd of others, that Scandalize their hu 
mane Shape with a brutiſh Life ; ſays, they are Men, ff 
they act like Men; fo the medical Art, if it be truly a 
Art, and not only a Name, is the greateſt Beneñt that 
belongs to this Life; and is by ſo much greater than 1 
others, by how much Life is more excellent than thoſe 
things we enjoy by it, 

But to return to the buſineſs: How profitable ſoever 
it be for the moſt part, that the Patient be kept fron 
Bed at the beginning of the Diſeaſe, yet ſometime 
(which is to be _ ) he muſt he altogether confine 
to it before the Eruption: For inſtance, a Child thatj; 

aſt the Symptoms which accompany the breeding of 
eeth, is of a ſudden taken with a Convulſion; in this caſe 
we muſt conſider that perhaps it proceeds from Nature, 
endeavouring to thruſt out to the Habit of the Body, 


the Small-Pox, Meaſles, or Scarlet Fever, tho' yet they N 
are hid in the Skin: That therefore we may ſufficiently 1 
provide againſt ſo dangerous a Symptom, we muſt pre. f 


jently apply a Bliſter to the Neck, and put the Child to 
Bed, and give a Cordial, with a ſmall uantity of ſome 
Opiate, by which the Cauſe of the Diſeaſe may be the 
more powerfully caſt out, and alſo the Tumults which oc. 
caſions the Paroxiſm may be quieted. E. G. I preſcribe 
five drops of Liguid Laudanum, in one Spoonful of Fyi- 
demick Water, or the like, for a Child of three Years old: 
And truly I very much ſuſpect, not to ſay J am certain, 
that ſome thouſands of Children, and ſome older, have 
therefore Perithed, becauſe Phyſicians have not ſufficient- 
ly conſidered, that ſuch Convulſions are nothing elſe but 
the forerunners of the foreſaid Diſeaſes; for unwary 
Phyſicians taking theſe Fits, which are really Symp- 
tomatical, for eſſential Diſeaſes, and endeavouring to 
cure them by Gliſters often repeated, and other Fvacu 
tions, hinder the Eruption of the Puſtles, and render the 
Fits more laſting, which they ſo much ſtudy to vanquilh, WF 
and which would otherwiſe certainly vaniſh of their F 
| | EW owr WE 


- 


** 


: the Tear 1675, to the Tear 1680. 282 


un accord, as ſoon as the Puſtles come out: And the 
wall Pox ( as we have mentioned in another place) 
that (ſeize young Children with a Convulſion, are fa- 
Vvourable and ſeldom Flux much, fo that the Patient may 
pe pat in Bed much fer at the beginning of the Diſeaſe; 
but! have often obſerv'd that the Small-pox flux very much, 
when they immediately follow Comatoſe Diſeaſes: In 
which caſe, I rather order a Bliſter, and ſuch an Opiate, 
Das I deſcribed, then to let the Patient keep his Bed con- 
Etinually before the Eruption. I have alſo taken notice, 
That ſuch Convu'fions do ſometimes (though very rare- 
Ely) precede the Fits of intermitting Fevers ; but Coma- 
E tole D ſeaſes often begin and end with theſs Paroxyſms, as 
well in Children as grown People; of both which there 


ae is no notice to be taken with reſpect to the Cure, but 
at i the Fever is only to be oppoſed, that being the chief 
» of and eſſential Diſcaſez for if I ſhould principaily regard 
uſe theſe Comatoſe Symptoms that accompany the Fever, 
ure. and therefore ſhould firive to conquer this Drowſineſs 
dy by Bleeding, Purging, and repeated Glyſters, I ſhould 
ber by this means heighten the Fever, and by confequence 


ſo increaſe the Coma, (which I endeavour'd to cure) 
that the Patient at length would be lulled afleep for ever; 


re. F 7 
it, u bereas if I uſe my utmoſt endeavour to cure the Fever, 
me be Symptoms that proceed from thence, will be eaſily 


8 vanquiſhed, which I deſire may be ſeriouſly minded; for 
upon this account frequent, and very fatal Errors are 


by 2 to happen: But I ſpoke largely of this in another 
bi- FH Piece. | 
1 In the next place alſo J muſt acquaint you, though it be 


advantageous for the Patient to be kept up a days, yet 
this Comfort cannot be allowed ſometimes, if vehement 
& Sickneſs, a high Fever, violent Vomiting, Giddineſs, and 
Fains of the Limbs like a Rheumatiſm, Cc. contrain 
& cat ; all which Symptoms, if they be violent, eſpecially 
in thoſe that are Sanguine, and in the flower of their 
Age, betoken that there is a great quantity of variolous 
Matter within, and that there will be no ſmall danger 
from the Puſtles ſtriving to come out tumultuouſly, and 
about to Flux extreamly: Seeing therefore it is abſo- 
lately neceſſary to reſtrain the exorbitance of the Fer- 
TY 4 ment, and yet on the one hand it rages more Hoey 


Rs ny 


284 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 
by being promoted, by the continual heat of the Req. 
and on the other hand the Patient cannot keep, up he. 
cauſe he is ſo very Sick, unleſs we give him eaſe, fy 
theſe reaſons it is altogether neceſſary to bleed him in the 
Arm, and to give him a ſtrong Vortit ſome hours after 
of the infoſim of Crocus Merallorum, which does ng 
only exv-! the Matter that cauſes the unuſual Sickneſ 
but fo refreſhzs the Patient, that being as it were well, 
he can keep from Bed: Neither re we to endeavour 
by this method only, to ſuppreſs the force of the Fer 
ment, but that the Patient may be the more ſecure, 
it is very fit, that beſides the Evacuations above men- 
tioned, a good Doſe of Spirit of Vitriol be dropt into 
the {mall Beer, as often as he drinks, till there be a ful] 
Eruption of the Puſtles. Yet notwithitanding theſe Ex- 
cuations, and the uſe of the cooling drink, the Patient 
muſt no be permitted to ke-p his Bed a days, if it may 
be for :2ſe univerlals much leſs reſtrain the Aſſimula- 
tion ©! , variolous Matter, than once cooling the Blood 
by 1c irefh Air, paſſing in and out by the Lungs, which 
alone iorthvith leſſens * above mentioned Symptomatick 
Sickneſs, 4s I have found by experience more than once: 
But this me what unuſual method, is not neceſſarily re. 

uired, unleſs in thoſe that are in the flower of their 

ge, Whoſe Blood has been over-heated by Venery or 
Wine, and in others ( always excepting Joung Children) 
that together with the Small- pox, conflict with thoſe 
violent Symptoms above-mentioned; where the Blood 
is nor ſo much inflamed, nor the Symptoms fo violent, 


as there is much leſs danger of over haſtily Aſſimulating 


the variolous Matter, ſo by conſequence the foremen- 
tioned Evacuations, and the Spirit of Vitriol may be o- 
mitted. . 
I have taken the more time in treating of theſe things, 
becauſe I am very well ſatisfied, that happy or la- 
mentable end of the Diſeaſe, chiefly, if not wholly, de- 
pends on the Management of the Patient at the begin- 
ning; but now all the Puftles being come out (Which, 
as we have ſaid before, was on the Sixth day, reckon- 
ing from ne firſt Invaſion, bat on the Fourth incluſively 
ſrom the firſt Eruption) the Patient is no more to be kept 
from his Bed the remainder of the Diſeaſe, Which * 
bv or A I” 6 ( * I 2 IM at, ah ee 


the heat, have ignorantly conſpired with the Diſeaſe 

deſt roy the Patient, | 
From this time the Puſtles begin to increaſe, and to 
inflame the Superficies of the Body, all over, eſpecially 
the Head, ſo that the Patient, unleſs he be a Child, is 


the Tear 1675, to the Tear 1680. 285 


Jeed as it ought not to be allowed before this day, ſo the 


Condition of the Patient will ſcarce bear, that it be de- 


ferred any longer, if he has the Flux-pox; and this is 
the ſort (which I deſire may be taken tice of that we 


dave hitherto treated of; for if the Puſt les are few, it is 


no great matter which method is uſed, if the Pizyſician be 
but indifferently well skilled; for tho* this kind of its own 
Nature be free from danger, yet not a few (which is much 
to be lamented ) have died, when they have unfortunately 
made ule of thoſe, who placing all their hope in 8 
t 


reſtleſs and can hardly ſleep, which I think in the next 
place is to be ſeriouſly confidered in this Diſeaſe ; for 
the more ſedate the Blood is, the better do the Puſtles 
increaſe and attain their due Magnitude, and on the 


contrary, according to the degree of the violent Motion, 


dy which the Blood is diſturbed, the Puſtles fade, their 
farther progreſs being intercepted; ſo that the Eruption 
of the peccant Matter is not only obſttucted, but more- 
over the Oeconomy, and natural Craſis of every parti- 
cular Phlegmon is diſturbed; and therefore, either they 


do not at all attain Separation at their due time, or in- 


ſtead of Pus, at length an Ichor is produced, and for 
the Yellow Liquor, reſembling the colour of an Honey- 
comb, tome black Humour, or ſome other Non=natural 
Juice is caſt out, contrary to the genuine Puſtles of the 
Small- pox: Wherefore I think Opiates are as much indi- 


cated in the Small pox, as any other Remedy is in any 
other Diſeaſe; for in this Caſe they are as it were Spe- 


cificks, as the Jeſuits Powder in intermitting Fevers; tho 
know very well, that Paregoricks do not operate by a- 


ny preciſe Specifick Virtue, but only by anſwering that 
Indication, bo 


which we endeavour to quiet the Blood 
and Spirits, and to reduce them to order; and truly 


this inordinate Motion of the Blood and Spirits ( being 


an r Companion of the Flux-pox in grown 
People) chiefly requires the uſe of Paregoricks : Nei- 


ther does he as yet rightly underſtand the Genius of this 


Diſeaſe, 


0 __ — 5 — 


; 
* 
. 
l 
; 
: 


286 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 


Diſeaſe, who thinks thoſe things are only occaſioned f, G 


want of ſleep, for as it may happen ſometimes, he th; 
does not ſleep may alſo have his Spirit compoſed ang 
quiet, (which often happens upon taking of Laudanuy 
ſo ſometimes it comes to paſs, that the Spirits being n 
violent Motion, hinder the laudable Eruption of the bu. 
ſtles, even when the Patient ſleeps much, which is wort 

Obſervation, 
Now to ſpeak of the forts of Anodynes, tho' I hatt 
ed Liquid Laudanum, for many years with good Sur. 
ceſs, when this Indication was to be anſwered, yet! 
Think Diacodium is to be preferred before it, tho! both 
may be uſed for the ſame purpoſe, yet I ſuppoſe the 
Laudanum heats a little more than the Syrup; as toth 
Doſe, that is not only to be ſuited to the Age of the P; 
tient, but to the degree of the Symptoms, and that whit 
perchance would be too much for a Perſon whole yi 
rits are wel! compoſed, would not be ſufficient for ar. 
ther that has his Sprits inraged: For inſtance, we (up 
por in general that ſix Drams is ſufficient for molt; 
ut for thoſe that have the Small pox, when this kind 
of Remedy is indicated, we muſt ſcarce give lels tha 
an Ounce, if we will do any thing to the purpoſe, which 
quantity indeed muſt be preſcribed for one Doſe throug 
the whole courſe of this Diſeaſe, I ſpeak now of grow 
People, for if it be given to Children, the Doſe mult l 
leſſened according to their Age; and truly Anodynes at 
not ſo muck indicated in Children that have the Smils 
Pots as in grown People, for they are more prone 
eep the whole time of the Diſeaſe; yet if they are h 
much danger, I ſhould be afraid to abttain from Opiate, 
But as I was about to ſay, it is very hard to determin: 
the Doſe of the Ancayre, in all the Caſes in which tie) 
are indicated, for whether it be in any inordinate Mut: 
on of the Spirits, or in violent Vomiting, or Flux 
the Belly; or great Pains, in which three Dileaks 
Anodynes are chiefly indicated (as we ſaid in anette 
place) they are to be given in ſuch a manner, that 
the firſt Doſe do not do the buſineſs, another, and 
another is to be given at due times, till at length Us 
Medicines anſwer the intention of the Phyſician, not f. 
much regarding the quantity taken, as the effect it as 
produc 


A 


F the Tear 1675, to the Tear 1680, 28 


© eroducein the Patient; and when this is done, and not 
4 A r we muſt deſiſt from fo freqvert, and great uſe 
of the Anodyne; but ſuch a ſpace muſt be interpoſed be- 
1) WE ticen the Doſes, that we may be able to know, whether 
the laſt performed the Buſineſs deſigned, before another 
i preſcribed : But when we have once obtained our end, 
the Doſe of the Anodyne is to be leſſened in the progreſs of 
the Diſeaſe, as things appear. . | 

have many Obſervations in readineſs, that may cap- 
firm what have hitherto delivered, but for the'preſent 
E will mention but one. The 13th, of Avril 1681. one 
Jof my Neighbourhood, by Name. Croſs, came weeping to 
me. and earneſtly defireg that | would viſit her Son, which 
Ewis Ten Yearsold who being ill for Four days, had as 
Tike feared the Small-pox , but | being laid up with the 
Gout, which at that time affficted me, defired my Apo- 
Ithecary to viſit him and to acquaint me how he was; 
when he returned, he told me, th:it the Boys Mother ha 
Niven bim be Counteſſes Powter, and other hot Medi- 
nes by the Advice of a Petticoat Doctor, and that by 
ber over care ſhe had as it were buried him in Cloaths, 
What by their weight ſhe might provcke Sweat. ( Which 


dich omen fly to in this Diſeale, as the facred Anchor 
01 t their hope: ) Moreover, ſhe drenched him with a 
on We reat quantity of Poſſer-drink, with Mary-Gold flowers, 


md Haurts-horn boyl'd in it, by which the Fever being in- 
reaſed, it occaſioned ſo great a Confuſion of the Spi- 


its, that the Child was «extraordinary light headed, fo 
e ub lar he could hardly be kept in Bed by all the force of 
en le Bye-ſtanders, and he muttered ſome odd words, like 


hoſe that are mad; neither did the Puſtles yet appear, 


mine er very obſcurely, but they lay very full in the Skin, the 
they roption being plainly hindred by this violent method, 
or hich was defigned to promote it; I ordered that he 
es e ould be preſently taken out of the Bed, and ſhould not 
als Return to it again, but only a Nights, till the Sixth day 
ther as palt, and then that he ſhould preſently take 
aut if an Ounce of Diacodium; which doing no good, I 
d av" cred the fame Doſe to be repeated an hour after, but 
h ci chout any Succeſs; for the Blood raged fo furioully, 
ot et It could not be quellcd before he had taken two Ounces 
bound and half; bur there was ſo much ſpace betwixt the 
(vi taking 


3 
7 
* 


288 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 


taking of each half Ounce, that I might be certa; 
was the effect of the laſt Doſe, A | aro oh : i 
an Ounce to be taken only every Night at Bed. time 2 
the end of the Diſeaſe, Which was ſufficient to Prefers 
the quiet ofthe Spirits, that a mor? frequent uſe had 3 
ready obtained, and by this means the Patient recovereq 
And here I muſt inform you, that how great ſpe, 
the Doſe of the Anodyne be, which is 2 at the 
beginning of the Diſeaſe, and tho' it be repeated, yet | 
can ſcarce obtain its end, unleſs the Patient riſe, if th 
heat of the Blood, and the violent motion of the gpiri 
rage mightily; for the heat of the Bed increaſes the hey 
of the Diſeaſe, and therefore it will be neceſſary to gi 
ſo great a quantity of the Anodyre, that perhaps Natur 
will not be able to bear it, which likewiſe happen 
tho' not with the ſame danger, when the Peruvian By 
is taken in an intermitting Fever whilſt the Patient keey 
bis Bed; and this I ſuppoſe is the Reaſon, why the Cur: 
of this Fever is ſometuues prolong'd, which otheryi 
might be performed ſooner, and ſometimes alſo if th 
Fever only remit, it will be ſo heightened, that the Patient 
wall ſcarce eſcape Death. gg. | 

But to omit extraordinary Caſes, in which this Re 
medy may be indicated at any time of the Diſeaſe, | 
would have it firſt preſcribed the Night in which the p- 
tientis altogether confined to his Bed, to wit, the Sixt 
from the firſt Invaſion, from which time it is to be g. 
ven every Evening to the Seventeenth day, or at leaſt til 
the Patient is out of danger: For on the Sixth day, tt: 
Fleſh being ſeized as it were with an Inflammation, ti: 
Head begins to be diſturbed by the Humours, that at 
alſo inflamed upon this Account. 

But we muſt take great care that the Avodyne be ukd 
earlier in this Diſeale than in others, becaule as it Wer 
a Paroxyſm of heat and reſtlefsneſs, always affi&t tho 
that have the Small-pox about Evening; and fometins 
it happens, that unleſs it be given early at the latter es 
of the Dileaſe, the Patient on a ſudden being ſomewls 
deu, preſently grows hot, and afterwards complains li 
Sickneſs, which ſoon ends in Death, his Friends bei 
Wonderfully aſtoniſht, who a little before entertaine 


great hopes of his Recovery; and perhaps his Deu 


2 " K 1 nab as NY * Py 2 OF. „ 4 = 4 _ 
. ” 


228990 


Kerem - 


mig ; 


«. 


2 
* 


might have been prevented by giving an Anodyne imme- 
Jiately > thorefore ay theſe days, eſpecially on the Ele- 
venta, I order the Anodyne to be taken ſooner, viz, a- 
bout five or ſix in the Evening, that it may be ready to 


| auell the Sickneſs if it ſhould chance to happen of a ſud- 


Acquaintance have therefore periſhed, becauſe they were 
deſtitute of this Medicine, when their Caſe required it, 
| who otherwiſe, might now have been in the Land of the 


| Men of a Sanguine Coniplexion, to ſuppreſs the violence 


the Tear 1675, to the Tear 1680. 289 


en: And truly I am very confident, that ſome of my 


Living, and if opportunity be ſudden in any other Caſe, 
it is much more in this: Wherefore ſeeing ſo great dan- 
er is like to happen, either if an Auodyne be not taken 
Gow enough, or on the contrary ſo over early, that its 
Auodyne Vittue which quiets the Spirits, fades before it 
is repeated z therefore ſeeing things are fo uncertain, it 
is ſafeſt to preſcribe a Paregorick to be taken Morning and 
Evening at appointed hours, to wit, on the laſt and moſt 
dangerous days of the Diſeaſe ; neither at this time will 
an Ounce of the foreſaid Syrup be always ſufficient, for 
this quantity will ſignifie no more in an intenſe Inflam- 
mation of the Blood, and in a great Exorbitancy of the 
Animal Spirits, than half an Ounce in a milder Diſeaſe ; 
for I have found by repeated Experience, that an Ounce 
and an half was but Faficient or one Doſe, in young 


of the Symptoms which invade them, and which we are 
moſt concerned to prevent ; and this very Doſe, in ſuch 
Perſons, and at ſuch times, may not only be ſafely re- 
peated, but alſo with great advantage, Morning and E- 
vening, till the Patient recovers, | 
Neither am I afraid to confeſs, that ſometimes at the 
laſt days of the Small-pox, when they Flux very much, 
have been forced to give an Auodynè three times in the 
* of a Natural day, i. e. once every eighth hour; 
amely, when longer Intervals from the uſe of it could 
not be allowed, by reaſon of the violent rage and con- 
fuſion of the Spirits, which occaſion Sickneſs: But this. 
is to be noted, that if this ſo frequent uſe of Diacodium, 
is nauſeous to the Patient (which often happens on the 
foreſaid days) then Liquid Laudanum muſt be preſcribed, 
of which Sixteen drops is Equivalent to one Ounce of 
Diacodium, namely, if it be ptepared after the fame 
u Wanner 


— — — * — 


it” 
— 2 Deo- th. CIC EL. . Oc: L 
. * - — — 
* _ _— - 
_ 3 * — — w- 
= — - * * — — 


2 


290 88 Foidemick Diſeaſes from 5 


manner as J have deſcribed in the Treatiſe gf acute Dil. 


eaſes, in the Chapter of a Dyſentery, _ 4 
| know very well, that they which are diſpleaſed ; a] 
theſe things, will object, that the peccant Matter will be 1 
fixt, and the Spittle leſſened by the Anodyne, fo often re. 3 
peated in ſo large a Doſe: To whom I anſwer, that h. 16 
deed the Salivation will be a little leſſened, yet never 0 on 
throughly ceaſe, as not ſomewhat to revive again, at th: | 
longell Intervals from taking the Anodyne, when its Vir. WW M 
tue is decaying : Moreover it will be ſupplied with two WWF . 
advantagesz Firſt, for that the Patient being recruited ME Ii 
by the Narcetick, will better expectorate the Phlegn, ve 
and then tho” the Spittle, which is hauked up be Teſs, ye: t 
it's better concocted, than if there were no Anodyre pie. d. 
ſcri'zed : In the next place, the defect of Salivation is Wi Py 
ſufficiently ſupplied by the ſwelling of the Face and WM +; 
Hands, which by the repeated uſe of the Anodyne 's aft 
greater, and more certain in thoſe days, in which thek fen 
parts uſe to ſwell, to wit, the Face, from the Eighth day N 
to the Eleventh (at which time it begins moſt commonly ple 
to ſink) but the Hands from the Eleventh, till the Pu- fre 
ſtles which are upon them ripen: And I boldly affirm, 
which no one who is well skilled it this Diſeaſe, can de ge 
ny, that the abſznce of either of theſe Swellings, at the tlie 
time when they ſhould appear, is a worſe ſign than the i 2 
ſtoppage of the Salivation, Truly, I think it is much ſafer ru 
to ventbre the danger of reſtraining the Flux, than to Wi gel 
leave off the uſe of the Auodhne, Which is foextreamly co. 
requiſite in this Diſeaſe, that he ought. to be accounted tin 
very, unskillal an careleſs, who will defraud his Patient BF wi 
of ſo great an help: VVT FS 
But thoſe 3 [ have hitherto diſcourſed of, are not I «1; 
to be ynderitood as if I would adviſe the daily uſe of Nit 
Diacoditm, tho' but in a convenient quantity, in young ker 
Children that have the Flux pox, unleſs the Diſeaſe Pa; 
threatens ſume great miſchief, and that for two Reaſotis: Wl th, 
Firk,.. begauſe Child;e: art not ſo hot as thoſe whoſe | tle, 
Lamp of. Life is fuller of Light, and burns clearer, Se. at 
coudly, becauſe their ſoft and infirm Age, cannot fo well ere 
bear the force of Azodynes continually taken: Beſides WF ir 
Children fleeping almoſt perpetually , of their own ac 


cord, ealier paſs over the wearinefs of the "oy 
| 


the Tear 1675, to the Tear 1680. 291 


yet notwithſtandin when they are ſeized with a Phren= 
ſie, or When the Puſtles are of an ill fort, Auodynes are 
always indicated ; for the diſturbed Motion of the Blood 
and Animal Spirits, fully confirm the ſame. 

Theſe two things which we have fo fully treated of, 
to wit, the method by which the over-haſty Affimulati- 
on of the variolous Matter is hindred at the beginning 
of the Diſeaſe, and the other that prevents the inordinate 
Motion of the Spirits, which is occaſion'd by the Inflam- 
mation of the external parts, are as it were the two 
E Hinges, on Which the whole Cure of the Diſeaſe is mo- 
ved, foraſmuch as the miſchiefs that ariſe, becauſe theſe 
| two dangers are not ſufficiently prevented, call in thoſe 
E ereadful Symptoms, that end the Tragedy of the Small- 
| pox, Wherefore theſe are the chief curative Indica- 
tions, which when I ſhall have ſufficiently anſwered, 
after the manner now mentioned; there is nothing more 
bor me to do as I am a Phyſician, not a Preſcriber of a 
Medical Formula, Which two Arts, or Gifts, or if you 
| pleaſe to call them Provinces, I think mightily differ one 
from the other. 

Io mention one thing more, if there be need of a Bli- 
ſter, it muſt be very large and ſtrong, and applied to 
the Patient's Neck, which ought to be performed ſo op- 
portunely, that neither being put on too early, it leave of 
"WT running Pente the Eleventh day, which is the moſt dan- 
0 WF gerous, neither be put off to that very Day: So that 
coming too late, it might do injury at that juncture of 
0 time, by the heat and rage it imprints on the Blood, 
i which then ts ſcarce able to combat with the Secundary 

Fever; therefore the Bliſter will be more ſeaſonably ap- 
| plied the Night which precedes” the great Cxiſit of the 
$ Diſeaſe, preſently after the Anodyne, which is to be ta- 
ken then, the Bliſter being applied at that time, the 
Pain will, wholly ceale- that is occaſioned by it, before 
that day in which the Patient is to fight the great Bat- 
| tle, and there will be a diſcharge of the peccant Matter 
at that time, of which there is need to conquer thoſe 
great Symptoms that attend upon that Day 3 for it is 
at this time firſt (Which I have handled largely in the 
| Hiſtory of this Difeaſe,) that the Face which hitherto 
_ ivelled, now begins to aſſwage, and the Salivation which 
ö U 2 hitherto 


292 Of the Epidemick Diſeaſes from 
hitherto flowed plentifully decreaſes, the Humour being 


thickned and hardly hauked up, which occaſioned is 


but to omit, that the Bliſter ſomewhat ſupplied the ſink; 
ing of the Swelling of the Face, and the Spitting that was 
leſſened ;, moreover it in ſome meaſure conduced to the 
ſuppreſſing of the Secundary Fevers, which at this time 
prevails, the Blood being as it were overwhelmed and 
quite poyſoned by the Abundance of Pus ſacked in from 
ſo many little Ulcers, ſo that in almoſt all I have been 
concerned with, that have been aflited with the Small. 
pox, I have obſerved that the Pulſe in the Hand-wriſt 
could hardly be obſerved, tho' they were ealily felt the 
Day before, and the Day following this Day. | 
Among thoſe things which draw from the Head, ei. 
ther by derivation or revulſion, nothing in my opinion 
is ſo effectual as Garlick applied to the Soles of the Feet. 
That it really draws, is manifeſt by the Bladders it 
raiſes, and the intollerable Pain it ſometimes occaſions, 
tho' rarely when it has raiſed no Bliſters, to wit, by 
attracting the Humour to thoſe parts whence fo vic 
lent Pain is now and then ftirred up, that I have been 
forced to order a Pultis of White bread and Milk; 
therefore in grown People that have the confluent Smalk 
pox, I uſe to apply Garlick ſliced, and wrapt in a Cloath, 
£0 the Soles of the Feet, from the eighth Day, at which 
time the Face begins firſt to aſſwage, till all the Danger 
of the Diſeaſe be paſs'd, and to repeat it every Day. 
Neicher muſt I omit to acquaint yon, that the Patient 
muſt wholly forbear Fleſh, and that he muſt only uſe 
the ſmalleſt Beer for his Drink; in the mean while, it 1 
firteſt for him to live poorly upon Oat- meal-Broath, roaſt. 
ed Apples, and Small-beer ; but at the time of maturation, 
when the purulent Particles, flowing back * the Maß 
of Blood, pollute the ſame with their Filth, it will be 
proper to give the Patient a few Spoonfuls of Wine, Night 
and Morning. As to the Coverings of his Bed, there mult 


be no more, nor fewer than he uled to have when he wa 


well; and he muſt be permitted to move from one part 
of the Bed to the other, as often as he will, that the Sym- 

tomatical Sweats may be hinder'd, which as I ſuppoſe has 

een ſufficiently proved to be injuxious to the Patient; and 

by the ſame means the violent Inflammation of the Puſtle 
x WI 


the Tear 1675, to the Tear 1680. 293 


Lin- be prevented, which proceeds from two great Heat 
' that the Fleſh contracts, when he lies 7. in one place, 
zs if he were ſtaked to it: But of this we have diſcourſed 
* WW 1irgely in another place. 
1 T will add a very late Caſe, as a Specimen of this 
* W. hole Practice: This Winter the Noble Lady Dacres 
: ſent for me to her Nephew, Mr. Thomas Cheut; he «was 
of a very Sanguine Complexion, and in the flower of his 
Age: The Day before he began to be in a violent Fe- 
oer, he caſt up a great quantity of Cholar by Vomit, and 
© he had a violent Pain in his Back; and hoping to eaſe 
* bimſelf he went to Bed, and by heaping on Cloaths, and 
taking hot Liquors, he endeavoured with all his might 
© to force Sweat for a whole Day, but all in vain; for 
the great inclination to Vomit, and the Looſenels, tho' 
moderate, fruſtrated the force of the Sudorificks, and in 
the mean While increaſed the Fever; I ſuſpected the 
E Small-pox would ſoon come out, and that they would 
flux extreamly, by reaſon of the Vigour of his Age, and 
alſo becauſe his Blood was much inflamed, by the fruit- 
leſs Attempt to force Sweat (upon which Account, if it 
had been Summer, a bloody Urine and purple Spots had 
certainly been occaſion'd) but chiefly becauſe I have 
always obſerved, that in young Men ſeized with a vio- 
ent Vomiting and Sickneſs, and Pain more than uſual 
| the following Smallpox fluxed beyond meaſure : There- 
fore I thou %e it was my Duty to endeavour all I could 
to hinder the over-haſty Aſſimulation of the variolous 


: Matter. I kept him up till the time he uſed to go to bed, 
+ WF The day following (which was the third ) the Small- 
\ box not appearing, I ordered eight Ounces of Blood to 
ee taken from his Right-arm it was very good and flo- 


de rid, for as yet it had only received the ſpirituous Ve- 
' nom, not that Putrefaction, which is occaſioned by a 
| bonger continuance of the Diſeaſe, and is moſt common- 
z „J ſeen in the Blood of thoſe chat are newly recovered 

of this Diſeaſe. At five in the Afternoon the ſame day 


f gave him an Ounce of the infuſion of Crocus Metallo- 
ix n; be vomited very well, and being freed of his Sick- 
q oe, ſeemed much better, and willingly kept from bed, 
ez; rom whence before he would ſcarce yield to be taken, 
being grievouſly afflicted der Sickneſs and amn 


4 


n 
1 
19 
7 
7 
* 0 
ON 
* 
1, 
1 1 
* 
* 
3 
N 
4. 
ul 
>. 


a 


? = he 


— 
3 — 
2 


—— 0 
- 
MO 


294 Of the Epidemick Diſeaſes from 


On the fourth day 1 viſited him in the Morning, a 
the Puſiles coming out fo fall, ( which T had k part” 8, 


deavoured to prevent) that it was to be feared, they - 
would endanger his Life, by reaſon of the great Flux 0 ö P 
threatned z therefore I took great care, that he was 2 th 
put to Bed in the Day- time, and I adviſed he ſhould drm p 
{mall Beer ſharpned with Spirit of Vitriol dropt into: pe 
he continued this method till the ſixth Day. on which Day ge 
though he was not ſick, but much refreſhed by the free ve co 


of the Air, yet his Body was now and then ſomethine 
looſe; towards Evening he was no longer able to keer 
from Bed, which is common in this caſe ; therefore 10 
continved in it to the end of the Diſeaſe by my conſe - 
for all the Puſtles were now come out, Which notwith- 
ſtanding all my Care fluxed much; and though they were 
fewer than thoſe which I have obſerved in ſome ther 
died of this Diſeaſe, yet were they more than they uſe 
to be in moſt of thoſe that recovered. This was the fir} 
Night that I ordered an Ounce of Diacodlium in Cowſlip- 
water to be repeated every Night after, and l adviſe 
that he ſhould have no more Cloaths on than he uſed when 
he was well, and that he ſhould be dieted with Oat-me 
and Barley-broath, and ſometimes with a roaſted Apple, 


and that he ſhould drink ſmall Beer. On the eighth Day, WW Pu 
I ordered iced Garlick to be wrapt in a linen Cloth, ad bu 
applied to the Soles of his Feet, and to be renewed daily ne 
till he was paſt danger; afterwards all things ſucceed:d Wi ** 
according to the Genins of the encreaſing Puſtles, till te Pu 
tenth day, at which time, viſiting him in the Morning, e 
though I found him pretty well, yet I perceived as it were Da 
ſome Fore runners of the Secundary Fever, with fome ter 
kind of reſtleſneſs; therefore preſently fear ing the ap- 8. 
pruaching Storm, I gave him the Anodyne above- ment. ®'- 
oned, by which all things were quieted, and at Night | of 
preſcribed an Ounce and an half of Diacodium. On tit ne 
following Morning, to wit, on the eleventh Day, when bt! 
the Virtue of the Paregorick was faded, Which he touk hat 
the Night before, he began to be reſtleſs again afrell, ure 
thereiore I preſently ordered him again an Ounce and ly 
an half of Lliacodium, and fo much in the Evening of 
and that he ſhould take the ſame Doſe Morning and 1 


Evening, till he was quite well: The Patient Was ver 
| OL CY) 


from the firſt Iva 
the Eleventh, and the like; I would net have it be fo 
| underſtood, as if the confluent Small- pox came out al- 
ways on the third Day; whereas I know very well, that 
it ſometimes happens, even in thoſe that flux moſt, that the 
puſtles do not appear ill ſume time after the third Day; 
but the Eruption is muſt commonly on the third Day, 
and for the moſt part, thoſe for inſtance which are ſei- 
ed with the Flux-pox on Monday, thall perceive the 
| Puſtles coming out the Hedneſday following; and the Se- 


the Tear 1675, to the Near 1680. 295 


orderly, neither were we affrighted with any other 


F Symprom afterwards, excepting only that he had a ſup- 


preſſion of Urine (a Symptom very frequent to young, 


| People in this Diſeaſe) but he made water kneeling in 
| the Bed: As to the Salivation, tho' the quantity of the 
© Spittle was ſomewhat interruptea by the frequent Re- 


petition of Anodynes, in ſo large a Doſe; yet in the lon- 
er Intervals from the uſe of them, he hauked up con- 


cocted Phlegm, and his Face and Hands ſwelled in due 
time, as well as could be wiſhed, On the eighteenth 
Day he roſe, and I firſt allowed him Chicken broch, 
and ſo by degrees he returned to his accuſtomed Diet; 
On the twenty firſt he was let Blood in the Right-arm, 
and eight Ounces Was taken away, Which was like the 
E Blood of thoſe that have a Pleuriſie, and not much unlike 
Pi. Laſtly, he took four Purges at a convenient Diſtance 
one from another. 


[t is to be noted, that when in this Treatiſe the Day 
on is mentioned, to wit, the Sixth, 


cond Thurſday from that Minday, will be the Eleventh 
Day, that is ſo very dangerous, unleſs the Phyſician in- 


terpoſe. 


And here I muſt again remind you, that all theſe The- 


orems belong only to the confluent Small pox, and are 


of no uſe in the diſtinct ſort; neither indeed do they 


| need them; and they impoſe upon themſelves as well as 
others, Who value themſelves upon curing thoſe who 


have but few Puitles, and thoſe diſtinct allo: If they de- 
ure to try their Skill, let it be in the Flux pox, eſpecial- 
!y when this Diſeaſe invades thoie that are in the flower 


| of their Age, or others that have been inflamed by the 


- . 
* i nr 3 F 3 * * 2 


immoderate drinking of Wine; leſt being exerciſed only 
in {light Matters, they 115 be ſo much miſtaken 5 5 
4 think 


296 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 
think they have ſaved thoſe the By-ſtanders did not kill. 

But before I finiſh this Diſcourſe, I will relate what 
my good Friend Dr. Charles Goodall, Fellow, and at pre. 
ſent Cenſor, of the College of Phyſicians, told me When [ 
was writing theſe things, and I do it to confirm what | 
have faid here and elſewhere of Purple ſpots, and of 
bloody Urinez for theſe Symptoms when they come uy. 
on acute Diſeaſes, . proceed wholly from a violent Inflan: 
mation of the Blood, and therefore indicate cooling Re. 
medies. The caſe is as follows; a young Man of about 
twenty ſeven Years of Age, of a thin and hot Conſtituti. 
on, was ſeized with a violent and continual Fever in 
June 1681, his Tongue was dry and foul, he was very 
thirſty, his Pulſe was quick, there was a Pain near the 
Region of the Scrobiculum Cordis, but eſpecially in the 
Back, wherein it raged continually; be made a bloody 
Urine now and then, and Spots of a Browniſh Colour 
were thick in the Neck, Breaſt, and Wriſts; the Phy: 
cian Was called on the ſixth Day, and finding the Sick in 
great danger, by reaſon of the great Excretion of bloody 
Urine, he thought the curative Indications were to be di. 
rected for the cooling and thickening of the Blood, aud 
alſo for ſtopping the Mouths of the Veſſels, which were 


relaxed and opened in the Veins. 


Bleeding therefore, and a lenitive Bolus, being premi- 
ſed, he ordered the Patient to keep from bed, as much 
as he couldz for he did not queſtion, but that the void- 
ing of Blood by Urine was promoted by the continual 
Heat of the Bed; he alſo adviſed, that he ſhould ſleep 
rather upon a leather Couch, and that he ſhould very 
rarely lie upon his Back; that he ſhould drink Milk. 
water, and be dieted with Panada, Ryce-milk, roaſted 
Apples, either alone, or ſqueezed into Fountain-water, 
and ſweetned with Sugar, and he ordered the following 
Medicines. 8 . ON OO 


Take of Red-roſes fix Drachms, of the inner Bark of the 
Oak half an Ounce, of the Seeds of Plantain a littit 
bra ſed three Drachms, of Fountain-water a Quart, 
of Spirit of Vitriol a ſufficient Quantity to make it 
pleaſan:ly acid,; infuſe them in a cloſe Veſſel on a geb. 
tle Fire for four or five hours; to the ſtrained Liqui 


$361 7% 


| Toke of the Seeds of Succory, Endive, Lnttice, Efie 


9 
F 
= 


5 * 
_- 
= 
"F 


4 
Y 


the Tear 1675, to the Tear 1680. 297 


add, of Cinnamon- water hordeated three Ounces, or 
White-ſugar a ſufficient Quantity to make the Tinfture 
pleaſant to the Tafte, whereof let him drink often Night 
and Day. FP Res r 


A Gliſter of Milk and Syrup of Violets was injected at 


. 


Two in the Afternoon, and at Bed-time the following 
E Draught was given. 


; Take of the Waters of Com/lip-flowers, Plantain, and 


Cinnamon hordeated, eath half an Ounce; of diftilled 
Vinegar two Drachms, of Diacadium fox Drachms, 


- mingle them. on, 


On the ſeventh Day the Symptoms ſcarce remitting, 
© the Gliſter before deſcribed was ordered to be injected 
daily, and an Emulſion and Draught was prefcribed in 
the following Manner. | 


each two Drachms, of the Seeds of Quinces and white 
Poppies, each one Drachm and an half, of ſweet Al. 
mond blanched Number four, beat them all together in 
a Marble-mortar, pouring upon them gently a Pint and 
an half of Barly. water; to the ſtrained 2 add 4 
ſufficient quantity of Cryſtaline-ſugar; make an Emul- 
ſfion,*whereof let him take twelve Spoonfuls every fourth 
Hour. | 


Take of the Waters of Cowſlips flowers, Water-lilizs, Oak- 
buds and Plantain, each half an Ounce, of diſtilled Vine- 
gar, and Cimnamon-water hordeated, each three Drachms, 
of the Confettion of Hyacinth half a Drachm, of Diaco- 

ium one Ounce, mingle them make a Draught to be 
taken at Bed, E 


| On the eighth Day, the Fever ſtill remaining, and Blood 
mingled with the Urine flowing plentifully, and the Spots 


ing many, in the Parts above mentioned; ſuppoſing 


that all theſe Symptoms proceeded from the Heat, Thin- 
neſs and Acrimony: of the Blood, he bled again a ſecond 
| \ime, allowed Small-beer more freely, made plea- 
# . i 4 * 


ſantly 


298 Of Epidemuck Diſeaſes from 

ſantly acid with Spirit of Vitriol; but becauſe the $i) 
nauſeated it, he allowed him Poſſet-drink made of Juice 
of Limons and Milk, and alſo the Pulp of Limons cor 


into Slices, and wrapt round with Sugar; he alſo added 
the following. 


Take of the Conſerves of Wood-ſorrel and Hips, each halt 
an Ounce, of the Confection of Hyacinth three Drachm; 
of Diacodium one Drachm and an half, of Re 
Coral prepared, Dragons: blood and Bole-armenick, each 
one Sc: uple, of SHyrup of Comfrey, and Moiſſe-ear, each 
a ſufficient quantity; make an Opiate, whereof let hin 
take the quantity of an Hazle-nut every Sixth How, 
drinking upon it a ſmall Draught of Poſſet-drink mad 
with Milk and the Juice of Limons, and ſweetned with 
Sugar, or of the vulnerary Decoction made a little acid 
with Spirit of Vitriol. 


Let the Draught preſcribed the Night before be repeat- 
ed with ten Drachms of Diacodium, 

On the Ninth day the Spots vaniſhed by degrees, and 
the Urine was not ſo bloody, and the Blood that was in 
it was more ealt)y ſeparated, and ſubſided ſooner to the 
Bottom of the Chamber pot; therefore he adviled the 
Patient to perſevere in the uſe of theſe things, and a fen 
Days after he added the following things to the ſame Fur- 


pole. ; 


Take of the Conſerve of Red-roſes pulped and vitriolated 
four Ounces, of Lucatellus's Balſam two Ounces, of Hol. 
armenick, Dragons blood, and the Species of the Elettu: 
ary of Coral each one Drachm, with à ſufficient quantity 
of Syrup of Coral; make an Elettuary; let him take tis 
my of a Nutmeg twice a Day, drinking upon it a 

raught of the following Emulſion, 


Take of the Seeds of Lettice and Purſlain, each thre 
Drachms, of Quinces one Drachm and an half, of 
white Poppies half an Ounce, of ſweet Almonds blanche 
Number five; beat them in a Marble-mortar, and p 

uon them geutly a Quart of Plaintain water, 155 0 

| unce⸗ 


x: a „ N 
" - * ** * — n —_— 5 2 _ * 
c * - 7 3 * * * * 8 5 1 a 8 " 2 * 1 - bs 1 N * , 1 * n 8 n RY of P * 4 
22 N . 1 3 mg © : 6 EEO 9 YES LS. RL od Tue. k ; r e + 
P * # OC J 2 „ 1 „ = * * 34 n — 2 F 4 . 1 . - . 4 þ 7 3 4 * * 
* 5 2... $4<£ af 3 va RNC W 2 Fo * ö : , R r N 1 5 
. — 


the Year 1675, to the Tear 1680. 299 


Ounces of Cinnamon-water hordeated; to the ſtrained 
Liquor add a ſufficieat quantity of Sugar. 


With theſe Remedies by the Bleſſing of God the Sick 
was freed within three Weeks from the Fever, and thoſe 
E dreadful Symptoms we have mentioned, and the Spots 
going off, and the Urine coming to its Natural Colour 
and e ee he recovered by degrees his Health and 
Strength. 
| Bur tho the foreſaid Symptoms accompanied the con- 
© tinual Fever, yet not the Diſeaſe we have treated of a- 
bove. But as often as they accompany either Diſeaſe, 
they always ariſe from a violent Inflammation, and the 
too great thinneſs of the Blood: Upon which Account 
che Blood is as it were forced violently through the 
1% WW Mouths of the Veſſels. And without doubt, the fame 
method is to be uſed, when there is fo great a Parity in 
E the Cauſes, as much as the Nature of the Diſeaſe will 
a low of z wherefore I entreated the worthy Man, that 
he would give me leave to add this Cure here, and if 
ad my greateſt Enemy (but judging other Men's Diſpoſiti- 
ons by my own, I could hope F have no Enemy) had 


e performed the ſame, I muſt being overcome by Truth, 
* We confeſs it had been the greateſt Cure I ever knew; for 
-" W- | long ago found how fatal it was for thoſe that have a 
ur Fever to render Blood with their Urine. But when it is 


my good Friend, how earneſtly ought I to contend for 
Truth, and the Reputation of the beloved Man; for this 


4 is he, who when very few dared to aſſert, that I have 
25 done any good either in diſcovering, or cultivating the 
Fl 


& leaſt thing in Phyſick, that ſuſtained the Torrent of my 
Calumniators, and was as earneſt ro defend me, as a 
Son would be to defend his Father: But tho' I am obli- 
© ved by fo great kindneſs, yet I would never have pub- 
E liſhed theſe Praiſes, unleſs he had deſerved them; for it 
is alike faulty to praiſe or diſpraiſe contrary to deſert, 


for on either fide we forſake Truth; therefore no Man 
L L ought to blame me, if I affirm he is ſecond to none for 
x . 0 Honeſty which 1 have hitherto known: For in thoſe ma- 


Y 
be never allowed himſelf to ſpeak, much leſs to do any 
thing to the injury of another, and how excellent he is 

in 


Ul 


ny Years I have been familiarly acquainted with him, 


300 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 

in the Art he profeſſes will ſhortly appear, if God oy 
him life; for being very learned, 2 has ſearche gs 
the Ancient and Modern Treatiſes of Phyſick; and ha 
been wiſely induſtrivus in diſcovering the minute Sud. 
tleties of Practice, without which no Man can practice 
Phyſick laudably; and therefore, the Sick will count 
him as good and ſucceſsful as the beſt. Now to con- 
clude ; Theſe are my Sentiments of this Diſeaſe, which x 
raſh Fancy did not ſuggeſt, but practical Phenomeng 
nor can I tell how it ſhould come to paſs, that he ſhou! 
bedeceived, that bounds and determines all his Thoughts 
to the meer naked Practice of the Art, or Faculty, which 
he deſigns to underſtand fully, and to practice with Re. 
putation; Or on the contrary, how it is poſlible, that he 
ſhould do any thing, but trifle away his whole Life in 
deceiving himſelf as well as others, who is vainly em. 
ployed in contriving thoſe things, that do not at all be. 
long to Practice; and as he would be no very honeſt 
nor ſucceſsful Pilot, that ſhould not bend his mind ſo 
mnch to know and avoid the Shallows and Rocks, as to 
contemplate the cauſe of the ebbing and flowing of the 
Sea, Which truly becomes a Philoſopher, but is not his 
buſineſs, who is only to ſecure the Ship; ſo neither will 
the Phyſician, who has no other Province than that 
of curing Diſeaſes, be a true Proficient in the Art of Phy- 
ſick, though he has good natural parts, who does not take 
ſo much Pains in ſearching out that hidden and crooked 
method, whereby Nature produces and nouriſhes Diſeaſes, 
( on which alſo their Hiſtory depends) and in procuring a- 
greeable Remedies for them, as in nice Speculations, which 
do not at all conduce to the reſcuing of Men from the 
Jaws of Death, which Phyſick promiſes; and this tri 
fling Humour does not only deprive Mankind of thoſe 
great Advantages, Which would accrew to it by the In- 
genuity of very many; but it makes alſo that which is 
called the Art of Phyſick, rather a babbling Faculty; 
at length it comes to this, that the Patient muſt live or 
die, as the Philoſopher gueſſes right or wrong; and this 
muſt needs be very uncertain; for the firſt Contrivers 
of Speculations had as great ' Contentions about their 
Brain-ſick Fictions, as their Slaves and Tools, and yet 


none of them perhaps in the right: For tho! upon feri 
{0 W 9 


| wich ! have found moſt ſucceſsful, which was ſuggeſted 


the Tear 1675, to the Tear 1680. 301 


© ous Conſideration, we may be able to find what Nature 
does, de facto, and what Organs ſhe uſes in her Opera- 
tions, yet the manner how ſhe does it will be always 
bid from Mortals, or I am deceived ; Nor is this ſtrange ; 
ſor it is much more, yea infinitely more probable, that 
| ye poor Manakins, baniſhed from the illuſtrious Region 
of Light and Life, can by no means comprehend the Me- 
thod. Which the moſt wiſe Artificer uſed in mag the 


Machin, than that an ignorant and bungling Smith ſhould 


not underſtand how a Clock is put together, the Stru- 
dure and Motion whereof ſhew the exquiſite Neatneſs 
of the Art; and as it plainly appears, that the Brain is 
the Fountain of Senſe and Motion, and the Shop of Me- 
mory and Thoughts, yet it is not poſlible, that the Mind 
| ſhould be ſo enlightened by the moſt careful Inſpection, 
and Contemplation of it, as to know how it comes to 


paſs, that ſo thick a Subſtance, and as it were a Pulp, 


and as it ſeems of no great Contrivance, ſhould ſuffice 


for ſo great an uſe, and ſuch excellent Faculties; nor is a 
ny one able to demonſtrate, for what teaſon, according to 


its Nature and structure of parts, it neceſſarily exerts this 


or that Faculty. | | ; 
And ſo much for the confluent Small pox, to which, if 


© thoſe things are added, which I have delivered of this Diſ- 
[eaſe in the Hiſtory of acute Diſeaſes, you have the ſum of 
all! hitherto know, and all thoſe things, which I have 


ſearched and weighed as carefully as I could. + 
I begin now, becauſe you require it, worthy Sir, to de- 
liver thoſe things which I have hitherto found by Ob- 


whereof I readily confeſs is very obſcure, and more dif. 
ficult than other Diſeaſes, that afli&t Mankind, and they are 
more difficultly cured z but 1 will endeavour to do as well 
as I can, and as briefly as is neceſſary for a Letter, which 
indeed my Sickneſs requires, eſpecially at this Seaſon of 
the Year, wherein there is danger of occaſioning preſent- 
ly a fit of the Gout, if I ſhould ſtudy too hard; there- 
ore [ will deliver in a tew words what I have to ſay, - and 


vill proceed in the method I am wont to uſe, viz. I will ſet 


down a ſhort Hiſtory of the Dileaſe, according to the true 
henomena of Nature ; I will alſoadd the method of Cure, 


to 


ſervation concerning Hyſterick Diſeaſes; the Diagnoſtick 


— 
_— 4 * 
—— — — — aw 
— —_— * 


* * ” = * * — 
vn... Ia#-4 „ 4 
A onal. mn” ” — DE > . 2 


— 0 — — wh 
* — - + Y 


- = — N * 4 — . — — — — > - — — PR 
dt — - ” . = JL © io FI ©... — . 8 * = wo Me St br < wh N FR 
—— 2 . l 


8 

- 

e 
» 


— 
I 


— 


. ES, > = — 


303 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 


to me heretofore, rather by my own Experience, thu; 8 
no ill Guide, than by the Reading of Books, = NE 

This Diſeaſe, if I calculate right, molt frequently oc. Mk war 
curs of all Chronical Diſeaſes, and as Fevers with the tho 
that appertain to them make two Thirds, if the; ,,. MK nov 
compared with Chronical Diſeaſes taken all together, M be 
Hyſterick Diſeaſes, at leaſt thoſe that go under that Name Seu 
are half the remaining Third; that is, they are half to 
Chronical Diſeaſes; for very few Women, which Sex is the WM gen 
half of grown People, are quite free from every Aff k 
of this Diſeaſe, excepting thoſe who being accuſtome: WR 
to labour, live hardly; yea many men that live ſedentary tie 
Lives, and are wont to ſtudy hard, are atflicted with con 
the ſame Diſeaſe; and tho' Hyſterick Symptoms wert 
always heretofore ſuppoſed to come from a vicion 
Womb, yet if we compare Hypochondraick Symptoms 


which were thought to proceed from Obſtructions of the 8 > 
Spleen, or Bowels, or from ſome other, I know not what Wl ab. 
Obſtruction, an Egg is ſcarce more like an Egg than the ee 
Symptoms are one another in all Reſpects. But it nat es 
be confeſſed, that Women are much more inclined to this Tha 


Diſeaſe than Men, not becauſe the Womb is more Fault; . 
than any other Region of the Body, but for Reaſons ty 


be ſhewn by and by. F 
Nor is this Diſeaſe only frequent, but fo ſtrangely var RF 
ous, that it reſembles almoſt all the Diſeaſes poor Morta's BW nc 
are inclined to; for in whatever part it ſeats it felt,” it pre- 0! 
ſently produces ſuch Symptoms as belong to it, and val: WK. © 
the Phyſician is very skilful, he will be miſtaken, and think W 
thoſe Symptoms come from ſome Eſſential Diſtemper of WF 
this or that part, and not from any Hyſterick Diſeale. | 
For inſtance, ſometimes it poſſeſſes the Head, and ca- 
ſes an Apoplexy, which alſo ends in an Hemiplegy, and gi 
is exactly like the Apoplexy, whereby corpuleiit and Wi Ki 
old People are deſtroyed, and which happens becaue il 0 
the Animal Spirits are ſtopt, the Cortex of the Brain be. | 
ing ſtuffed, by a great deal of Phlegm, from which caule Wl 4 
the Apoplexy of Hyſterick Women does no way ſeem to b 
ariſez for it ſeizes fuch very often, preſently after De. Wh. 
livery, a great quantity of Blood being at the ſame time Bl... 
evacuated, or it proceeds from hard Labour, or ſome 


violent Commotion of the Mind. 
ame. 


the Tear 1675, to the Tear 1680. 302 


gometimes it occaſions violent Convulſions, much like 


6 the Falling: ſickneſs, the Belly and Bowels ſwelling to- 
4 JVards the Throat, the Sick ſtroggling ſo violently, that 
„boat other times her {trength is but ordinary, ſhe can 
„os (carce be held by all the ſtrength of thoſe that are 
©, WE :bout her, and ſhe mutrers ſome odd and inarticulate 


E cuinds, and ſtrikes her Breaſt. Women that are wont 
to have this Diſeaſe commnly called Mother fits, are 
generally very Sanguine, and have an habit of Body almoſt 
ke that of a Virago. 

| Sometimes it ſeizes the outward part of the Head be- 
teen the Pericranium and Skull, cauſing violent pain 
L continually fixt in one part Which may be cover'd with 
Ethe top of your Thumb, and violent Vomiting accom- 
Epanies this Pain, I call this kind Clavus Hyftericus, chiefly 
Jaſticting thoſe that have a Chlorofis. | 
Sometimes falling on the Vital parts, it cauſes ſo great 


the | | 
a beating of the heart, that the Women who are trou- 
bed with it verily believe, that thoſe that are near may 


hear thumping on the Ribs; this kind chiefly ſeizes thoſe 
that are of a thin Habit of Body, and of a weak Conſtitu- 
tion, and who look Conſumptive, and alſo young V irgins 
that have the Green-ſicknels, | 

& Sometimes it ſeizes the Lungs, and the Patient coughs 
E1moit without Intermiſtion, but Expectorates nothing; 
ud tho' this fort of Cough does not ſhake the Breaſt ſo 
(violently, as that which is Convulfive; yet the Exploſions 
Ere much more frequent: But this kind of Hyſterick Cough 
| ary rare, and chiefly invades Women that abound: with 
W leon. | GI 2 
Sometimes ruſhing violently on the Region under the 
Perobiculum Cordis, it produces violent Pain, very like 
e lac Paſſion, andthe Woman Vomits greatly, eject- 


ade a certain green Matter, ſomewhat like that they 
6 e Lorraceous Bile, and ſometimes of .a colour unuſuai. 
be. d frequently after the Sick has been almoſt deſtroyed 
ae the forefaid Pain (Which would weary a Stoical-Apa- 


De Fit is carried off by a violent Jaundice, which Lin- 
F'ures the Superficies of the Body like Saffron. Moxe- 
er the Sick is oppteſſed by a dreadiul Anguiſnh of mind, 
Id wholly deſpairs of Recovery, which: dejection of 
Sou! , 


) and reachings to Vomit for many days, at length 


— 


— — 
"= — 2 O——Ce EY — _ <p 0 - * * „ -2 
- = 4 — 2 — — = — 
— > Z — - - 8 — — 
=> 2 —B = 


— 2 — = 
= A _ 


5,2 
- * Y:! 
2 
5 
% 


304 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 
Soul, and as it were a certain Deſparation, as certain 
accompanies (as I have noted) this kind of Hyſter 
Diſeaſes as the Pain and Vomiting above-mentione: 
This kind chiefly invades thoſe, that are of a crude . 
lax habit of Body, and thoſe that have ſuffered mach 
by bringing forth great Children, When this pj 
eaſe ſeizes one of the Kidneys, it plainly repreſent; h 
the Pain it cauſes there; a Fit of the Stone, and not * 
ly by that fort of Pain, and by the place it rages in, bn 
alſo by violent Vomitings which accompany. it, aud a, Mm 
for that the Pain ſometimes extends it felf through th. MW 
paſſage of the Dreter : So that it is very hard to knoy at 
whether theſe Symptoms proceed from the Stone, or ft 
ſome Hyſterick Diſeaſes, unleſs perchance ſome unlucky | 
Accident diſturbing the Womans mind a little before r 

was taken ill, or the Vomiting up of Green matter, MW * 
ſhews that the Symptoms rather proceed from an Lys. :: 
rick Diſeaſe than from the Stone, Neither is the Blada WW D 
free from this falſe Symptom, for it not only produc; ed 
Pain there, but it alſo ſtops the Urine, juſt as if the 2 
were a Stone, whereas there is none. But this [aſt kin WF = 
ſeizing the Bladder happens very ſeldom ; but that whic b 
reſembles the Stone in the Kidneys is not fo rare, both ar 
accuſtomed to invade thoſe Women who are much weak 


* 2 
. 8 


3 


— 
— — — — 


ned by Hyſterick Fits, coming frequently, and wh 
health of Budy is much l ch 
Sometimes falling upon the Stomach it occaſions cot. Ca 
nual Vomiting, and ſometimes a Diarrhea, when it is xv WF - 
upon the Guts; but no pain accompanies either of tl: ' * 
Symptoms, tho' frequently in both the Green Humour a Atl 
pears. Both theſe kinds are familiar with thoſe that az} de 
much weakned by the frequent coming of Hyſterick Fits, W '> 
And as this Difeaſe afflicts all the iward parts almol, 8 |! 
ſo ſometimes the outward parts are alſo ſeized by it, au e. 
the Muſculous fleſh, occaſioning Pain, and ſometimes a Ti = 


mour in the Jaws, Shoulders, Hands, Thighs, Legs, | 
which kind the Tumour, which ſwells the Legs, is moi 
conſpicuous than the reſt; but whereas in Hydropic 
Tumours theſe two things may be always obſerved, name 
ly, that the Swelling is moſt in the Evening, and being pre- 
ſed by the Finger, a pit remains: In this Tumour ti 
ſwelling is molt in the Morning, neither does it viell l + 


r 


the Nar 1675, to the Year 1680. 30 
tue Finger, or leave any mark behind it; and for the muſt 
part it only {wells one of the Legs. As to other things, if 


jou oblerve the Largenels of it, or its ſuperficics, iris fo 


| very like Hydropical Swellings, that the Patient can 


ſcatce be perſwaded to believe, that it is any other Dil- 
cale, Neither are the Teeth, which you will ſcarce be- 
lere, free from the Aſſault of this Diſeaſe, tho' they are 
10: Holo] and tho there is no apparent Defluxion, that 
may occafion the Pain, yet it is no u hit gentler, nor thtorter, 
nor eaſier to be cured. But thoſe Pains and Tumouts that 
aili&t the ourward parts, chiefly fall upon thote Women 


that are in a manner quite deſtroyed by a long Series of 


{{yſterick Firs, and by the force of them. 

Zut among all the Torments of this Diſeaſe, there is 
none ſo common as a pain in the Back, which moſt cer- 
tainly all feel, how little ſoever they are afflicted with this 
Diſeaſe. Moreover this is common to the above-inention- 


ed Pains, that the Place on which they were, cannot bear 


touching after they are gone, but is tender, and akes juſt 


——— OS PF 4 | "he 2 2 


© as it it were beaten ſoundly; but this Tenderneſs goes off 
by degrees. 


And this is worthy of Obſervation, that often a nota- 
ble cold of the external parts, makes way for theſe Sym- 
ptoms, which for the moſt part goes not off till the Fit ends, 
hich Cold 1 have oblerved is almoſt like that by which a 


> Carkaſs grows ſtiff, yer the Pulſe is good. 


And moreover, almoſt all Hyſterick Women, hem 
have taken care of hitherto, complain of a Dejection 
and linking of the Spirits; and when they would ſhew 
the place where this Contraction or ſinking of the Spirits 
's, they point to the Region of che Lungs. 

Laſtly, it is known to every one, that Hyſterick Wo- 
men ſometimes laugh excetlively, and ſometimes Cry as 
much, without any real cauſe for either. 

But among all the Symptoms that accompany this 
Diſeaſe, this is the moſt proper, and almoſt inteparable, 
. An Urine as clear as Rock-water; and this Hyſte- 
ck Women evacuare plencitally, which I find by di- 
gent inquiry, is in almoſt all, the Parhognomonich; 
"gn ofthis Diſeaſe, which we call Hyſterick in Women, 
ind Hypochondriack in Mer, ; and I have ſometimes ob- 
ved, in Men, that preſently after making water of a 

bt Citron 


* 3 —— —— 


_—— 


ISS, <LLRCES 


LY 


- — - _— 


"=. - 
— 


W —— — 


63 „ ei. ca. 
1 —— 
3 


* 


ned by Hyſterick Fits, Coming frequently, and who 


Iy; that the Swelling is moſt in the Evening, and being pre: 


ſwelling is moſt in the Morning, neither does it views 4 


304 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 
Soul; and as it were a certain Deſparation, as certzir: 
accompanies (as I have noted) this kind of Hyſteric, 
Diſeaſes as the Pain and Vomiting above-mentiqge; 
This kind chiefly invades thoſe, that are of a crude 1, 
lax habit of Body, and thoſe that have ſuffered mic. 
by bringing forth great Children, When this Di 
eaſe ſeizes one of the Kidneys, it plainly repreſents h) 
the Pain it cauſes: there; a Fit of the Stone, and not ch. 
ly by that fort of Pain, and by the place it rages in, hy 
alſo by violent Vomitings which accompany: it, and lj, 
for that the Pain ſometimes extends it felf through the 
paſſage of the Ureter: So that it is very hard to knoy 
whether theſe Symptoms proceed from the Stone, or tron 
ſome Hyſterick Diſeaſes, unleſs perchance ſome unlucky 
Accident diſturbing the Womans mind a little before (}; 
was taken ill, or the Vomiting up of Green matter, 
ſhews that the Symptoms rather proceed from an Hyſt. 
rick Diſeaſe than froni the Stone, Neither is the Bladde 
free from this falſe Symptom, for it not only produce 
Pain there, but it alſo ſtops the Urine, juſt as if ther 
were a Stone, whereas there is none. But this laſt kin 
ſeizing the Bladder happens very ſeldom ; but that which 
reſembles the Stone in the Kidneys is not ſo rare, both ar 
accuſtomed to invade thoſe Women who are much weak 


health of Body is much impaire 2 

Sometimes falling upon the Stomach it occaſions cont: 
nual Vomiting, and ſometimes a Diarrhea, when it is e 
upon the Guts; but no pain accompanies either of tie 
Symptoms, tho' frequently in both the Green Humour ap 
pears. Both theſe kinds are familiar with thoſe that art 
much weakned by the frequent coming of Hyſterick Fits. 
And as this Diſeaſe afflits all the wmward parts al moll 
ſo ſometimes the outward parts are allo ſeized by it, and 
the Muſculous fleſh,, occaſioning Pain, and ſometimes a It 
mour in the Jaws, Shovlders, Hands, Thighs, Legs, i 
which kind the Tumour, which ſwells the Legs, is mot 
conſpicuous than the reſt; but whereas in Hydropid 
Tumours theſe two things may be always obſerved, nam. 


1 
fed by the Finger, a pit remains: In this Tumour w 


the Tear 1675, to the Near 1680. 305 


we Finger, or leave any mark behind it; and for the moſt 
| part it only ſwells one of the Legs. As to other things, if 
| you oblerve the Largenels of ir, or its ſuperficies, it is fo 
very like Hydropical Swellings, that the Patient can 
E ſcarce be perſwaded to believe, that it is any other Dil- 
kale. Neither are the Teeth, which you will ſcarce be- 
lere, free from the Aſſault of this Dileaſe, tho' they are 
not tollow ; and tho' there is no apparent Defluxion, that 
may occaſion the Pain, yet it is no whit gentler, nor ſhorter, 
nor eaſier to be cured. But thoſe Pains and Tumours that 
atlict the ourward parts, chiefly fall upon thole Women 
that are in a manner quite deſtroyed by a long Series of 
E [{yſtcrick Firs, atid by the force of them. | 

Zut among all the Torments of this Diſeaſe, there is 
none ſo common as a pain in the Back, which moſt cer- 
© rainly all feel, how little ſoever they are afflicted with this 
© Diſecale. Moreover this is common to the above-mention- 
ed Pains, that the Place on which they were, cannot bear 
touching after they are gone, but is tender, and akes juſt 
as if it were beaten ſoundly ; but this Tenderneſs goes off 
by degrees. | 

And this is worthy of Obſervation, that often a nota- 
ble cold of the external parts, makes way for theſe Sym- 
pioms, which for the moſt part goes not off till the Fit ends, 
EF which Cold I have oblerved is almoſt like that by which a 
Carkaſs grows Riff, yet the Pulſe is good. 

And moreover, almoſt all Hyſterick Women, whom 
| | have taken care of hitherto, complain of a Dejection 
and linking of the Spirits; and when they would ſhew 
che place where this Contraction or ſinking of the Spirits 
is, they point to the Region of che Lungs. 

Laſtly, it is known to every one, that Hyſterick Wo- 
men ſometimes laugh excetlively, and ſometimes Cry as 
much, without any real cauſe for either. 

Bur among all the Symproms that accompany this 
Diſeaſe, this is the moſt proper, and almoſt inſeparable, 
15. An Urine as clear as Rock-water; and this Hyſte- 
rick Women evacuate plentifully, which I find by di- 
ligent inquiry, is in almoſt all, the Pathognomonick, 
ſign of this Diſeaſe, which we call Hyſterick in Women, 
and Hypochondriack in Men; and I have ſometimes ob- 
ved, in Men, that preſently after making water of a 
4 * Cirrgn 


+», 


LI. 


— ˙—  ——_ 
— — _— — —ͤ— - = - 


-. i. owt 


— A — ear 57% oo 


» at * 
—— ——' — 
— 


— — — 
= 2 * if — 2 —4 * 
* el” 3 — 
— = — — — 


+. "95 
8 


„ — 
= - 
© wx » 
— — — 


3 — — 8 


n 
% _ TE 2- ” — 


n 


. 1 


* 

4 - — 
— = A 
— ADA ited. — Conn ,, . Im. 

- * — - 
— — ogg 


2 - . * 


4 
j 
: 


1 


— — 
„ ,- ES 


— AS. 


306 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 
Citron colour (yea almoſt the next moment) being lud. 
denly ſeized with ſome violent Perturbation of the M 


f Th: 
they preſently void water as clear as Chryſtal, and in — ke 
vantiry, with a continued violent Stream, and continue {on 
ill till the Urine comes to its wonted Colour, and then the all 
Fir goes off. M 
And it happens to all Hyſterical and Hypochondriacal cel 
People, when the Diſeaſe has been long upon them, that M. 
ſometimes they belch up ill Fumes as often as they eat, 4). ing 
tho they eat with. Moderation, and according as they have Mi 
an Appetite ; and ſometimes the Wind that comes from 
the Stomach is ſour juſt like Vinegar, when it comes into me 
the Mouth, the Concoction being much decayed, and the lor 
Juices quite changed from their natural State. at 
Nor are they unhappy on this Account only, viz. that C: 
their Bodies are ſo diſorderd, and as it were tottering jo) 
like ruin'd Houſes ; for their Minds are worſe affected Fl, 
than their Bodies, for an incurable Deſperation is mix: 
with the very Nature of the Diſeaſe ; they are very angry WW ot 
when any one ſpeaks never ſo little of the hopes he has of thi 
their Recovery, eafily believing that they undergo all the no 
Miſeries that can befall a Man, foreboading the mot WF Ce 
dreadful things ro themſelves, entertaining in their reſt- he 
leſs and anxious Breaſts upon ſmall occaſions, and per- an 
chance for none at all, Fear, Anger, Jealouſie, Suſpicions, of 
and worſe Paſſions of the mind, if any can be worle, ab- N 
horring all Joy, Hope, and Mirth, and if any of theſe th 
chance to happen, tis very rare, and ſoon flies away, and WW 1 
yet does not leſs diſturb the Mind, than the ſorrowful Pal- de 
fions, and they never keep a Mean, conſtant only to In. H 
conſtancy. Sometimes they love above meaſure, and pre- 
ſently hate the ſame without any reaſon ; ſometimes they ar 
intend to do this or that, then preſently alter their Inten- tet 
tions, and begin the quite contrary, and yet they do not da 
do that neither; ſo wavering are they that their Minds lic 
cannot be at all ar reſt ; and what the Roman Orator ba 
faid of the Superſtitious, agrees exactly with theſe Me- of 
lancholy People, Sleep, ſays he, ſeems to be a refuge for 7 
the Laborious, and careful; but from thence Cares and I h 
Fears ariſe, whilſt only Funerals and Apparitions of their * 
Friends deceaſed are repreſented in Dreams, and they ae 1 >: 


ſo afflicted in Body and Mind, that one would imagine £ 
| tha! 0 


4 wm 
Nr 


indiſpoſition, Whic 
deen diſturbed in their Minds, and afflicted wich 
- oricf ; Which if they confeſs, I am abundantly ſatis- 
ad dat the Diſeaſe muſt come under this Tribe we now 


the Year 1675, to the Year 1680. 305 


ar there Lives were a Purgatory, wherein they were to 
purifie themſelves, and to expiare Crimes committed in 
ſome other State; nor is ir only ſo with mad People, but 
ilſo with thoſe, who, if you except theſe Impetuoſities ol 
Mind, are very prudent and judicious, and who much ex- 
cel, for deep Thought and wiſdom of Speech, others whole 
Minds were never excited by theſe Provotations to think- 
ing; ſo that Ariſtotle was in the right, when he {aid thai 
Melancholy People ate moſt ingenious. 

But this dreadful Condition of Mind, which I have 
nentioned above, ſeizes thoſe only that have much, and a 
long while been afflicted with rhis Diſeaſe, and have beet 
x length quite conquered by it, eſpecially if Adverſity, 
Care, or Trouble of Mind, or hard Study, or the like, 
joyned with an ill habit of the Body, have added Oyl to the 
Flame. 

A Day would ſcarce ſuffice to reckon up all the Sym- 
proms belonging ro Hyſterick Diſeaſes, ſo various are 
they, and ſo contrary ro one another, that Proteus had 
no more Shapes, nor the Chameleon fo great Variety of 
Colours: And I think Democritus was pretty right (tho 
he miſtook the Cauſe of the Dileaſe) when he wrote in 
an Epiſtle to Hippocrates, that the Womb was rhe Cauſe 


+ of fix hundred Miſeries, and of innumerable Calamiries, 


Nor are they only very various, bur allo ſo irregular, that 
they cannot be contained under any uniform Type, which 
s uſual in other Diſeaſes, for they are as it were a diſor- 
derly heap of Phenomena, ſo that it's very hard to write the 
Hiſtory of this Diſeaſe. 

The Procatartick or external Cauſes of this Diſeaſe, 


me violent Motions of the Body, or which is much of- 


tener, violent perturbations of the Mind from tome ſud- 
dain Aſſault, either of Anger, or Grief, or ſuch like Pal- 
lions ; therefore as oſten as Women adviſe wich me a- 
bout this or that Diſorder of the Body, the reaſon where- 
of cannot be deduced from the common Axioms, for 
finding out Diſeaſes, I always diligently enquire of 
them, whether they are not chiefly afflicted with that 

h they complain of, when they have 


- i - diſcon fe 


303 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 

diſcourſe of, eſpecially if Urine clear as Cryſtal evacy,: 
red copiouſly ar ſome certain times makes the Diagto 
tick more manifeſt. Bur to theſe Diſorders of the Mina 
which are uſually the Cauſe of this Diſeaſe, Emptineſs o 
the Stomach, by reaſon of long faſting, is to be added, ang 
immoderate Bleeding, a Vomit or Purge that hath rough. 
too much. Now having drawn the Picture of this Ui. 
eaſe according to its vulgar Phenomena, in the next place 
the internal efficient Cauſes of it are to be conſidered, x; 
well as we can gather them from all rhe Circumſtance; 
joyned together, which we have deſcribed. And in my 
opinion thoſe Diſeaſes, which we call Hyſterical in Wa. 
men, and Hypochondriacal in Men proceed from a Confy(. 
on of the Spirits, upon which Account, roo many of them 
in a Croud, contrary to proportion, are hurried violently 
upon this or that part, cauſing Convulſions and Pain, 


when they ruſh upon parts endued with exquiſite Senſe, he 
perverting the Functions of the Organs, both of tha WF le 
they thruſt themſelves into, and alſo of that from whence W- 
they departed ; both being much injured by this unequ te 
Diſtribution, which is altogether contrary to the Oeconomy . I 
of Nature. . 
The origin and antecedent Cauſe of this Araxy, isa ir 
weak Conſtitution of the ſaid Spirits, whether it be na {WF «» 
rural or advenritious ; for which reaſon they are caily We I. 
diflipated upon any occafion, and their Syſtem {ſoon v 
broke. For as the outward Man is framed with pars . 
obvious ro Senſe, ſo without doubt the inward Man con- ſe 
fiſts of a due ſeries, and as it were a Fabrick of the WF tl 
Spirits to be viewed only by the Eye of Reaſon : nc WR at 
as this is nearly joyned, and as it were united with the WWF 1s 
Conſtitution of the Body, ſo much the more eaſily or p. 
more difficultly the Frame of ir is diſordered, by how . o 
much the conſtitutive Principles that are allotted usby {MW b 
Nature, are more or leſs firm: Wherefore this Diſeae i 
feizes many more Women than Men, becauſe kind Na- tr 
ture has beſtowed on them a more delicate and fine Ha- > 
bit of Body, having deſigned them only for an eaſie Life, WW E 
and to perform the tender Offices of Love: But ſhe gave {WF *t 
to Men robuſt Bodies, that they might be able to deive WF V 
and manure the Earth, to kill wild Beaſts for Food, ad P 
the like. | V 


Put 


rr 


n 


N 
F. 7 3 
-# FE aw. 


the Tear 1675, to the Tear 1680, 309 
But that the ſaid Confuſion of Spirits is the Caule of 


this Diſeaſe, the Phencmena now deſcribed will abun- 


dantly prove; I will only mention the chief of them. 


And 1 begin with Mother: fits. Here the Spirits are croud- 


ed in the lower Belly, and violently ruſhing together to- 


| wards the Jaws, produce Convulſions in every Region 
© through which they paſs, blowing up the Belly like a 


great Ball; which yet is nothing but the rowling toge- 


tber, or conglobation of the parts affected with the 


Convulſion, which cannot be ſuppreſſed without great 


Violence. The external parts in the mean while, and 
E the Fleſh being in a manner deſtitute of Spirits, becauſe 
they are carried another way, are often ſo very cold, 


not in this kind only, bur in all other kinds of Hyſterick 


* Diſeaſes (as it was noted above) that dead Bodies are not 
* colder. But the Pulſe is as good as that of People in 
E health ; nor is the Woman's Life in danger by this cold, un- 
leſs it is occaſioned by ſome great Evacuation going before. 


The ſame may be ſaid of that Hyſterick Diſeaſe, which 


to outward appearance is like the Bilious Cholick or the 
lliack Paſſion, in which the Woman is ſeized with a violent 
Pain about the Scrobiculus Cordis, and allo violent Vomit- 
ing, by which a Matter is caſt up, like Herbs in colour; 
© which Symptom I ſuppoſe, proceeds only from a violent 
> Impulſe of the Spirits crouded together in the ſaid parts, 


which cauſes the Convulſion and Pain, and rhe total Sub- 
verſion of all the Faculties. Nor is it to be concluded pre- 
ſently that this Diſeaſe reſides in the Humours, becauſe 
thoſe things that are evacuated upwards and downwards 
are of a Green Colour ſometimes, or that the violent Pain 
is produced by the Acrimony of ſome Humour rearing the 
part it adheres to, which for thar Cauſe, we account rhe 
occaſion of the Diſeaſe, and therefore ſuppole it ought to 


be rooted out by Vomits and Purges; for it is manifeſt that 
the Sickneſs which ſeizes People that go to Sea (ariſing 


from the Agitation of the Animal Spirits in the boiſtrous 
Sea) occaſions the vomiting up of Matter as green as an 
Herb, from the Stomachs of thoſe in perfect Health, when 
they go firſt to Sea, and are a good way from Land, in 
whom there was none before of that colour which they call 
porraceous. And do not Infants in convulſive Fits, in 
which the Animal Spirits are chiefly concerned, evacuate 

X 3 upward 


310 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 
upward or downward Matter of the fame Colour, to Which 
muſt be added that which almoſt daily Experience teache; 
to wit, that tho ſuch Women and Children ſhould be quite 
exhauſted by repeated Purges, yet the ſaid Colour would 
ſtill appear in that which they evacuate by Vomit or Stool: 
yea the green matter increaſes by the frequent uſing of Ca. 
tharticks and Emeticks; becauſe by both, the Confuſion cf 
the Spirits is augmented, which I know not how either 
deſtroys, or perverts the Ferment of thoſe parts, or 
throws into the Stomach or Guts, by the force of the 
Convulfions, ſome Juice of a ſtrapge Nature, which i; 
diſpoſed to give the Humours ſuch a Tincture. And tho 
Chymiſts are not ſo happy as to prepare better Medi. 
cines in their fruirful Glaſſes, than are made in a Mortar 
or a Pipkin, yer know they how to pleaſe the vain Hu. 
mour of the Curious, by ſhewing rwo Liquors equally 
limpid and clear, which being mixed together, preſently 
change into ſome deep Colour, as if there were conju. 
ring in the caſe. And indeed the ſpeculation of Colours 
is ſo uncertain, and vain, that we can learn nothing of 
certainty from them concerning the Nature of the Bo- 
dies they appear in; nor does it more neceſſarily follow 
that thoſe things which are of a green Colour ſhould be 
acrid, than that all acrid things ſhould be green. Thele 
things therefore being throughly conſidered, it will plainly 
appear, that the violent Pain which almoſt deſtroys thoſe 
that are afflicted with the Hyſterick Cholick, and the Era. 
cuation of the green Matter, are wholly occaſioned by the 
Spirits ruſhing in violently upon the parts about the S. 
biculus Cordis, and contracting the ſame by Convulſions. 
That Symptom which I termed above Clavus Hyſteri- 
cus, is to be at tributed to this Enormity of the Spirits in 
which the Spirits in all the compaſs of the Body are as 
it were contracted in a certain Point of the Pericranium, 
occaſioning a Pain, boting as it were through; juſt as 
if a Nail were driven into the Head, together with vio- 
lent yomiting and caſting up of green Matter; which 
Contraction is indeed ſomewhat like that Collection o 
the Rays of the Sun, which is made by a Burning: Glals; 
and as the force of theſe united burns, ſo they by the ſame 
reaſon produce Pain, by tearing the Membranes with their 
{orces unieed, | | 85 Eee tf * 

Ly 3 S 


A 
; 


the Tear 1675, to the Tear 1680, 311 


And then from that inordinate Agitation of the Spirits 
diſtutbing the Blood, ariſes that Symptom which we 
hare mentioned above, and is often in Hyſterical and Hy- 
pochondriacal People, clear, limpid and copious U- 
rine, For when the Oeconomy of the Blood is diſturbed, 
the Sick cannot long enough contain the Serum that is im- 
ported, but lets it go before it is impregnated with Saline 


Particles, by which the Citron colour is ro be communi- 


cated to it; whereof we have a daily Experiment in thoſe 
that drink much, eſpecially of thin and attenuating Li- 
quors, for then their Urine is very clear, in which caſe 


dhe Blood being over- powered by that quantity of Serum, 


and being wholly unable to retain it, puts it off quite 
clear, not as yet coloured by the Juices of the Body by rea- 
ſon of its too ſhort ſtay. 

Three Years ago, a Noble- man ſent for me; he ſeemed 


to labour under an Hypochondriack Cholick, that was 


almoſt come to an Iliack Paſſion, with Pain and violent 


: Vomiting, with which he was greatly, and a long time 


afflicted, and almoſt worn out. I obſerved through the 
E whole Courſe of the Diſeaſe, that when he was worſt, his 


' Urine was always clear; but when he was alittle better, 


it was ſome what of a Citron- colour. Viſiting him one 


day, I looked upon his Urine made at three times, kept 


apart in three Chamber. pots, of a Citron- colour; he was 
then merry and cheerful, thinking to eat ſome Meat 


of eaſie Digeſtion, and ſaid he had a craving Appetite; 


but one coming in at that very moment, vex'd him 


ſo much, that ſuddenly being taken ill, he called for a 


Chamber pot, which he almoſt filled with Urine as clear 
as Chryſtal 

And perhaps that ſpitting ſo common to Hyſterical 
Women proceeds from the Spirits diſturbing the Blood; 
they ſpit thin for many Weeks, juſt as if they were ſaliva- 


ted by Unction: for during this diſturbed Motion of 


the Blood, in which it is not able to perform Evacuation 


according to Nature's method, the Serum by chance ta- 


hing this contrary Courſe is not evacuated by the Reins 
according to Nature's Rules, but is put off by the Extre- 
mities of the Arteries upon the Glands, and ſo comes 


torth by the ſalivary Paſſages in the form of Spittle. 
The ſame may be ſaid of thoſe violent Nocturnal Sweats, 
X 4 whisk 


7 
PX 4 * 


E. 
— — 


+ oF I * . 
- _ 42 1 
o _ 


— 
— 
a 


— * * — - 
4 1 — 


— — 


ſelves violently upon the Organs, that perform theſe Ari. 
mal Functions. 


rhruſt out, and moved frequently, (as froward Children 


abſtinence from Fleſh ; which the Phy ſician ordered for 


312 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 
wh'ch afflict Hyſterical Women, which proceed from 50 
other Cauſe than the ill Diſpoſition of the Serum gf the 
Blood, by which it is inclined to be put off upon the Hair 
of the Body, by reaſon of the confuſion of the Blood, iuſt 
now mentioned. | X 

As ro the Cold by which the external parts are ſo g. 
ten chilled in Hyſterical Diſeaſes, it is very apparer; 
that that happens becaule the Spirits forſaking their dt. 
tions, too officiouſly intrude themſelves into this or thy 
part: Nor is it to be doubted that weeping and laughiry 
Fits, which often ſeize Hyſterical Women, without ary 
occaſion, are cauſed by the Animal Spirits forcing them. 


And by the bye, Men are alſo (tho! rarely) ſubje3 
ro Firs of Weeping. I was ſent for ſome time ago to an 
ingenicus Gentleman, who but a few Days before had 
recovered of a Fever; he made uſe of another Phyſci. 
an, who blooded him, and purged him three times, and 
forbad him the uſe of Fleſh : When I came and faw hin 
with his Cloaths on, and heard him diſcourle judici- 
ouſly, 1 asked to what purpoſe I was ſent for: Ore 
his Friends anſwered, 1f I would have a little parience, | 
ſhould lee ; fitring down therefore, and dilcourſing with 
him, I preſently took notice, that his lower Lip ws 


uſed to do to prepare for Crying) and then wept ſo vio- 
lently, that I ſcarce ever ſaw the like, with ſuch deep 
Sighs as were almoſt convulfive ; which ſudden Torrent 
in a little time aſſwaged. I ſuppoſed that this Diſorder 
proceeded from a Confuſion of the Spirits, which was 
partly ſo occafioned by the length of the Dileaſe, and 
partly by Evacuations which rhe Method of Cure necel- 
farily required; and partly alſo from Emptineſs, ard 


"ay 4 4 * 1 * by * * - oY * FO * 
RA | * Jae 
TIES 5 TE” 0” VETS 04 IS < * — 8 A S : 


ſome Days after he was well, ro ſecure him from a Ke. 
lapſe. Burl affirmed he was clear from all danger ot 4 
Fever, and that the abovementioned Symptom Was 
wholly produced by Emptineſs, and therefore I ordered 
chat a roaſted Chick ſhould be provided for his Dinner, 
and that he ſhould drink Wine moderately ; which be⸗ 
ing done, and he returning again to the cating of PY 

mode- 


N IF TOURS £5 7 
= * y * 3 

y & 1 8 7 5 5 
r VS ee 3 


892 wg yu — — 


r 


— — — 


the Tear 1675, to the Tear 1680, 313 


; mcderarely, was never afterwards troubled with this con- 
| vulfive Weeping: | 

And now at length to come to a Concluſion, (for 1 
> omit other Phenomena, which belong to this Diſeaſe) 
© char diſturbance and varying Intemperies both of Body 
and Mind, which prevails over Hyſterical and Hypo- 
E chondriacal People, is produced by the Inordination of the 
Spirits, for in both that firmneſs of the Spirits being want- 
* ing, which is always to be found in the Robuſt, and in 
E thoſe who are continually ſtrengthened by the Aſſiſtance 
© of vigorous Spirits, they cannot bear the Impreſfions of 
© croſs Accidents, but are ſoon moved by Anger, or Pain, 
© and are as apt to be angry as thoſe to whom either Na- 
ture has given a ſoft and weak Government of Mind, or 
it has been rendred ſo by a long Series or Continuance 
of Dileaſes. For the Strength and Conftancy of Mind, 
* as long as it is confined in the Body, much depends on 
the firmneſs of the Spirits, that are ſubſervient to it; 
which indeed are made of the fineſt Matter, and are placed 
in the Confines of immaterial Beings : and as the Frame 
of the Mind, if it be lawful to call it fo, is much more 
curious and delicate than the Structure of the Body, for 
it conſiſts in the Harmony of the moſt excellent and al- 
moſt Divine Faculties; ſo if its Conſtitution is any way 
vitiated, by ſo much the greater is the Ruin, by how 
much it was more excellent and more exquiſitely com- 
= poſed when it was whole. And this truly is the Condi 
tion of theſe miſerable and dejected People we have de- 
ſcribed, for which Dileaſe, ſome obſtinate Decree of the 
moſt inſolent Stoick would give no greater caſe, than he 
that would prevent the Tooth- ach, by firmly reſolving that 
de would not by any means permit his Teeth to ake. 
And now I ſuppoſe it is manifeſt, chat this whole 
Diſeale is occaſioned by the Animal Spirits being not 
rightly diſpoſed, and not by Seed and menſtruous Blood 
corrupted (as ſome Authors affirm) and ſending up ma- 
lignant Vapours to the parts affected; nor from I know 
not what depravation of the Juices, or congeſtion of a- 
crid Humours as others think, but from thoſe Cauſes we 
© have aſſigned. For that the Fomes of the Diſeaſe does 
not Jurk in matter, will evidently appear by this one in- 
ſtance, viz, a Woman that uſed to enjoy perfect Health, 


being 


314 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 
being delicate, and of a thin Habit of Body, f «,: 
chance to be weakened and exhauſted by ſome Er 
or by a ſtrong Vomit or Purge, will certainly be afflict. 
ed with ſome one of thoſe Symptoms that accompany; 
this Diſeaſe ; which would rather be removed than cd. 
caſioned by ſuch Vomiting or Purging, if the Fomes 0 
the Diſeaſe was contained in an Humour. The "hy 
may be ſaid of a great Loſs of Blood, whether it be u. 
ken away by opening a Vein, or flows immoderately in 
Labour, or of Emptinels or too long abſtinence {rg 
Fleſh; all which would rather prevent Hyſterick Diſcaſs; 
than produce them, if the Fomes of them was containe) 
in ſome matter: Whereas on the contrary nothing does 0 
conſtantly occaſion this Diſeaſe, as theſe Evacuations. 
Bur though it is evident enough that the original Fome; 
of rhe Diſeaſe, is not lodged in the Humours, ye i 
muſt be confeſſed that the Confuſion of the Spirits, the 
Cauſe of this Diſeaſe, occaſions putrid Humours in the 
Body, by reaſon the Function as well of thoſe parts which 
are diſtreſſed by the violent Impulſe of the Spirits, a; 
of rhoſe which are deprived of them, is wholly perver: 
ed, And moſt of theſe being as it were ſeparatory Or. 
gans deſigned for the Reception of rhe Impurities of the 
Blood, it their Functions are any way hurt, it cannot be 
bur a great many Feculencies will be heaped up, which 
had been eliminated, and ſo the maſs of Blood purifed, 
if the Organs had performed their Duties; which they 
had certainly done, it a due Oeconomy of the Spirits 
had invigorated them all. To this Cauſe J attribute great 
Cachexies, loſs of Appetite, a Chloroſis, or the white Fe. 
ver in young Women, (which I doubt not is a Species ol 
Hyſterick Diſeaſes) and the Spring of all the Miſeries 
that afflict poor Women, that have languiſhed a long 
time under this Dileaſe ; all which are produced by pu- 
trifying Juices heapt up in the Blood, and flowing from 
thence upon the various Organs; of this kind is a Drop- 
lie of the Womb in Women which have been long at- 
flicted with this Diſeaſe , produced by depraved Juices 
caſt from the Blood upon the Organs, by which their 
Faculties being perverted, they become firſt barren, the 
Oeconomy of the parts being wholly deſtroyed, and 
then $4435: and Serum are generated, which do not * 
N x "hs 


the Year 1675, to the Tear 1680. 315 


auf the Eggs of the Teſtes, bur alſo inſinuating them- 
' W {ves into the Interſtices of rhe Coats, cauſe them to 
„ grow very big, which is perceived by the Diſſection of 
| hoſe that die of this Diſeaſe : And the Hyſterical Diſ- 


poßtion, is the prime Caule of theſe and other Humours, 
„ W though they are nor of the ſame kind with ir. As in a 
of W Quartan-Ague, with which any one in perfect Health 
e way be ſeized, if he ſtays two or three days in fenny 
a. or mooriſh Places: Firſt, ſome ſpirituous Venom of the 
in Diſeaſe is imprinted upon the Blood, which continuing 
IM 2 long while, and at length rhe Oeconomy of Nature 


„ being hurt, it infects all the Juices of the Body, and 
e! quite alters their Diſpoſitions; ſo that the Sick (eſpecial- 


y if he begins to be antient) is rendred obnoxious to Ca- 
chexies and other Diſtempers, which come upon long A- 
vc WF gues ; yet theſe Agues are not to be cured by thoſe Reme- 


it dies that are fit ro purge off ſuch Humours, but by ſuch 
the things as cure Agues by a ſpecifick Quality. 
Prom all that has been treated of, it is very evident to 
ich WW me, that that is the chief Indication in this Diſeaſe, 
2 which directs the ſtrengthning of the Blood, that is, the 
ert · Fountain and Origin of the Spirits; which being done, 
the invigorated Spirits can preſerve that Order which 
is agreeable to the Oeconomy of the whole Body, and 
the particular parts. And therefore, when the Ataxy of 
the Spirits (which we have allowed above may be) has 
vitiated the Humours by long continuance, it will be fir 
© firſt ro leſſen theſe Humours ſo corrupred, by bleeding 
and Purging, if the Patient has ſufficient Strength, be- 
fore we endeavour to invigorate the Blood: and which 
indeed we can ſcarce do, whilſt a feculent heap of Hu- 
mour lies in the way. But for as much as Pains, Vo- 
miting, and Looſeneſs are ſometimes ſo very ſevere, that 
they will not bear a Truce ſo long, until we have ſatis- 
fed the firſt Intention of fortifying the Blood; there- 
fore we muſt begin the Cure ſometimes by quiering the 
Symptoms, (the cauſe being let alone a little while) with 
© ome Anodyne Medicine, and then we muſt endeavour 
to rectifie the Spirits, the infirm Conſtitution whereof is 
© tlic cauſe of this Diſeaſe, and ſo to cure ſuch kind of 
Symptoms: And becauſe we find by Experience that 
tere are many ſtinking things that will quell the Inor- 
| N | dination 


316 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 


dination of the Spirits, and retain them in theit places 
(and are therefore called Hyſtericks) we muſt uſe chem 
when we would anſwer ſuch Intentions. 

According to what has been ſaid, 1 order the Sick 9 
be blooded in the Arm, and that after ſhe be purge 
Three or Four Mornings following; but the Woman 
thinks her ſelf worſe after thoſe days ſhe is Blooded ang 
Purged in ; for theſe Evacuations promote the Diſorder 
which I rake care to forewarn her of, that ſhe may ng: 
deſpair, the Diſeaſe of it {elf being apt to incline her tg 
do ſo; yet notwithſtanding thoſe vitious Humours, we 
ſuppole are heap'd up by the long continuance of the 
Diſeaſe, are in ſome ſort to be evacuated, before we can 
conveniently anſwer the chief Intention. 

After theſe Evacuations I order ſome Chalybeate Re. 
medy to be taken Thirty Days to ſtrengthen the Blood, 
and ſo by conſequence, the Spirits that proceed from it; 
and nothing will more certainly anſwer your Intention in 
this Caſe, for it raiſes a Volatile Ferment in the Vapid and 
Languid Blood, whereby the weak Spirits are rouled, 
which before were preſſed down by their own weight, 
and this is very manifeſt ; for as often as Steel is given 
in the Green-lickneſs, the Pulſes are manifeſtly greater 
and quicker, the outward Parts grow warm, and the 
pale and dead Countenance is changed, and becomes 
freſh and lively. Bur here it is to be noted, that Bleed. 
ing and purging muſt not be always uled before Steel 
Medicines, tor when the Sick is weak, and almoſt worn out 
by the long continuance of the Diſeaſe, they may and 
ought to be omitted, and you muſt begin with Steel, and 
this muſt be well minded. | 

Bur in my Opinion it is moſt conveniently given in 
Subſtance ; and as I have never ſeen nor heard that ſo 
taken it ever hurt any Body; fo I have been fully fatis- 
fied by frequent Experience, that the bare Subſtance pet. 
torms the Cure ſooner and more effectually than any of 
the common Preparations of it; for buſie Chymiſts make 
this as well as other excellent Medicines, worſe rather 
than better by their perverſe and over-officious Diligence. 
I have alſo heard (and if it be true, ir much fortifies 
our Aſſertion) thai the crude Mine as it is digged out of 


the Earth, is more effectual in curing Diſeaſes, than e 
that 


the Tear 1675, to the Tear 1680. 317 


ö hat has paſſed the fire, and been purified by melting; ſo 
the Author aſſerts, but I have not as yer tryed, whether 


: beſo or not. This am certain of, that no excellent 
dad effectual Remedy has been any where made, which 
bas not received its chiefeſt Virtues from Nature; upon 
n W this Account grareful Antiquity called excellent Medi- 
ines, God's Workmanſhip not man's. And that ſome 
„ excellent ching does produce wonderful Effects by its 
„native Goodneſs and Efficacy, in what form ſoever it be 
o W taken, may be proved by Opium, or the Jeſuits Bark. 
x: W Nor is a Phyſicians skill ſo much perceived by preparing 
he Medicines, as by chuſing ſuch as are fir, which Nature 
an has prepared with her own Fire, and freely beſtowed on 

us, ſo that all we have to do is to reduce Medicines to 
+. W {ch a form; as that either their Subſtance, or their Vir- 
d, tic and Efficacy may be better imparted to our Bod ies; 
ir: ber the performance whereof, we are ſufficiently inſtru- 
in W 4d. Next to the Subſtance of rhe Steel, I chuſe the 


nd Syrup of it, prepared with the Filings of Steel, or I- 
© ron, infuſed in Cold Rheniſh Wine, till the Wine 
is lufficiently impregnated, and aftetwards ſtrained, and 
boyled to the Conſiſtence of a Syrup with a ſufficient quan- 
© tity of Sugar. 


the WW Nor do I uſe any purging Medicine at ſet times, du- 
nes ring the whole Chalybeate Courle, for I think the Virtue 
ed. of the Steel is deſtroyed by a Purge, both in Hyſterick 
reel and Hypochondriack Diſeaſes; and when my chief De- 


© lign is to reduce the Spirits to order, and to renew and 
confirm their Syſtem, if I ſhould uſe the gentleſt Purge 
but once, I ſhould undo all that I had done in a Week 
before, and ſo by pulling down what I had built, and 


in by Building what I had pulled down, I ſhould trifle 
t ſo with my ſelf and Patient too; and I believe Mineral 
is- Waters, which participate of an Iron Mine, are rendred 
per. WF leſs effectual by this means, tho' I know that ſome have 
y 0: been cured, when Purges have not been given only now 
ake and then, but daily with the Steel which does nor ſo much 
cher WE prove ro me the Diſcretion of the Phyſician, as the extra- 
nce, WWF ordinary Virtue of the Steel; for if they had been omitted, 
ifies WWE the Cure would have been performed in a leſs time. 

i of WF Nor truly do 1 ſee whar advantage Purges often re- 
Iron WWF v42red may produce in many other Dileaſes, beſides that 


juſt 


2 A — 
1 
5 of + © TT, 
— . 
— Ly -_ 


* « eo — = 
28 75 * 2 
8 — 3 
- 9 
1 
AA * — - 


— 1 "= 
* » 
2 


r 
W 
— = 


- — = 
> a LT 
7 4 bs 28 * - 


218 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 
juſt mentioned; for tho it cannot be denied, that th 
clear the Inteſtines of Impurities, and likewile that they 
ſomewhar diſcharge ill Humours, that are lodged in tj; 
Mals of Blood; yer on the contrary, it is no leſs cenain 
that when they are frequently repeated in weak Bodie; 
eſpecially in the render Age, they may do much hurt, be. 
cauſe thereby a great many Humours are drawn to the 
Inteſtines, and being put off upon theſe parts, occaſo 
Preter- natural Ferments, whereby Tumors ariſes in tie 
Belly, increaſing daily ſo much the more, by how much 
the oftner the Sick is purged, and at length it happen, 
that thoſe parts by reaſon of weakneſs, (being as it were 
overwhelmed with a burthen of Humours) and by: 
defect of natural hear, ſoon become rabid and purre. 
fied ; and ſomerimes allo the Oeconomy of the Bow. 
els being quite ſubverted, by realon of the Caules men. 
rioned, Preter-natural Kernels like the King's-Evil, ard 
the like, grow upon the Meſentery, and make way far 
Death; for theſe Reaſons I judge it is ſafeſt in Children 
after general Evacuations, and thoſe bur very few, 10 di. 
rect the curative Indication ſo as to comfort the Blood 
and Bowels, which may be done with Spaniſh Wine 4 
lone; or with corroborating Herbs in it, if Morning and 
Evening ſome ſpoonfuls of it, according to the Age of the 
Sick, are given long enough. And becauſe things our- 
wardly applied, can eaſily penetrate the tender Bodies of 
Infants, and ſo throughly affect the Blood with thei: 
Virtue, whatever it is; it Will be proper in ſwellings 
of their Bellies, whether cauſed by the Kings-Evi|, or 
the true Rickets, to uſe Liniments that are proper to cor- 
tobate the Blood and Bowels, and likewile to cure any 
Atorbifick Indiſpoſition of chem. 


Take of the Leaves of common Wormwood, of the Leſſer 
Centaury, of White Horehound, Germander, Grounapine, 
Scordium, common Calaminth, Feverfew, Meadow Saxi- 
Frage, St. John's Wort, Golden-rod, Wild Time, Mint, 
Sage, Rhue, Carduus Benedictus, Penny- Royal, Sou- 
thern-wood, Camomile, Tanſie, Lily of the Valley, 
all freſh gathered and cut, each one handful ; of Las 
four Pounds, of Sheeps-ſuet, and Claret-wine, each 4 


Quart: Let them be infuſed in an Earthen-pot * 
902 


the Tear 1675, to the Year 1680. 319 


hot aſhes for twelve hours, and then let them beyl till all 
the watry part is conſumed, afterwards ſtrain them, and 
make an Oyntment, wherewith let the Belly and Hypochon- 
ders be anointed Morning and Evening, for Thirty or 
Forty days following, and alſo bath the Arm-pits. 


But as to the Rickets this muſt be noted, that in thoſe 


0 Tumours, that ſeized the Bellies of Infants heretofore 
j aſter long Agues not much unlike the true Rickets, Pur- 
© ges repeated {ſeem to be indicated. For before the uſe 
h WF of the ſeſuits- powder, Agues continued along while, and 
n, put off a Sediment Which was the cauſe of Tumors af 
e mis kind, which could be only carried off by Purges re- 
2 WE reared ; bur Catharticks are not to be uſed in the Rickers 


e. above once or twice at the moſt, before the Sick en- 
w. rers upon the uſe of Alteratives; and let him take in- 
n- WE wardly of the Wine above-mentioned, all the time the 
nd WWF parts are anointed, or let him uſe, if it may be, for his 
for ordinary drink, Beer with the forementioned Herbs, or 
ren ¶ at leaſt ſeveral of them put up with ir in the Veſſel. Laſtly, 
d. hat 1 have now hinted ought to be carefully minded, 
ol WEfor 1 am well ſatisfied that many Infants and Children 
+ Whhave been ruined by Purges repeated often, which perhaps 


and were given to aſſwage the Belly. Bur this by the bye. 
the lt any one object chat the Filings of Steel may injure 
but. thoſe that take them by ſticking in their Guts, unleſs 
50! ibey are purged now and then. I anſwer firſt, that I 
nen derer found any ſuch thing in any one, and beſides it is 
1033 wuch more probable, that being involved with the ſlime, 
„tend wich the Excrementious Humours of the parts, they 
cor- {Whould ar length all paſs away with them, than when 
ally bey are exagitated by purging Medicines, which caule 
Ebnuſual Compreſlions, Twitting and Contraction of the 
Bowels, whereby the Filings of the Steel thruſt upon the 
.eſſer cats of the Guts may penetrate deeper into them. 
pine, WW When the Sick is in a Steel-courſe, Remedies com- 
an only called Anti-Hyſtericks are to be uſed, as it were 
Win, by the bye, (io comfort the Blood and Animal Spi- 
Sou- tits) in chat manner and form, which is moſt agreeable 
%, che Patient; but if ſhe can take them in a folid form 
Lara ey will more powerfully retain the Spirits in their Of- 
wy Ke and Place, than things that are Liquid, chat is, ei- 
" 


„ ther 


320 Of Epidemich Diſeaſes from 


ther Decoctions or Infuſions, for the Subſtance it ſelf 3 
fects the Stomach longer with its Savour, and works more 
forcibly upon the Body. 

Upon the whole, being about to anſwer all the Indica. 
tions which I have mentioned above, I uſe to order the; 
few and common things, which tho they are not at 2 
pompous, yet they moſt commonly do what I deſign, Ie 
eight Qunces of Blovd be taken from the right Arm. 


Take of Galbanum diffolved in Tincture of Caſtor, an 
rained, three Drams Tacamahacca two Drams ; mal. 

a Plaiſter to be applyed to the Navel ; the next Morning 
let her enter upon the uſe of the following Pills, 


Take of Pil. Coch. Major two Scruples, of Caftor powder: 
two Grains, of the Balſam of Peru four drops ; mal: 
Four Pills, let her take them at five in the Morning, and 
ſleep after them; repeat them twice or thrice every Mum. 
ing, or every other Morning, according to their Operatim 


and the ſtrength of the Patient, 


Take of the waters of Black Cherries and of Rue and of con. 
pound Briony-water, each three Ounces, of Caftor hei 
up in a rag, and hung in the Glaſs, half a Dram, 
fine Sugar a ſufficient quantity; make a Fulep, where, 
let her take Four or Five ſpoonfuls, when fhe is faint, 
dropping into the firſt Doſe, if the Fit be violent, twei- 
drops of the Spirit of Harts-horn, 


* | * E * — ** „9 , * ä 
1 * | EE 1 * add. * 
— . EE 


After the purging Pills above deſcribed are taken, lc 
her uſe the following, 


of ucts Os — * * p 
* 4 4 y . 
r 


Take of the Filings of Steel Grains eight, with a ſuffcien 
prey of extraft of Wormwood, make two Pills ; l WF 
er take them early in the Morning, and at Five in iti WF nc 
Afternoon for thirty days, drinking upon them a drauy ber 
of Normwood.- wine. Or for daily ule, ſen 


Take of the Filings of Steel, and of extract of Wor mw, We the 
each four Ounces ; mingle them and keep them for I WW | 
det her take at the ſame time fifteen Grains, or a Srcupt We the 


made in three Pills, Or if ſhe likes a Bolus better, F h 


Tai.” 


the Tear 1675, to the Tear 1630, 321 


Tale of Conſerve of Roman Wormwood, and of the Con- 
ſerve of the yellow Rind of Oranges, each one Ounce, 
of candied Angelica, Nutmegs candied, and of Venice 
Treacle, each half an Ounce, of candied Ginger two 
Drams, make an Elettuary with a ſufficient quantity of 
Syrup of Oranges : Take of this Elettuary one Dram 
and an half; of Filings of Steel well rubbed eight 
Grains; make a Bolus with a ſuſficient quantity of S- 
rup of Oranges to be taken in the Morning, and at five 
in the Evening, drinking upon it a draught of Worme 
wood- wine. 


Take of choice Myrrh and Galbanum, each ene Dram and 
an half, of Caſtor fifteen Grains, with a ſuſfisient quan- 
tity of Balſam of Peru ; make twelve Pills of every 
Dram; let her. take three every Night, and drink upon 
them three or four ſpoonfuls of compound Briony-water 
through the whole Courſe of this Proceſs. 


© Bur if theſe Pills move the Belly, which ſometimes 
happens in Bodies that are very eaſily purged, by realon 


ll 

1d of the Gum that is in them, the following are ro be ſub- 
„ WW ititured, 

ef 

int, Take of Caſtor ene Dram, of Volatile Salt of Amber, 


Lalf a Dram, with a ſufficient quantity of extract of 
Rue; make twenty four ſmall Pills, lat her take three 
every Night. 


But here we muſt take notice, that Steel Medicines in 
| E whatſoever Form or Dole they are taken, cauſe ſome- 
en! mes in Women great diſorders both of Body and Mind, 
e: and that not only on the firſt days, which is uſual al- 
% moſt in every Body, bur allo, all the time they are ta- 
ge ken. In this Cale the uſe of Chahybeats mult not pre- 
& [ently be interrupted, bur Laudanum muſt be given e- 
very Night for ſome time, in ſome Hyſterick- water, that 
they may bear it the better. 

; But when the Symptoms are gentle, and ir ſeems that 
p be buſineſs may be done, without taking Steel, viz, 
ben the Diſeaſe is ſmall, ir lufficient to * 

au 


m” F * 4 ad by * "Ig, 
8 x wy PR 6 - l * 
- os * ö . 5 Fog AXY 
ol 3 r N iy 222 7 


. 
, 7 
A 
| 


322 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 

and ro purge three or four times, and then to gixe . 
alrering Hyſterick Pills above-mentioned, Morning ang 
Evening for ten days, which method ſeldom fails, wh. 
the Diſeaſe is not violent; yea the Pills alone, Bleedir, 
and Purging being omitted, oftentimes do à great deal q 

ood. 

, Yer ir muſt carefully be noted, that ſome Women, by 
a certain Idio/yncraſie do fo abhor Hyſterick Medicina 
(which give eaſe in moſt of the Symptoms of this Dj. 
eaſe that they do not only not receive Benefit, but ar: 
reby much injured ; therefore they muſt not be pre. 
cribed for ſuch : For Hippocrates ſays, it is to no Pur. 
pole to do any thing contrary to Nature's inclinatic, 
which Idiohncraſie, is indeed lo great and ſo common, thi 
if we have not regard to it, the Lives of the Sick may 
be indangered, and not only by- Hyſterick Medicine, 
but by many other, whereof I will at preſent mer. 
tion but one, viz. that ſome Women, that have the 
Small pox cannot bear the uſe of Diacodium, for Gid- 
dineſs, Vomiting, and ſuch Symptoms belonging to Hy: 
ſterick Diſeaſes are occaſioned thereby; and yer Liqui 
Laudanum agrees very well with them, which I obſerre 
whilſt I was writing this, in a young Woman, a perſon 
of Quality, ro whom I had given the ſaid Syrup on the 
Sixth and ſeventh Night; the Symptoms above-mentio- 
ned invaded both Nights; nor did the Inflamms 
tion of the Puſtles duly proceed; bur after ſhe had uled 
Laudanum, ſhe was quite freed from rhe ſaid Symptoms, 
the ſwelling of the Face, and Puſtles daily increaſing, 
the Anxicty and Reſtleſsneſs of the Body and Mind 
(which uſed to be as it were a Fit of the Small- pox) ws 
wholly removed, as often as this Anodyne was given, the 
Patient being ſtrengthened and revived by it: But thi 
by the bye. 

And ſo Hyſterical Diſeaſes are moſt commonly cure! 
and moſt Obſtructions of Women, bur eſpecially a Ci. 
roſis, or Virgin's pale Colour, and alſo all Supprefiions! 
the Courſes. But if the Blood is ſo very weak, and il. 
Confuſion of the Spirits ſo great, that Steel ordered to be 
uſed according to the Method preſcribed is not ſuffici!' 


to cure the Diſeaſe, the Sick muſt drink ſome Minera! 
waters, impregnatgd with the Iron Mine, ſuch are 7 


brian 


1 


the Year 1675, 10 the Tear 1680, 322 


Vidge- waters, and ſome others lately found out; for the 
Chal/leate Virtue of theſe is better mingled with the 
Blood, by reaſon of the great quantity that is taken in, 
ard alſo becauſe they are moſt agrecable ro Nature, 
and they cure Diſeaſes more effectually than Iron, how 
much ſoever exalted by Art, as Boaſting Chymiſts talk. 

But this is more clpecially to be taken notice of in 
drinking of them, 2/3. if any Sickneſs happens that is 
to be referred Hyſterick Symptoms, in this caſe the 
patient muſt forbear drinking them a Day or two, till 
that Symptom that hinder'd their paſſage is taken off; 
for tho theſe Waters are leſs apt to {tir the Humours, and 
o to cauſe a Confuhon of the Spirits, than the gentleſt 
Purges of the Shops, yet they do fomewhar {tir them as 
they force Urine, and alſo often purge by Stool too; bur 
if the Waters themſelves hinder their own paſſage, by 
diſturbing the Humours and Spirits, let thoſe conſider 
how incongruouſly they act who order purging Medicines 
to be given once or twice a Week, while the Sick is 
drinking thele Waters, or which is yer more impertinent, 
to be mixed with the Waters, whereby theſe and other 
Mineral-waters paſs more difficultly. 

And here I muſt inform you, that tho' ſome think Iron 
is in theſe Waters in principiis ſolutss (which is plainly 
the ſame as if we ſhould ſuppoſe liquid Iron) yer I do 
not at all doubt, but that they are ſimple Waters Impreg- 
nated with the Mine, through which they paſs, which 
will appear to any one, if he pour {ome Gallons of Wa- 
ter on a ſufficient Quantity of ruſty Nails, for then he 
will perceive that this Water, when the Powder of Gauls, 
or the Leaves of Tea, or the like, are put into it, will 
plainly appear of the ſame Colour with the Waters of a 
Mineral- fountain, when ſuch things are caſt into them. 
Nor indeed have theſe artificial oi inarrificial Waters 
(which you pleale to call them) when they are taken, 
different effects, if they are uſed in che Summer-rime, and 
in a good Air. | 

Bur however it be, if the Diſeaſe becauſe of irs Obſti- 
nacy does not yield ro Chalybear-waters, the Sick muſt 
uſe ſome hot Sulphureous-waters, uch as our Bath, and 
when he has uſed them inwardly three Mornings follow- 
ing the nent Day let him go into che Bath, and the Day 

L -4 following 


3 


—— 


% . * d © + 
En 2 — — 
* „ — =.” 


— 


— 


— —— 
* 


> — 
TW bo 
81 
5 - 
22 * - 
829 * 


. 
0 — 'S, . Ws 2 — 
„ s- 2 8 
- —— ꝙ—G— O_— RO” 
— . — . 


324 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 
following let him drink them again, and ſo ler him do b. 
Turns for two whole Months; for in theſe and in oche.. 
of whar kind ſoever they are, this muſt be carefully obſe;y.. 
ed, that the Sick mult perſiſt in the Ule of them, not on 
till he receives lume benefit, but till he is quite well, tha: 
the Symptoms may not {con return, 

Venice Treacle alone if it be uſed often, and a lone 
while, is a great Remedy in this Diſeaſe, and not only ir 
this but in very many other Dileaſcs, thy proceed from 
want of Hear and Concoction, or Digeſtion ; ttis perhaps 
the moſt effectual that has been hitherto known, hoy 
contemptible toever it may ſeem to moſt People, because 
tis common, and has been a long while known, 

Spanith wine medicated with Gentian, Angelica, Worn. 
wood, Centaury, the yellow Rind of Oranges, and other 
Corroboratives infuſed in it, does much good, ſome Spoon- 
fuls of it being taken thrice a Day, if the Woman be nc: 
of a thin and cholerick Habit of Body; and indeed a large 
Draught of Spaniſh wine by it ſelf raken at Bed time, tor 
ſome Nights by my advice has done much good to {ome 
Hyſterick Women; for by it the Habit of the whole Bo. 
dy was render'd ſtronger, and they who before were Ca- 


cChectick, became freth colour d and Brisk. 


Moreover we find ſometimes that the jeſuits- powder 
wondertully comforts and invigorates the B.ood, arc 
Ipirits; a Scruple whereof raken Morning and Evening 
tor tome Weeks, has, as I have obſerved, reſtored (both 
o Hypochondriack Men and Hy ſterick Women that have 
been very fick a long while, and when the Oeconomy 
ot their Bodies has been much weakned ) a firm ard 
healthy Conſtitution; bur it ſucceeds beſt in that kind o- 
Hyſterick Diſeaſes wherein Women are affected wit 
Convulſions, ſo that they ſtruggle violently and beyond 
the Strength of Women, and at the ſame time beat thei: 
Breaſts; yet it muſt be confeſſed that this Medicine dots 
not ſo certainly and ſo often cure this Diſeaſe as Agues; 
but tho' ro mention this by the bye, the Jeſuir's powd:! 
does wonders in curing Agues, and tho' we ule it frech) 
our ſelves, and give it our Wives and Children, as ol:et 
as there is occaſion, yet there are ſome at this preſen! i 
much diſpleaſed with it, becauſe ir cures ſo certainly an 
ſuddenly, as they were heretofore, becauſe ir OY 

Den 


Z 


=. 
= 3. 
5 


the Tear 1675, to the Tear 1680. 325 


own amongſt us. To which Fate the beſt Men, and 
moſt excellent Remedies have been a/moit always expoled ; 
but by this we try as by a Touch tone our diſpoſitions, and 
om thence judge whether we are good or ill Men, wig. 


according to the degree of our joy or grief, as oft as the 


Welfare of Mankind is promoted by ſome common Benefit 


vor Bleſſing of God. 
But if any of the Remedics above-mentioned do not well 


| agree, Which often happens in cholerick and thin Conſtiru- 
E tons, then a Milk- diet may be uſed. For {come Women 


which wou'd ſeem ſtrange ar firſt) that have been troubled 


: :long while with Hyſterick Diſeaſes, and even ſuch as have 
E fruſtrated all the endeavours of Phyſicians, yet have reco- 
ver d by dieting themſelves for ſome time only with Milk, 


and eſpecially thoſe that labour with that Diſeaſe, I call 


an Hyſterick Cholick, which cannot be quiered by any 
thing but Narcoricks, to which repeated by Intervals the 


Women are much accuſtomed , the Pain returning as ſuon 


zs the Virtue of the Anodyne fades, But this is chiefly ro 
be wonder d at in this Method of Cure, viz. Thar Milk 
E which yields on'y a cold and crude Nouriſnment, {hou d 
E notwithſtanding by uſe ſtrengthen and invigorate the Spi- 
E tits, and yer this will not ſeem diſagreeable to reaſon, if 
you conſider that Milk yielding only a fimple Nouriſh. 
ment, does not buſie Nature much in concocting it; for 
E whar Meats and Liquors more compounded do, and that 
an equal Temper of the Blood and Spirits neceſſarily fol- 
lous that perfect Concoction, for this muſt be alſo conũ- 
der d, that a bare Weaknels of the Spirits conſidered by it 
elf, is not the Cauſe of thoſe Confuſions they are under, 
but the Weakneſs of them compared with the State of the 
E Blood. For it may be an Infant has Spirits ſtrong and 
E firm enough with reſpect ro irs Blood, bur yer nor propor- 
tionable to the Blood of a grown Perſon. Now when by 
the continual uſe of a Milk-dier (tho' it is crude and weak) 
the Blood is rendred more ſoft and tender, if the Spirits 
that are made by ir, are only equal to ir, all is well, Yer 
all are not able ro undergo thoſe Inconveniences which 
moſt commonly accompany it the firſt Days, namely be- 
cauſe it curdles in the Stomach, and is nor ſufficient to 
maintain the ordinary Strength of the Body; bur if they 
could, they might receive benefit by it. 


3 Bus 


326 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 

But nothing of all I have hitherto known, does ſo uch 
comfort and ſtrengthen the Blood and opiris, as ridin 
much on Horſe- back every Day for a long while ; for firce 
by this kind of Exerciſe the lower Beily is moſt ſtroręh 
moved, in which the Veſſels for Excretion (as many 0 
are appointed by Nature to drain the Impurities of th: 
Blood) are ſituated: What diſorder of the Functions or 5. 
ther natural Imporence of the Organs, can be imagineq 
ſo great as not to be helpt by the frequent jolting of the 
Horſe, and then too in the open Air? Whole innare Heat 
is ſo extinguiſhed, that it cannot be ſtirred up by this Mo. 
tion and Ferment afreſh? Or hat preternatural Subſtarce 
or depraved juices can there be in any creek of theſe Part, 
which cannot by this Exerciſe of the Body, be either re. 
duced to ſuch a Conſtitution as is agrecable to Nature, or 
ſcattered every way and ejected? Moreover the Blocd be. 
ing perpetually exagitated by this Motion, and throughly 
mixed, as it were renewed, and grows vigorcus again, 
And indeed this Method, tho' it is inconvenient for We. 
men that ate accuſtomed to a flothful and delicate way cf 
living, for they may be injured by Motion, eſpecially in the 
beginning; yet it is very proper for Men, and ſooneſt re- 
ſtores their Health. One of our Reverend Biſhops, famous 
for Prudence and Learning, having ſtudied too hard 
long while, fell at length into an Hypochondriacal Diſcale, 
which afflicting him a long time, vitiated all the Fermer 
of the Body, and wholly ſubverted the Concoctions. H: 
had paſſed through long ſteel Courſes more than once, ard 
had tried almoſt all ſorts of Mineral- waters, with often te. 
peated Purges, and Antiſcorbuticks of all kinds, and a great 
many teſtaceous Powders, which are reckoned proper 10 
{weeten the Blood: and ſo being in a manner worn our, 
partly by the Diſeaſe, and partly by Phyſick uſed conti 
nually for ſo many Years, he was at length ſeized with 
a calliquative Looſeneſs, which is wont to be the Fore- 
runner of Death, in Conſumptions and other Chronical 
Dileales, when the Digeſtions are wholly deſtroyed. 5: 
length he conſulted me: I preſently conſidered that 
there was ro more room for Medicine, he having taken 
lo many already withourany benefit; for which reaſon 
1 adviſed him to ride a Horſe- back, and that firſt he 


mould rake ſuch a ſmall Journey as was agreeable to 1 
weak 


the Year 1673, to the Year 1680. 327 


| weak Condition; had he nor been a judicious Man, and 
one that conſidered things well, he would not have been 


perſwaded ſo much as to try ſuch a kind of Exerciſe. I 


entreated him to perliit in it daily, till in his own Opini- 
on he was well, going daily further and further, till at 


length he went ſo many Miles, as prudent and mode- 


rate Travellers, that go a large Journey upon bulinels, 


uſe to do, without any regard to Meat or Drink, or the 


Weather; but that he ſhou'd take every thing as it hap- 


pens, like a Traveller. To be ſhorr, he continued this 


| Method, encreaſing his Journey by degrees, till at length 


he rode twenty or thirty Miles daily: and when he found 
he was much berter in a few Days, being incouraged by 
ſuch a wonderfull Succels, he followed this Courſe for a 
pretty many Months, in which, as he told me, he rode 
many thouſand Miles, ſo that at length he not only reco- 


ver d, but alſo gained a ſtrong and brisk habit of Body. 


Nor is this kind of Exercile more beneficial to Hypo- 


chbondriacal People, than to thoſe that are in a Conſum- 


ption; whereof ſome of my Relations have been cured by 


tiding long Journeys by my advice; for I knew I cou'd 
not cure them better by Medicinesof what value loever, 
or by any other Method. 


Nor is this Remedy proper only in ſmall Indiſpoſitions 


accompanied with a frequent Cough and Leanneſs, but 
alſo in Conſumptions that are almoſt deplorable ; when 
the Looſneſs above-mentioned accompanies the Night 
' Sweats, which is wont to be the Fore-runners of Death 
in thoſe that die of a Conſumption. To be ſhort, how 
deadly ſoever a Conſumption is, and is ſaid to be, two 


thirds dying of it, which are ſpoiled by Chronical Diſ- 


| caſes: Yer J ſincerely aſſert, That Mercury in the French- 


Pox, and the Jeſuir's-bark in Agues, are not more effe- 
cual than the Exerciſe above-mentioned in curing a Con- 
ſumprion, if the Sick be caretul rhar his Sheets be well 
aired, and that his Journeys are long enough. Bur this 
muſt be noted, Thar thoſe thar are paſt rhe Flower of their 
Age, muſt uſe this Exerciſe much longer than thoſe that 
have not yet arrived to it; and this I have Learned by long 
Experience, which ſcarce ever failed me. And tho riding 
on Horſe. back is chiefly beneficial ro People that have a 


Conſumption, yet riding Journeys in a Coach, is ſome- 


umes very beneficial. 
* 4 : Bu: 


328 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 

Bur to return to the buſineſs in hand, this is the geg. 
ral way of Cure in this Diſcale, which :s applied to th. 
original Cauſe, viz. the weak Conſtitution of the Blogs. 
and is to be uſed only when rhe Fir is off; therefore Ki 
o ten as the Fit invades, joyned with any one of the 4. 
bo vementioned Symptoms, it the Diſeaſe be ſuch, or { 
great an one, that it will not bear a Truce, till it may 
be cured by Medicines that ſtrengthen the Blood ard 
Spirirs, we mult preſently ule Hyſterick Medicines, which 
by their ſtrong and noilom Smell, recall the exorbitant 
and del erting Spirits to their proper Stations, whether they 
are taken inwardly, or {melt to, or applied ourward|;: 
Such are Aa Fetida, Galbanum, Caſtor, Spirit of Sal Ar. 
moniack : And laſtly, whatever has a very offenſive and un. 
grateful Smell. 

And indeed, whatever Stinks is proper for this inten- 
tion, whether it is naturally ill ſcented, or made ſo by 
Art; and, unleis I am deceived, Spirits of Harts-horn, ot 
humane Blood, of Urine, and of Bones, and the like, take 
their chief Virtues from the force of the Fire, in their 
preparation contracting, an ill ſcenred Empyreuma, which 
is intimately joyned with their Eſſence, which is alſo per- 
ceived in Fumes ariſing from Feathers, and ſuch kind of 
parts of Animals, when they are burnr, for this is com. 
mon to the Subſtance of all Animals, viz. to emit a ſtinł- 
ing Fume, white they are burning; and if it is forced by 
Fire, and received in Glaſſes, when it is condenled, . 
turns to thoſe Liquors, called Volarile Spirits, which al- 
*:me Faculties that were not in the beginning in then 
Subjects, and are indecd only Creatures of Fire, and thei 
Vertues are truly all the ſame, from whatever Subitanc 
(ſo it be Animal) they are extracted. 

In the next place it is to be obſerved. that if ſome n. 
tolerable Pain accompanies the Paroxyſm, in what part 
ſoe ver it is, or violent Vomiting, or a Looſeneſs; then be. 
ſides the Heſtericks above-mentioned, Laudanum mult b. 
uſed, which only is able ro quell theſe Symptoms. 

Bur in quieting theſe Pains, which are cauſed by Vo- 
mitting, we muſt take great care chat they are nat tt. 
itr ined, either by Laudanum, or any other Anoqhne, be- 
{ore due Evacuations have been made, unleſs they almolt 


exceed all humane Patience. Firſt, becauſe lometimes 
tele 


. 


the Tear 1675, to the Tear 1680, 329 


here is ſo great a quantity of Blood and Humours heapt 
© up, [eſpecially in Sanguine Women and Men of a proper 
Habit) that it is able to reſiſt the Operation of the moſt 
effectual Anodh ne, though it be often repeated; and there- 
> Gre in ſuch, Blood muſt be neceſſarily drawn from the 
ves of the Arm, and a Purge muſt be given before the 
| ſe of Laudanum. For When theſe things are orderly 


performed, thar which before would do no good given 


in a large Dole, will now do the bulineſs in a moderate 


Dole. And then, becauſe I have found by long Experi- 


ence, that when the Sick has been uſed by little and lit- 
le to Laudanum, and has nor been duly evacuated be- 

fore, ſhe was forced by reaſon of the return of the Pain, 
© preſently after the Virrue of the Medicine vaniſhed, to 
EF take an Anodyne again; and ſo daily for ſome Years, the 


Doſe being ſometimes by degrees increaſed, ſo thar at 
laſt they can by no means be without Laudanum, tho 


thereby all the Digeſtions are ſpoiled, and the natural 


Functions weakned, though I do nor think that the Uſe 
of Laudanum does immediately hurt the Brain or Nerves, 


or che Animal Faculties. Therefore I judge, and ſpeak 
E what I have found, That Evacuations ought to precede 
E Paregoricks, viz. in Viragoes, and in Women that abound 
* with Blood, a Vein muſt be opened, and the Body pur- 


ged, eſpecially if they have been lately ſeized with the 
Fir. But if the weak Women and thoſe of a quite con- 


rary Conſtitution, labour with ſuch a Fit and Pain, and 
E have been not long ago afflicted with it, it will be ſufficient 
io cleanſe their Stomachs with a Gallon of Poſſet-drink, 
more or leſs, drunk and vomited up again; and then to 

give a large Doſe of Venice-Treacle, or of Orvietan, and 


a few ſpoonfuls of ſome ſpirituous Liquor that is plealing 


to the Taſte, with a few Drops of liquid Laudanum, to be 
taken immediately after. 


But if the Sick has vomited à great while before the 


| Phyſician was called, and there is danger, leſt by a further 
provocation by Emeticks, the Spirits ſhould be inraged, 


and the Sick too much weakened ; in this caſe you muſt 
give Laudanum without delay, and ſuch a Doſe as is nor 


> cnly equal to the Violence and Duration of the Symptom, 
but ſuch an one as is able to conquer it. 


Bur 


330 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 

Bur here two things arc to be chiefly obſerved ; Fit 
That, when you have once begun to uſe Laudany, 
after due and neceſſary Evacuations, it muſt be taken jr 
that Doſe, and often repeated, till the Symptom is quit 
vanquiſhed ; only ſuch a ſpace muſt be betwixt each Ds: 
that we may know what the former has done, before wegus 


another. But I have ſpoken largely of this in anothe the! 
place. And then when we treat the Diſeaſe with Lauda, WF bur 
we muſt do nothing elſe, and nothing muſt be evacuve;. i * 
forthe mildeſt Glyſter of Milk and Sugar, is ſufficier;:, Ke 
ruin whatever has been repaired by the Anodyne, and 1; ne 
occaſion the return of the Vomiting and Pain. Ke 
Bur though the foreſaid Pains, as has been ſaid, arc ay: i Di 
ro vanquiſh the force of the Anodyne, yet violent vomit. Wi te 
ing indicates the largeſt Doſe of it, and that it ſhould Fes 
be frequently repeated; for by the inverred Periitalrick wi 
Motion of the Stomach, (by which, that which is con. 0 
rained in it ought to be carried downwards) the du. fro 
dyne is ejected by the O2/>phagns, before it can produce ret 
any effect, unleſs after very time the Sick Vomits, the Ga 
Anodyne be given afreſh, and eſpecially in a ſolid Form; A 
or if it be given in a Liquor, the Vehicle muſt be be 
{mall, as that it may bur juſt wer the Stomach, ſocha i ti 
by reaſon of the ſmall quantity of the Matter, it camo 2 
be caſt up; for inſtance, ſome drops in a ſpoonful o 3 
ſtrong Cinnamon-watet, or the like; and the Sick mul 41 
be told to keep her ſelf quiet, preſently after the raking the . 
Laudanum; and that ſhe keep her Head as much as 5 " 
poſſible immoveable, for the ſmalleſt Motion ot the FE 
Head, ftirs up Vomiting more than any thing elle, and M 
then the Medicine that was juſt taken is vomited vp. We 
Moreover, when the Vomiting ceaſes, and is as it wer pr 
overcome, it is expedient to give a Paregorick Morning We 4 
and Evening for a few days, to prevent a relapſe ; whit cr. 
alſo oughr to be obſerved after a Diarrhea, or an H-. fe 
ſterick Pain taken off by an Anodyne. And fo at lere m 
by this Method we may readily cure the 8 ymptonaatic, Wi £3 
Pain and Vomiting ; whereby, becaule they are ve c. 
often like other Diſeaſes, Phyſicians are eaſier impole! I ve 
upon, than by any other Symptoms whatever, that fe. . 
quire their help; concerning which I will add a fes 


things: For inſtance, in that kind of Hyſterick Dilealt 


119 


a 


4 


the Year 1675, to the Year 1680. 331 


: o mentioned, which reſembles a Nephritick Pain; is 
not che great Patity and Similitude of both Diſeaſes evi- 
dent to any one, both becaule the Pain in both is in the 

ame part, and alſo for that the Woman Vomits in both 
Diſeaſes, and yet they are produced from Cauſes differ- 

ing from one another; and the method for the cure of 
them, ſo unlike, that that which helps in the one does 
burt in the other, and ſo on the contrary ? For whether 
i Stone or Gravel fretting upon the ſubſtance of the 
E Reins, produces Pain, and by conſent of parts, Vomit- 


ine, nothing is ſo effectual, as very large and frequerf 


Revulſion of the Antecedent cauſe by Blood- letting, and 
Dilatation and Laxation of the paſſages, by which the 
Stone is to be excluded, by Emollient Glyſters often re- 
peated, and inward Medicines of the ſame kind, to 
E which are to be added Lithoatriprick and Diuretick Me- 
dicines. Now if the ſaid Symptoms do no way ariſe 
from the Stone, but from the Animal Spirits, ruſhing im- 
petuouſly in a great quantity upon the Kidneys (in which 


Caſe, Anodynes are only indicated; nor are the gentleſt 


E Glyſters injected after the firſt Evacuatiens without dan- 
ger) what great hazard the unhappy Woman is put 
into, whoſe Life is rrifled with, I need nor ſay. The 


ſame may be affirmed of that Hyſterick Diſeaſe, which 


© reſembles the Bilious Cholick, or the Liacł Paſſion, when 
it is taken for granted, that the Diſeaſe (tho of a quite 


different, yea contrary Nature) is the Bilious Cholick, 


and proceeds from a ſharp Humour caſt upos the Bowels, 

by the Mouths of the Meſenterick Arteries;) into which 
Error the vehement Pain, and the Green Colour of the 
Matter expelled by Vomit and Stool, eaſily ſeduces the 
unwary and unthinking Phyſician) what method is fo 
proper, as that whereby we endeavour to attemperate the 
© iharpnels of the Humeurs by the help of cooling and in- 
craſſating Medicines 2 And what is fitter than Cathartichs 
frequently given, beſides Glyſters daily injected to exter- 
minate the Humours from the Guts, eſpecially Mercu- 
£1115 Dulcis mixed with Diagrydiate Medicines, to eradi- 
© cate perfectly the Morbifick matter? Bur ir is plain to e- 
very one, how ill the Patient would be treated, and in 
what hazard he would be, whilſt we inſiſt upon this 
method, if the Diſeaſe which is ſuppoſed to be a Bzlious 


Cholick 


332 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 


Cholick, ſhould really prove an Hyſterick or Hypoch,, 
driack Symptom , when Experience openly proclain, 
that after the firſt general Evacuations (which are 30 
pointed to remove the rubbiſh of the putrefying Nn. 
mours, which the Araxy has occaſioned , whereby the 
Virtue of the Anodyne may be obſtructed ) nothing te. 
mains to be done, beſides the mitigating of the tumuhu. 
ous Spirits, till the Symptoms go oft, and afterwaich 
it will be proper to give Steel Medicines, or any other 
Remedy, if there be any that by kindling, and 1nvigy. 
rating the Blood, may root out the Diſeaſe. It is 50. 
my buſineſs to reckon thoſe great Miſeries, which I hays 
known befall Women, when this Hyſterick Cholick hat 
been ſuppoſed to proceed from Choler, nevertheleſs [ af. 
firm that Evacuarions often repeated, which are indeed 
indicated in the Bilious Cholick, have been ſo far fron 
leſſening the Pain and Vomiting, that they have ftirre, 
them up more, by promoting the diſturbance of the Si. 
rits. Which is the true cauſe of theſe Symptoms: And x: 
length the Diſeaſe being prolonged for ſome Month; 
ends in Convulſions, there being a ſudden Tranſlation 
to the Brain, whereby the Sick is ſoon deſtroyed, and 
eſpecially when after other Evacuations repeated a long 
time, by reaſon of the Green colour of thoſe things which 
are vomited up, a Vomit is given. To be ſhort, if I hare 
learnt any thing by Obſervation, I judge we muſt chief 
take care, that thoſe Symptoms familiar ro Hyſterick Wo. 
men, be not ſuppoſed by a miſtake in the Dzagnoſtich, to 
proceed from other Diſeaſes, which they often reſemble. 

And here I muſt acquaint vou, that beſides the Errors 
above-mentioned, whereby Women ſubject to Hyſterick 
Diteaſes, are put in danger of their Lives; very many 
moreover, ſuffer by theſe Diſeaſes, by an Error no lels fi. 
tal, at a time wherein, tho' this Diſeaſe is not of its own 
Nature deadly, yer by reaſon of rhe Diſaſters that come 
upon it and follow it, it is fatal ro many; For inſtance, 
a Woman of a tender and weak habit of Body, bring 
turth a Child, and all ſueceeds well, and according to 
Nature. The Midwife, whether rude and unskilful, or 
Vain-glorious, ro new how well ſhe has performed let 
bnfinels, adviſes that her Woman ſhou'd riſe a few da)s 


after ſhe has been Delivered, and that ſhe ſhould keep uf 
4 


A 
4 | 


the Year 1675, to the Tear 1680. 333 


chile; the Woman does ſo, and is preſently ſeized up- 
on the firſt Motion of her Body, with an Hyſterick in- 
di{pefirion, and according as the Diſeaſe increaſes, the 
| 1:chia are firſt leſſened, then quite ſtopped, whole un- 
amely ſuppreſſion a long Train of Symptoms follow; 
E which ſoon deſtroys the Sick, unleſs great Diligence and 
skilfulneſs intercede. And ſometimes they are ſeized 
ich a Phrenſie on this account, which growing daily 


worſe and worſe, cauſes Convulſions firſt, and then Death. 


gut if they eſcape they are maddiſh, and ſometimes con- 
eiue ſo their whole Life-time. Sometimes after the 
uppteſſion of the Lochia, they fall into a Fever, which 
either turns to that which is then Epidemical, or de- 
E rends only on that beginning. Moreover, the ſame Hy- 
ſterick Symptoms which were firſt occaſioned by the 
ſuppreſſion of the Lochia, rage more now, as it after- 
E wards they proceeded from it. I was of Opinion long 
ago, that of thoſe Women that die in Child bed, ſcarce 
one in ten, to ſpeak within bounds, dies, becauſe ſhe has 
not Strength neceſſary for Delivery, or from the Pains 
chat accompany difficult Labour, bur chiefly, by reaſon 
they riſe roo ſoon, Hyſterical fits being produced by 
chat Motion, whereby when the Lochia are ſtopt, a nu- 
merous Series of dreadful Symptoms follow. Where- 
fore they that follow my Advice, keep in Bed ar leaſt 
E till che renth day, if they are of a weakly Conſtitution, 
elpecially if they have been long fince troubled with Va- 
pours. For beſide that the Reſt they have in Bed, frees 
them from theſe Dangers, we have ſo often made men- 
ion of; the warmth of the Bed not interrupted likev iſe 
© cctreſhes the Spirits, weakened and exhauſted by the Pains 
un Labour, and by the Evacuations uſual in this Caſe, and 
© recruits Nature, and digeſts and removes all thoſe Crudi- 
© tics, which are heapt up during the time of Child-bearing. 


But if by reaſon of this Error committed, any one 
of the ſaid Symproms ſupervenes, the curative Indica- 


tions are to be directed fo, that the Spirits diſquieted 


by this Motion ſhould be appeaſcd, and that the Lochia 


mould flow again, for as much as the {ſtoppage of them 
© 5 the next and immediate Cauſe of theſe Symptoms - 
hut we muſt nor obſtinately ir ſiſt vpon this Method, but 
E iiVing. given a while thoſe Remedies, that are wont to ba 


ule l 


334 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 

uſed ſucceſsfully in this Caſe ; if they do not anſwer 30 
cording to our Deſires, we mult leave them off; fe- - 
ſtrong things muſt not be uſed, ſo neither ought we tg per 
ſe vere in the uſe of gentler, by reaſon Women in Child-heg 
ſo affected are much weakned, and their firength almoſ 
worn out. For inſtance, whenit firſt appears that rhe Lg 
are ſtopt, it is proper to put the Women prelently to Re! 
and then to apply an Hyſterick Plaiſter to the Navil, 3 
ro order this following Electuary to be taken forthwih 


Take of the Conſerve of Roman Wormwood, and of Rut 
each one Ounce, of the Treches of Myrrh two Drama ; 
Caſtor, Engliſh Saffron, of Volatile Salt of Sal Atmo. 
niack, and of Aſſa Eœtida, each half a Dram, malte w 
Electuar with a ſuff.cient quantity of the Syrup if the fi 
opening Roots; let her take the quantity of a large Nye. 
meg every third hour, drinking upon it four or five ſpun, 


fuls of the following Fulep. 


Take Mue- water, compound Briom - water, each three Oun. 
ces ; ef Sugar-candy a ſufficient quantity, mingle then, 
make a Fulep, 


And if theſe Remedies are given as ſoon as the Sup- 
pretiion begins, the Diſeaſe is moſt commonly conquered; 
bur if having continued the uſe of the ſaid Medicines, 
till che whole quantity is taken, the Lochia are ſtill ſtop! 
in this Caſe we muſt try Laudanum, at leaſt for once, ibo 
of its own Nature it is Aſtringent, yer by quieting the 
diſturbance of the Spirits, whereby the uſual Evacuartior 
of the Lochia is interrupred, it does ſometimes much good, 
and when Emenagogues do no good, it may bring back the 
Flux of the Lochia ; but Anodynes are moſt convenient!) 
given with Hyſtericks and Emenagegues : For iritance, 
Fourteen drops of Liquid Laudanum, in compound Brio. 
water, or one Grain and an half of Solid Laudanum mad? 
into two Pills, with half a Scruple of Aſa Fetida. Bu 
we muſt be ſure to take notice, that if we do not hit ti: 
Mark at once, if the Lochia do not follow, we mult b. 
no means repeat the Opium, as is uſual in other Cale 
and ought to be: For if here the Narcotich, is repeated 


it will ſo powerfully ſtop the Lochia, that afterward 
they 


bayn, frat GO ee eee A: a eons oa 


— — I 
KK 4 ©. 


„„ 
com wy ͤ — . om @q% 


8 ? 


* N 4 
ts, * 
* $3 


the Tear 1675, to the Tear 1680. 335 


bey can by no means be provoked ; for indeed if this 
go not ſucceed (ſome time being paſſed that we may 
know the effects of it) we mult return to the uſe of Eme- 
| nagogues, mixed with Hyſtericks, and then inject a Glyſtet 
| of Milk and Sugar; and what has been ſaid before of O- 
bim, holds good here likewiſe of Glyſters ; for unleſs the 
| {| injected bring down the Lochia, nothing is to be ex- 
| pected from more, one being lufficient by turning the Hu- 
| mour gently, to cauſe the Lochia to flow, but more may 
divert them another way. Theſe things being done (which 
| are to be touched on lightly) it is moſt ſafe, and the Duty 
| of a prudent Phyſician, ro wait and ſee whar time will do, 
for every day the buſineſs of the Cure is more removed 
from danger, and if the Patient live beyond the Twentieth 
day, ſhe is in a manner beyond danger. For when the 
Woman has been recruited a little, and gained ſome 
ſtrength, in a long Diſeaſe whatſoever it is, ſhe will be 
able ro bear that Remedy, which is moſt proper for the 
Cure of that Diſeaſe, which was cauſed by a Suppreſſion 
of the Lochia; whereas Medicines crammed in obſtinately, 
the firſt doing no good, may augment the Diſeaſe, and al- 
d the diſturbance of the Spirits from whence the Diſeale 
proceeds, which mult be carefully obſerved. 

EF Lately a vertuous Matron of good Quality ſent for 
me; ſhe upon the above-mentioned occaſion, preſently 
after ſhe was brought to Bed, was ſeized with Hyſte- 
nick Fits, and the Lechia ſuppreſſed. I endeavoured by 
che Medicines above-mentioned to provoke them, but to 
no purpoſe, the violence of the Hyſterick Diſeaſes being 
too ſtrong for the Medicines; and ar length when TI 
@ perceived ſhe would recover if I did nothing, I commit- 
ted all ro Time, by much the beſt and moſt ſucceſsful 


niently AE Phyſician; and according to my Opinion things went 
tance, well with her ro the Fourteenth day: Viſiting her every 
Briom-· day, I found ſhe was no day worle than ſhe was the day 
made before. After this the Woman that waited on her, whom 
. Bu had kept hitherto from doing miſchief by her over-offi- 
hit che ciouſnels, perſwaded the Husband to have a Vein opened 
auſt b inſtantly in his Wives foot, which being performed, the 
Cale, Hyſterick Firs ſo far prevailed, that within a few hours 
peared, (8 {ue was ſeized with Convulſions, and ſoon after by Death, 
ward hat ends all our Miſeries. | 


the! 


And 


336 Of Epidemi:k Diſeaſes from 


And if it be Jawful to ſpeak what I think, L haye beg. 
a long time of the Opinion, that I have well perfor. 
the Duty of an honeſt Man, and a good Phyſician bor 
only in Diſeaſes of Women in Child- bed, bur alſo in 2 
other acute Diſeaſes, when I cannot certainly premiſe 
that a Cure will follow this or that Method I uſe) ag gf. 
ten as J do nothing, when viſiting the Patient, I gy 
him no worſe this Day than the Day before, and when! 
guels he will be no worſe ro morrow than he is to day, 
whereas if I proceed in curing the Patient after a Method, 
whereof I do not yet know the Efficacy, he will be in ha. 
zard both upon the account of the Experiment I ama. 
bout to make upon him, and alſo by the Diſeaſe, nor wil 
he ſo eaſily get out of two Dangers as one. For tho at pr. 
ſent there is no evident Sign of his beginning to be well, ye: 
it is very certain, that according to the Narute of acute 
Diſeaſes, no one can always labour with them. And be- 
tides, every day will more and more ſecure the Sick, or at. 
ford an occaſion to the Phyſician, whereby he may more 
opportunely and certainly conquer the Diſeaſe, than he 
could before. Which as it may be truly aſſerted of moſt Di. 
eales, ſo eſpecially of rhe Diſeaſes of Women in Child-Bed, 
wherein the leaſt Error may prove fatal, and in which ve 
are ſo little able to govern that natural Evacuation, the ſto. 
ping whereof cauſes the Diſeale we have been treating of, 

But for as much as Hyſterical Diſeaſes do not alway 
owe their Original to the prime cauſe, namely, the na- 
tive weakneſs of the Spirits, bur ſometimes to an Adver- 
titious Debility; therefore J intend before I make an end, 
to diſcourſe of this ſort of Cauſe, which moſt commoniy 
is the caule of Vapours, as they are called; and it is an im. 
moderate Flux of the Courſes either in Child- bed, or at o- 
ther times: As to the firſt kind that comes and is trouble- 
{ome the firſt days after hard labour accompanied with 
a numerous Train of Hyſterical Symptoms; and as it oni 
comes, and is troubleſome the firſt days, fo it ſoon goes a- 
way, for a Diet that is ſomewhar thickening eaſily drives 
it away, for which alſo the following drink may be uſcd. 


Take of Plantain-water, and Red. wine, each one Pint, loi 
them together till a third part is conſumed, then ſweet! 
it with a ſufficient quantity of white Sugar, give half 4 
Pint of it twice or thrice a day, 


the Near 1675, 10 the Tear 1680. 3237 

ja the mean while ſome very gentle Hyſterick Julep may 

be taken now and then, and the following Nodulus may be 
held to the Noe. 


Take of Galbanum, and Aſſa Fœtida, each two Drams; 
of Caſtor one Dram and an half, of Volatile Salt of 
Amber half a Dram, mingle them and make a Nodu- 
lus. Or, 


Take two Drams of Spirit of Sal Armoniack, to which let 
ber ſmell often, 


But as to the Flux when Women are not in Child-bed; 
tho that is wont to happen at any time, yet it comes moſt 
commonly a little before the time the Courſes are about 
to leave them, 2 the Age of Forty five, if they 
flow early, but about Fifty if they come ſome what la- 
ter; from theſe, as is ſaid, a little before they quite go 
away (like a Candle burnt to the Socket, which gives 
the greateſt light, juſt as it is about to go out) they flow 
impetuouſl y, and ſubject the poor Women almoſt conti- 
nually to Hyſterick Fits, by reaſon of the great quantity 
of Blood, which is continually evacuated; now tho in 
this Caſe Hyſtericks both in ward and outward muſt be uſed, 
by the bye forbearing thoſe that are ftrong, left they 
ſnou d promote the Flux; yet the main Intention muſt be 
to ſtop the Courſes which may be ſoon done in the follow. 
ing manner. | 

Let eight Ounces of Blood be taken from the Arm; 
the next Morning give the common purging Potion, which 
muſt be repeated every third day for twice, and every 
Night at Bed-time through the whole Courſe ; let her 
take an Anodyne made with one Ounce of Diacodium. 


Take of Conſerve of dried Roſes two Ounces, of Troches of 
Loemnian Earthone Dram and an half, of Pomegranate- 
prel, and Red-coral prepar'd, each two Scruples, of Blood- 
one, Dragons-blood, and Bole-Armenick, each one 
Seruple ; mae an Eledtuary with a ſufficient quantity of . 
Jumple Syrup of Coral g let her take the quantity of a large 
Nutmeg in the Morning, and at Five in the Afternoon, 
drinking upon it ſix * of the following Fulep. be 
4 | . Te 


— 


F K 
1 
* 
q 
” 1} 
. 
of 
: 


335 Of Epidemie, Diſeaſes from 


And if it be lawful to ſpeak what | think, I have bee. 
a long time of the Opinion, tha: I have well perfor; 
the Duty of an honeſt Man, and a good Phyſician 50: 
only in Diſeaſes of Women in Child-bed, bur alſo in 0 
other acute Diſeaſes, when I cannot certainly premiſe 
that a Cure will follow this or that Method I uſe) as gf. 
ten as J do nothing, when viſiting the Patient, I firg 
him no worſe this Day than the Day before, and when! 
guels he will be no worſe to morrow than he is to day, 
whereas if I proceed in curing the Patient after a Method, 
whereof I do not yet know the Efficacy, he will be in ha. 
zard both upon the account of the Experiment I am. 
bout to make upon him, and alſo by the Diſeaſe, nor wi! 
he ſo eaſily get out of two Dangers as one. For tho at pr. 
ſent there is no evident Sign of his beginning to be well, ye 
it is very certain, that according to the Natute of acute 
Diſeaſes, no one can always labour wich them. And be. 
tides, every day will more and more ſecure the Sick, or af. 
ford an occaſion to the Phyſician, whereby he may more 
opportunely and certainly conquer the Diſeaſe, than he 
could before. Which as it may be truly aſſerted of moſt Di. 
eaſes, fo eſpecially of the Diſeaſes of Women in Child-Bed, 
whercin the leaſt Error may prove fatal, and in which ue 
arc ſo little able ro govern that natural Evacuation, the tor 
ping whereof caules the Diſeaſe we have been treating of. 

But for as much as Hyſterical Diſeaſes do not always 


owe their Original to the prime cauſe, namely, the ra- 


tive weakneſs of the Spirits, bur ſometimes to an Adver- 
titious Debiliry ; therefore I intend before I make an end. 
to diſcourſe of this ſort of Cauſe, which moſt commoniy 
is the caule of Vapours, as they are called; and it is an im. 
moderate Flux of the Courſes either in Child-bed, or ato- 
ther times: As to the firſt kind that comes and is trouble- 
{ome the firſt days after hard labour accompanied wit 
a numerous Train of Hyſterical Symptoms; and as it on 
comes, and is troubleſome the firſt days, ſo it ſoon goes 
way, for a Diet that is ſomewhar thickening eaſily drives 
it away, for which alſo the following drink may be ulc. 


Take of Plantain-water, and Red. wine, each one Pint, boy! 
them together till a third part is conſumed, then ſweete! 
it with a ſufficient quantity of white Sugar, give hal 4 
Pint cf it twice or thrice a day, 


| | 


will b\ 


7 
=y 
1 
$ 
1 


1 
. 
* 
"2 


uble- * 
with 
q only 1 
a- x 
irres 
= R 
ule - 
mM 
„ Hl 2 
veete, 
5 


to leave them, vi 
flow early, but a 
ter; from theſe, as is ſaid, a little before they quite go 
away (like a Candle burnt to the Socket, which gives 
© the greateſt light, juſt as it is about to go out) they flow 
impetuouſl y, and ſubject the poor Women almoſt conti- 
nually to Hyſterick Fits, by reaſon of the great quantity 
of Blood, which is continually evacuated; now tho in 
this Caſe Hyſterichs both in ward and outward muſt be uſed, 
by the bye forbearing thoſe that are ſtrong, leſt they 
ſnhou d promote the Flux; yet the main Intention muſt be 
to ſtop the Courſes which may be ſoon done in the follow. 
ing manner. 


the Tear 1675, to the Year 1680. 337 
In the mean while ſome very gentle Hyſterick Julep may 


be taken now and then, and the following Nodulus may be 
| held to the Noſe. 


Take of Galbanum, and Aſſa Fœtida, each two Drams, 
of Caſtor one Dram and an haf, of Volatile Salt of 
Amber half a Dram, mingle them and make a Nodu- 
lus. Or, 


Take two Drams of Spirit of Sal Armoniack, to which let 
her ſmell of ten, 


But as to the Flux when Women are not in Child- bed, 


* tho' that is wont to happen at any time, yet it comes moſt 
commonly a little before the time the Courſes are about 


E the Age of Forty five, if they 
ut Fifty if they come ſomewhar las 


Let eight Ounces of Blood be taken from the Arm, 


the next Morning give the common purging Potion, which 


muſt be repeated every third day for twice, and every 
Night at Bed-time through the whole Courſe ; let her 
take an Anodyne made with one Ounce of Diacodium. 


Take of Conſerve of dried Roſes two Ounces, of Troches of 
Lemnian Earth one Dram and an half, Pomegranate- 
peel, and Red - coral prepar d, each two Scruples, of Blood- 
ſtone, Dragons- blood, and Bole-Armenick, each one 
Scruple ; make an Electuary with a ſufficient quantity of. 
Jimple Syrup of Coral; let her take the quantity ef a large 
Nutmeg in the Morning, and at Five in the Afternoon, 
arinking upon it ſix Spoonfuls of the following Fulep. ; 

2 | Take 


338 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 
Take of the Waters of Oak-buds, and Plantain, eacl, thres 
Ounces of Cinnamon water hordeated, and of Syrup of 
dryed Reſes, each one Ounce, of Spirit of Vitriol a . 

cient quantity to make it pleaſantly Acid, 


Take of the Leaves of Plantain and Nettles, each 3 ſaſtei. 
ent quantity; beat them together in a Marble Mfg, 
and preſs out the Fuice, then Clariſie it: Let ber tale 
ſix ſpoonfuls cold three or four times a day, after the firſt 
Purge apply the following Plaſter to the Region of 1. 
Loins. | 


Take of Diapalma, and of the Plaſter ad Herniam, each 
equal parts, mingle them, and ſpread them on Leather, 


A cooling and thickening Diet muſt be order'd, only i 
will be convenient to allow the Sick a ſmall draught of 
Claret- wine, once or twice a day, which tho' tis ſome. 
what improper, by reaſon tis apt to raiſe the Ebullition, 
yet it may be allowed to repair the ſtrength; and as indeed 
this is very beneficial to Women thus affected, ſo it is alſo 
as uſeful for thoſe that be in danger of milcarrying, only 
the Purges and Juices muſt be omitted. 

s There is another cauſe, though it is not ſo frequent, of 
Hyfterical Diſeaſes, vix. a falling of the Womb, by rea- 
ſon of hard Labour; it is accompanied with a large Train 
of this kind of Dilcaſe, yet is it ſoon and eaſily removed 
this way. 


Take of Oak-bark two Ounces, boyl it in four Pints of 
Fountain-water to two, add at the latter end one Ounce 
of Pomegranate-peel bruiſed, Red-roſes, Granate. flow. 
ers, each two handfuls ; and then add half a Pint of Red- 
wine; ſtrain it; bath the parts affected with Flannel. 
cloaths dipt in it, in the Morning, two hours before tht 
Moman riſes, and at Night when ſhe is in Bed; continu: 
pe uſe of it till the Symptom is quite gone. But enoug| 
of this. 

And now, worthy Sir, Thave mentioned the chief of what 


has been hitherto obſerved in the Hiſlory and Cure of 


this Diſeaſe, and having nothing elſe to do but to beg 
Pardon 


"Pm — Oo at n e 5 * „ 2 " a 1 - , 44 wo 
A * * x 4 * 2 p * >» hb ra hows 
4 , — : 
mn. i "OD OP a a ia — Yd 8 . .< © a<S — 33 


ee 
of 


F. 


ei. 
tar 
ale 
rſt 


the 


ach 
er, 


Yit 
of 
ne. 
on, 
eed 
allo 


nly 


of 
ea · 
ain 


ved 


ts of 
unct 
low. 
Red- 
mel. 
e the 
inue 


Jug 


hat 
e of 

beg 
rdon 


| Pard 


you 10 


the Tear 1675, to the Tear 1680. 339 


on, if I have erred in deſcribing theſe things, not 
* {, exactly as I ought ro have done, and alſo to deſire 
| accept favourably of this ſmall Treatiie, v hich 
das deſignedly written to return you thanks for your 
Approbation of my other Works: And indeed I have ſo 
(eldom received any thing of this Nature, that either I 
| have merited no ſuch thing, or elſe theſe candid and in- 
* genuous men (which Nature has framed with ſuch ex- 
Mind, as to know how to be grateful) are 
very few, ſcarce ſo many as the Gates of Thebes, or the 
© Entries of wealthy Nile. Yer notwithſtanding J endea- 
© our all I can, and will do ſo, to learn and promote the 
method of curing Diſeaſes, and to inſtruct 

© are leſs converſant in Practice than my. ſelf, if any ſuch 
E there are, let other People think of me what they pleaſe. 
For having nicely weighed, whether it is better to be 
© beneficial to men, or to be praiſed by them, I find the 
© firſt preponderates, and much conduces to the Tranqut- 
& liry of mind. Bur as for Fame and popular Applauſe, 
© they are lighter than a feather, or a bubble, and more 
E vain than the ſhadow of a Dream. Bur if any one 
thinks that Riches got by ſuch a Reputation, have ſome- 
thing more of ſolidity in them, let them enjoy what they 
have ſcraped together with all my heart, but let them 
remember that ſome Mechanicks of the moſt ſordid 
Trades, get and leave more to their Children, yer they 
do not exceed the Beaſts in this, who take as much care 
as they can of themſelves and theirs; and if we except 
things honeſt proceeding from the Judgment of the 
Mind and Virtue {whereof the Nature of Beaſts is nor 
capable) the Beaſts are plainly as good as theſe, and all 
= others who do nor endeavour to do all the good they can 
in their Generation. Pray give my Reſpects to the Lear- 
ned Mr. Kinderick, your and my good Friend, for he ac- 
= quainted me of your Kindneſs to me, and I ſhall endea- 


& Your as much as I can to make the beſt returns of good 
Offices; tor I am, 


cellency of 


1680. 


Worthy Sir, 


Lond. Jan. 20; 


& 3 


thoſe rhar 


Tour obliged Servant, 
Tho. Sydenham: 
A 


340 


A 


TREATISE | 


GOUT and DROPSIE 


tt. . 8 


—_— — 


To the Learned Dr. Thomas Short, Fellow of 
the College of Phyſicians in London. 

Dedicate to you, worthy Sir, this ſmall Treatiſe of 

the Gout, and Dropfie, inſtead of a larger Volume! 

= defign'd, I mean, the Hiſtory of Chronical Diſeaſes, 
eſpecially of thoſe my Practice was moſt converſant in, 
But by being roo intent on theſe things, I occaſion d the 
worſt Fir of the Gour I ever had, and therefore I wa 
admoniſhed thereby to lay afide theſe thoughts, tho un- 
willingly ; and to conſult my own Health, and to be 
contented that I had in ſome ſort finiſhed rheſe two Dil- 
caſes; for as often as I fell ro ſtudy Io often the Gout 
returned: Therefore I deſire you won'd accept of this 
Work as it is, which I dedicate to you, for two realons 
chiefly, Firſt, becauſe you have, not doubred to declare 
to me and before others, that have contemn'd them, the 
Ulefulnels of the Obſervations I publiſh'd heretofore, and 
alſo, becauſe in conſultation with you, I have found your 
Genius diſpoſed for the Practice of Phyſick : For tho you 
are well skill'd in all ſorts of Learning, yet Nature has 
rather determined you to thoſe Subtleties, which ariſe 
from Practice, than to vain Speculations, which differ n 
| muc 


+ * 2 . N r ie W TO IPTG 1 P — G > as a * * * 
* — 3 * A 2 A „ . 0 4 OR. 7 kT hes — 7 * 2 ET * ö 1 n = * . * 3 1 % * 8 N * " , 


1 1.40 HE 4 © A 


#, 
wu 

% 
4, 
* 
3 
- 4 
8 

— 
ls * 


the Year 1675, to the Tear 1680. 341 


| much from one another, as things of the greateſt Mo- 
ment and Children's Rattles do. And unleſs my Obſer- 
vation fails me, one Man ſeldom minds both. Your Sa- 
gacity accompanied with great Practice hath given you 
an opportunity of making Experiments, whereby you are 
become the chief Phyſician, and your extraordinary Ci- 
vility will preſerve the Eſteem you have gain d; if theſe 
© things I diſcourſe of now are not diſpleafing to you, to 
E whom they are dedicated, and to a few more honeſt 
Men that are my Friends, I ſhall not much care what 
E others ſay, who are offended with me upon no other Ac- 
count, than becauſe I have other opinions of Diſeaſes 
and their Cures, than they have. And this is not in my 
power to help; for Iam ſo made and diſpoſed by Na- 
ture, that what time others ſpend in reading Books, I 
ſpend in Meditation, and I do not ſo much inquire whe- 
cher others are of my Opinion, as whether what I deliver 
de agreeable to Truth. For I do not much eſteem pub- 
flick Applauſe; and truly what matter is it, if performing 
carefully the duty of a good Citizen, and ſerving the 


[ 


e of Labour? For if the thing be rightly weighed, the pro- 
mel WF viding for Eſteem, I being now an Old-man, will be in 
ales, a ſhort time the ſame, as to provide for that which is nor, 
t in. for what advantage will it be to me after I am dead, 


chat eight Alphabetical Elements reduced into that Or- 
der that will compoſe my Name, ſhall be pronounced by 


un- WW thoſe who can no more frame an Idea of me in their 
o be WWF minds, than I can now conceive what thoſe are to be, 
Di. who will not know ſuch as were dead in the foregoing 
Gout : Age; and perhaps will have another Language and o- 
' this cher Manners, according to the Inconſtancy, and Viciſſi- 


ao rudes of all humane Affairs? But to what purpoſe ſhou'd 
U be ſollicirous about the Opinion of others ? for if my 

, the Endeavours have any way promoted the Knowledge of 
and Diſeaſes or their Cure, and ſo I have deſerved ſome- 

your ching of Praiſe on that Account, I cannot long enjoy it: 
, And on the contrary, if my Writings diſpleaſe any one, 


e has I think I ſhall {ſcarce write any more, for by reaſon of 


arile Sickneſs I am not able to trouble the World with any 
fer as © more Phyſical Treatiſes; and truly I cou'd not hold a 
muck WW” Pen to write this ſmall Treatiſe I now publiſh, bur was 


* 


2 3 aſſiſted 


4 


7 
Ix 
: 
} 
S 


Publick to my own prejudice, I have no thanks for my 


— Pw 


342 Of Epidemich Diſeaſes from 
aſſiſted, I muſt thankful y acknowledge, by Mr, 2% 
Drake, Bachellour of Phyſick in Chriſt College in Cam. 
bridge, who by reaſon of his good Nature, and Integrit 
is an excellent Friend, and his natural and acquired En. 
dowments, will render him very ſerviceable to the pub. 
lick, when he pleaſes to practiſe that Art he ſo well un. 
derſtands. To conclude, worthy Sir, I muſt beg your 
pardon, if in performing my Duty, I have been any way 
troubleſome to you, for I only deſign d to teſtiſie my 
Reſpects, 


Your Humble Servant 


Tho. Sydenham, 


* 
1 


—— — 


Of the GOUT. 


JW Ehour doubt Men will ſuppoſe, that either the Ne 
3 ture of the Diſeaſe I now treat of is in a manner 
incomprehenſible, or that I who have been rroubl'd with 
it thirty four Years am a very dull Fellow, ſeeing my 
ſervations about it, and the Cure of it, little anſwer 
their Expectations. But however it is, I will faithfully 
ſer down thoſe things I have hitherro found, the Diff 
culties and the Intricacy either reſpecting the Hiſtory ot 
the Diſeaſe, or the Method of Cure, leaving them to be 
made clear and plain by Time the Guide of Truth. 
; The Gour moſt commonly ſeizes ſuch Old men, 25 
have lived the beſt part of their Lives tenderly and deli. 
cately, allowing themſelves freely Banquers, Wine, and 
> other ſpirituous Liquors, and at length by reafon of the 
4 Sloth that always attends Old-Age, have quite omitted 
WW ſuch Exerciſes as young Men are wont to ule. Moreovet, 
"they who are ſubject ro this Diſeaſe have large Skulls, and 
moſt commonly are of a groſs Habit of Body, ' moiſt and 
BY lax, and of a ſtrong and luſty Conſtitution, the beſt and 
48 — richeſt Foundation tor Life, 95 
be” ah | 8 : B. 


John 
Cam. 
rity, 
1 En. 
Pub. 
| un. 
Your 
wa 
my 


am, 


the Year 1675, to the Tear 1680, 343 


Bat the Gour does not only ſeize thoſe that are corpu- 
ent, for ſometimes alſo, though ſeldomer, it ſeizes thin 
Folks, nor does it ſtay always till they are old. For ſome- 
times ir invades, ſuch as are in the Flower of their Age, 


: when they have received the ill Seeds of this Diſeaſe from 


their Parents by Inheritance; or if this be not the reaſon, 


they have too ſoon uſed Venery, or have wholly left off 
© Fxerciſe, that they uſed formerly violently; moreover, 
| they have great Appetites, and have immoderarely drunk 
| ſpiritnous Liquors, and afterwards of a ſudden fell to thin 


3 and cooling Liquors: 


When ir firſt leizes any one when he is very old, it 


E never afterwards has ſuch exact Periods, nor is ſo vio- 
© Jent as when it invades a younger Man, becauſe he dies 
E mot commonly, before the Diſeaſe attended with its pro- 
per Symptoms comes to its height, and alſo becauſe the 
natural Heat and Vigour of the Body, being abared, ir 
cannot be fo conſtantly and violently thruſt off on the 
joynts: But if ir ſeizes any one ſooner, though it does 
not yet fix on one part, nor treat him ſo ſeverely, but 
comes with uncertain Periods, occaſionally paining a little, 
for a few days coming and going without any Method; 
yet it formally beſieges the Man by degrees, and proceeds 
regularly both as to the time of its coming, and as to the 
duration of the Fit, and afflicts him more violently than 


at firſt. 


Iwill treat of this Diſeaſe firſt as it proceeds regular- 


ly, and afterwards of its irregular and uncertain Phæno- 
nena, when being forced out of irs Courſe, either by a 
© prepoſterous uſe of Medicines, that were improper, or 
by the Weakneſs of the Subject, it cannot attain ro its 
Proper and genuine Symptoms; therefore when the Gout 
V regular, it ſeizes the Sick moſt commonly in the follow- 
ing manner. About the end of January or the begin- 
ning of February it comes ſuddenly, and moſt common- 
ly without giving any notice, only the Patient has been 
& troubled with Indigeſtion, and Crudities of the Stomach 
= ſome Weeks before; moreover the Body has been op- 
& preſſed and puffed up with Wind, which daily increaſes, 
= Ul the Fit thunders upon him; bur a few days before 
it comes, the Thighs are as it were benumbed, and there 
b as it were a Deſcent of 


Wind through the Fleſh of 
2 4 rhem, 


244 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 
them, With convulſive Motions, and the day before the 
Fit the Appetite is ſharp, bur not natural. He goes 10 
Bed and ſleeps well, but about two a Clock in the Morn. 
ing is waked by the Pain, ſeizing either his great Toe 
the Heel, the Calf of the Leg, or the Ancle; this Pain 
is like that of diſlocated Bones, with the Senſe as it ver 
of Water almoſt cold, poured upon the Membranes g Wc; 
the parts affected, preſently ſhivering and ſhaking fo. che 
low with a feveriſh Dilpoſition ; the Pain is firſt gen. 
tle, but increaſes by degrees, (and in like manner 
the ſhivering and ſhaking go off) and that hourly, til 
towards Night it comes to its height, accommodating i 
ſelf nearly according to the Variety of the Bones of the 
Tarſ1s and Metatarſus, whole Ligaments it ſeizes, ſome. 
times reſembling a violent ſtretching or rearing thoſe Ii. 
gaments, ſometimes the gnawing of a Dog, and ſome. 
times a weight; morcover, the part affected has (uch ; 
quick and exquiſite Pain, that it is not able to bear the 
weight of the Cloaths upon it, nor hard walking in the 
Chamber; and the Night is not paſſed over in Pain up. 
on this Account only, but allo by reaſon of the reftlel 
rurning of the part hither and thither, and the continu. 
al Change of its place. Nor is the toſſing of the whole 
Body, which always accompanies the Fir, but eſpecially 
at its coming, leſs than the continual Agitation and Pain 
of the tormented Member: There are a thoufand fruit- 
leſs Endeavours uſed to eaſe the Pain, by changing the 
Frm continually, whereon the Body and the affected 
embers lie, yet there is no eaſe to be had, till two or 
three a Clock in the Morning, viz. (a Night and a Day 
being ſpenr from the firſt approach of the Fir) at which 
time the Sick has ſuddenly eaſe, by reaſon there is a lit- 
rle Digeſtion of the peccant Matter, and ſome Diſcuſſi- 
on of ir, though he undeſervedly attributes ir to that Poſi- 
tion of the affected part he uſed laſt. And now being 
in a breathing Swear, he falls aſleep, when he wakes he 
finds rhe Pain much abated, and the Part affected ſwell d 
afreſh ; for before there was only (which is uſual in the 
Fits of thoſe that have tbe Gout) viſible, a ſwelling of 
the Veins intermixed with the affected Members. The 
next day, and perhaps two or three after, if the Mat- 


ter apt to generate the Goup is copioud,, the par afect 


the Tear 1675, to the Year 1680. 245 


A 1.1! be in pain, which will be violent too towards E- 
" 2 but i. will be eaſed about the time of the Cocks- 
"mn. WW crowing ; within a few days the other Foot will be in 
0 Train, as the former was ; and if the former has left off 
in aking, the Weakneſs which rendred ir infirm, will pre- 
ere MW (ently vaniſh, Strength and perfect Health being ſo pre- 
s of WW (cnily reſtored, as if ir never had been our of order; if 
fol. de Pain is violent in the Foot lately ſeized. Ard yer it 
ven. ads the ame Tragedy in the other Foot as it did in the 
ner Former, both as to the greatneſs of the Pain, and the du- 
ul W;:rion of it, and ſometimes on the firſt Days of the Diſ- 
vic Neale, when the peccant Matter is ſo exuberant, that 
the one Foot is not able to contain it, it afflicts both together 
me. ich the like violence; but moſt commonly ir ſeizes by 
li. turns one after another as we ſaid: After it has vexed 
me. che Feet, the Fits that follow are irregular, both as to 
cha WET the time of their coming on, and duration; yet the Pain 
the always returns in the Evening, and is not ſo great in the 
the Morning; and of a Series of theſe ſmall Fits conſiſts that 
up. ich we call a Fit of the Gour, longer or ſhorter, ac- 
tles cording to the Age of the Patient; for it is not to be ſup- 
inu-· poled, that when any one is afflicted with this Diſeaſe 
hole two or three Months, that it is one Fit, but rather a Se- 
ally ties or Chain of ſmall Fits, whereof the latter is more gen- 
ain tle, and of ſhorter duration than the former, till at length 
uit- the peccant Matter being wholly conſumed; the Patient 
the recovers his former Health, which in thoſe that are vi- 
ted WA gorous, and in others, whom the Gout has rarely vi- 
o 0 fred, comes to paſs often in fourteen Days, and in 
Day thoſe that have been often aflicted by it in two Months; 
hich but in thoſe who are more weakned either by the long 
lit- Continuance of the Diſeaſe, or by Age, it does not go 
uſſi» off till Summer coming pretty well on, drives it away. 
oft The firſt fourteen Days the Urine is of a high Colour, 
eing which after ſeparation puts off a red Sediment, and as 
s he it were full of tmall Sand; nor does the Sick render by 

elld Urine more than a third part of what he drinks, and 
the the Belly is moſt commonly bound the ſaid firſt Days; 

of want of Appetite, ſhaking of the whole Body towards E- 

The vening, Heavineſs, and a troubleſome Uneaſineſs of the 

Aa- Parts that are not affected, accompanies the whole Fit; 

ect. Violent itching of the Foot affected, follows the Fit that 


18 


346 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 
is going off, chiefly berwixt the Toes, and the Feet (v1; 
as if the Sick had raken Poylon. The Diſeaſe being 0 
cuſſed, a good Habit of Body and Appetite return, accorq, 
ing to the Degtee of Pain with which the Fit laſt palt ra. 
ped ; and fo proportionably the following will be haſteneg 
or retarded ; for if the laſt Fit was very ſevere, the fg. 
Towing will not come till the fame time of che Year rem, 
again, 

Ard in this manner, rhe regular Gout ſhews it ſel 
with its genuine and proper Phenomena ; but when it i; 
diſturbed by unfit Methods of Cure, or by the obſti. 
nate Continuance of the Diſeaſe; the very Subſtance g 
the Body being as it wer? perverted to the Nouriſhmer; 
of the Diſeaſe, and Nature not being able to thruſt oy; 
the ſame by her wonred Method, then the Phencmeng 
differ much from rhoſe deſcribed. For whereas the ain 
was hitherto only troubleſome to the Feet ( which are 
the genuine Seat of the peccant Matter, if it poſleſ- 
ſes any other part, it is without doubt, that either the 
Method of rhe Diſeaſe has been altered, or the Vigour 
of the Body, is by little and little diminiſhed ) now it 
poffeſſes the Hands, Wriſts, rhe Arms, the Knees, and 
other Regions, rormenting thele, as much as it uſed 
to do the Feet: For ſornerimes diſtorting one or more 
of the Fingers, it makes them like a Bunch of Parlnips, 
raking away the Morion by little and little, and at length 
it pri duces ſtony Concretions about the Ligaments of the 
Jeynts, which deſtroying rhe Curicle, and the very Skin 
of the Joynrs being rendred viſible, naked Stones, like 
unto Chalk or Crabs-eyes appear, which may be picked 
out by a Needle. Sometimes the Matter cauſing the Dil- 
eafe thruſt upon the Arm, cauſeth a whiriſh Swelling, al. 
moſt as big as an Egg, which is by degrees inflamed with 
recknefs; fometimes falling upon the Thigh, it feels as if 
chere were a great Weight hanging upon it; yet with- 
aut any conſiderable Pain, but paſſing to the Knee, it 
handles that more feverely, ſo obſtructmg all Motions, 
chat it is as it were nalled to the Bed, ſo that it cannot 
be moved a Hairs-breadrh from the place where it is. 
And. becauſe of the Reſtleſneſs of che Body, or to eaſe 
Nature, the Patient muſt be moved by the help of others, 
there is great care required, Teſt by chance, the leaſt — 

0 erate 


the Tear 1675, to the Year 1680. 347 


e craricry of motion ſhould occafion Pain, which for this 
. ceaion only is tolerable, viz. becaule ir preſently goes 
4. off: And truly, this carrying of the Body, that muſt 
a de perform d lo tenderly and carefully, is not a ſmall 
es WE part of the Troubles wherewith the Gour is burtkened ; 
yn. WW for the Pain is not violent through all the Fit, if the 
part affected be kept quiet. 

Whereas the Gout before did not uſe to invade, be- 
fore the latter End of Winter, and was wont to go off 
after two or three Months, now it remains upon the 
i. Sick a whole Year, excepting only two or three hot 
Months of Summer. And what is moreover to be ob- 
nt ſerved, as the great and general Fit is longer than here- 
r WE tofore it was, fo thoſe particular Fits, whereof the ge- 
„ neral is compoſed, rage longer; for whereas before thoſe 
n particular Fits did not torment the Patient above a Day 
+ or Two, now where- ever it fixes, eſpecially if it poſſeſſes 
the Feet and Knees, it does not go off till the tenth or 
fourteenth Day; moreover the firſt or ſecond Day aftet 
its coming, the Patient feels ſome Sicknels, beſides the 
Pain, together with a total Proſtration of the Appe- 
tite. 
Laſtly, Before the Diſeaſe was grown to ſuch a heig ht 
the Patient did not only enjoy larger Intervals of the 
Fits, but alio during that Intermiſſion, he was well in 
his Limbs, and in other parts of the Body, all the na- 
tural Faculties performing their Offices duly ; but now 
his Limbs are contracted and cumbred, ſo that tho' he 
can ſtand, and perhaps go a little, yer he creeps along lo ' 
very lamely and rroubleſomely, that when he walks he 
# ſeems to ſtand ſtill; and if he endeavour to walk be- 
= yond his ſtrength, that he may the better recover his 
Peet, the more he confirms them by walking, and ren- 
ders them leſs apt to receive the Pain, ſo much the more 
the Fomes of the Diſeaſe not perfectly diflipated by all 
this Interval, hovers more dangerouſly about the Bowels, 
when it cannot be ſo freely diſcharged upon the Feet, 
which at this time of the Diſeaſe, are ſcarce ever free 
from Pain, but are always uneaſie more or leſs. 
The Sick is alſo afflicted with many other Symptoms. 
as with a Pain of the Hemorrhoidal Veins, with unſa- 
vory Belchings, reſembling the taſte of the Ment laſt eat, 

h putre. 


—— 


348 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 


putrefying in the Stomach, when ſomething of hard Di. 
geſtion is eaten, or only ſo much as is fit for People in 
health, the Appetite languiſhes, and likewiſe the Whole 
Body, by reaſon of a ſcarcity of Spirits. Laſtly, he 
lives only to be wretched and miſerab e, and not at all 
to taſte of the Happineſs of Lite. The Urine that waz 
before high coloured, eſpecially in the Fits, and rendted 
in a ſmall quantity, now is like that, both as to colour 
and quantity, which is voided in a Diabetes: The Back 
and other parts itch troubleſomely about Bed - time. 
And this inconvenience alſo happens in this Diſeaſe, 
when ir is confirmed, viz. that upon yawning, eſpecially 
in the Morning, the Ligaments of the Bones of the Me. 
tatarſus, are violently pull'd, and ſeem to be ftrongy 
prefſed with a ſtrong hand; and ſometimes when yawn. 
ing does not go before, the Patient juſt dropping aſleep, 
ſuddenly feels a blow as it were of a Club, breaking in 
pieces the Metatarſus, ſo that he wakes crying out: The 
Tendons of the Muſcles that ſuſtain the Legs, are ſome. 
times taken with ſuch a ſharp and vehement Conynl. 
fion, that the Pain which it occaſions, it it ſhould laſt but 
a little while, would overcome all humane Patience. Af. 
ter many and dreadful. Torments, and long Execution, 
the following Fits as ro Pain are gentler, as a pledge of 
the diſcharge which approaching Death is about to give, 
(Nature being partly oppreſſed by the burthen of the 
peccant Matter, and partly by old Age, is no more able 
to expel it conſtantly and forcibly to the Extremities of 
the Body) but inſtead of the accuſtomed Pain, a certain 
Sickneſs with a Pain of the Belly, ſpontaneous Wearineſs, 
and ſometimes a propenfion to a Looſeneſs ſupervene. 
Theſe Symptoms eaſe the Pain of the Limbs when they 
are violent, and likewiſe vaniſh when the Pains in the 
Joynts return; and ſometimes the Pain, and ſometimes 
the Sicknefs afflicting alternately, prolong the Firs much. 
For it is to- be obſerved, that when any one has had the 
Gout many years, the Pain is by degrees leſſened every 
Fir, and at length he dies more of the Sickneſs than the 
Pain: for the Pain which is in theſe Fits, tho it is lon- 
ger; yer it is not the tenth of that which he uſed to ſut- 
fer when his Strength was more intire. But this ſeveri- 


cy of the Diſeaſe is compenſated moſt commonly 15 che 
* onget 


the Year 1675, to the Tear 1680. 349 


| longer ſpace betwixt the Firs, and by the good Health he 
in the mean time enjoys. For in this Diſeaſe Pain is Na- 
mre's moſt bitter Medicine; and the more violent it is 
che ſooner will the Fit paſs over, and the intermiſſion 
| will be longer and more perfect, and ſo on the con- 
ty. 
"Noo does the Pain, the Lameneſs, and the obſtructed 
Motion of the affected Parts, the Sickneſs, and other 
| Symptoms deſcribed, complear the Tragedy of this Dif- 
| eaſe : For ir breeds the Stone in the Kidneys in very ma- 
ny, either becaule the Sick lies a long while upon his 
Back, or becauſe rhe Organs of Secretion have left off to 
| perform their due Functions, or becauſe the Stone is 
made of a part of the ſame kind of Matter, but which 
is the Cauſe I ſhall not determine; whatever is the Ori- 
gine of this Diſeaſe, the Patient has ſometimes many ſad 
Contemplations, to know whether the Stone or the Gout 
is moſt ſevere; and ſometimes the Stone hindring the 
paſſage of the Water into the Bladder, through the Uri- 
nary Paſſages, kill him, not waiting longer upon the 
8 flow Gouty Execution. Nor is it enough that the Sick 
mis rormented in ſuch a miſerable manner, as that he can- 
f. not help himſelf, but wants the help of others: bur this 
„ is alſo added to the heap of his Sorrows, vix. that du- 
of ring the Fit his Mind is as it were affected with the Con- 
e, MW ragion, and lo far ſuffers with the Body, that it is hard 
he to ſay, which of them is moſt afflicted; for every Fit 
le may be as properly called a Fir of Anger, as of the Gour ; 
of for the Mind and Realon are ſo extreamly enervared by 
in the infirm Body, that they are diſordered by the leaſt 
% Motion of the Affections, ſo that he is as „. to 
e. 1 others as to himſelf: Moreover, he is as obnoxious to 
ey I the reſt of the Paſſions, viz. to Fear, Care, and other 
he of the ſame kind, by which he is alſo vexed, till the Diſ- 
es eaſe going off, the Mind alſo has recovered its former 
h. Tranquility. . 
ne At length (that I may diſpatch the Caraſtrophe of this 
ry dreadful Diſeaſe) the Bowels being ſo hurt by hatching, 
he and embracing the peccant Matter, that the Organs of 
n- ecretion can no longer perform their Duty, the Blood 
if. ſtuffed with Dregs ſtagnates, and the peccant Matter is 
r- not as hererofore caſt upon the extream parts of the Bo- 


dy; 


250 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 
dy; at lengrh, I ſay, the moſt miſerable Wrerchis ſo hay. 
py as to die. Bur (which may be a comfort to me and 
others, that are afflicted with this Diſeale, though we zo 
but moderately furniſhed with Money, and the Graces of 
the Mind ſo lived, and ſo died, great Kings and bo. 
tentates, General of Armies, and Admiral of Fleet; 
Philoſophers, and many others ſuch as theſe. To be ſtor, 
this Dileale of the Joynts (which can ſcarce be ſaid q 
any other) kills more Rich than Poor, more Wile than 
Fools, Nature demonſtrating as it were with the Finger, 
how juſt the Creator and diſpoſer of all things is, and 
bow ltrle he fides with Parties; for thoſe that want 
ſemething are wont to be abundantly er With 
another kind of Good]; and he allays profuſe Munificence, 
by mixing an equal ſhare of Miſeries with it; ſo that i 
is every Where inviolably decreed, that no Man ſhall be 
perfectly happy, or altogether miſerable, bur that al 
ſhall partake of both Lots, which mixture of Good and Il, 
ſo convenient to our Frailty, and Mortality, is perhaps 
very proper for us. 

Women are very ſeldom afflicted with the Gout, and 
if they are, not until they are old, or of a Maſculine Hz 
bir of Body. Thin Women, who in their Youth or mid- 
dle Age are troubled with Symptoms like the Gout, re. 
ceive them from Hyſterick Diſe aſes, or a Rheumarilm 
which they were troubled with hererofore, the Fomes 
Whereof was nor well carried off at the beginning. 

Nor have I hitherto obſerved, that Boys, or Youths, 
are vext With the true and genuine Gout; yet ſome that 
I have known, have perceived ſome (mall touches of i 
before they have arrived to that Age, viz. when their 
Fathers had this Diſeaſe when they begar them. And 
here ends the Hiſtory of this Diſeaſe. 


Having very much conſidered the various Phanomen 
of this Dileale, I ſuppoſe it is produced by the Conco- 
Ction weakned, both in the Parts, and in all the Juices 
of the Body; for in thoſe who are obnoxious to this 
Diſeaſe, they being either worn out by Age, or having 


by Intemperance haſtened old Age, the Animal Spirits ace WR 
decayed throughout the whole Body, being conſumed i 


by the immoderate uſe of the vigorous Functions ke 
Th 


the Tear 1675, to the Tear 1680, 351 


heat of youth, for inſtance, by too early or too much uſe 
of Venzry, by mad and extravagant exerciſes, whereby 
they unweariedly ſerve their Pleaſures, ro which is ro 
be added a ſudden intermiſſion, or Ceſſation from the 
Exerciſes of the Body, to which they have been accu- 


De 7 : 

„ WT ftomed hererofore, either by reaſon of years, or Lazi- 
bels, (by the uſe whereof the Blood was wont to be ren- 
WY dared more vigorous, and the Tone of the parts more firm) 
n WT upon which account the Body becomes now withered, 
„d the Concoctionsare no more rightly performed, bur 
1 WT on the contrary, the Dregs of the Juices of the Body are 
"r WY henceforth laid up in the Veſſels, as a Stock for the Diſ- 
4 WS caſe, which were diſcharged before by the help of ſuch 
: Exerciſes, and ſometimes hard Study, or Meditation con- 
Wl cerning ſome ſerious Matter had encreaſed the Diſeaſe, 
de che fine and volatile Spirits being thereby diverted from 
| Wtheir buſineſs of Concoction, which they ought to per- 
pom. Moreover, they thaz are ſubject to this Diſeaſe 


are not only moſt commonly greedy of Meats in gene- 
ral, but chiefly of thoſe that are hardeſt to digeſt, of 
which when they eat as much as they are wont to do, 
when they Exerciſed rhemlelves, they are unable to di- 
geſt them; nor does the ſaid Voracity or full Feeding, 
ſo frequently (tho it does often) occaſion the Gout, as 
the immoderate and mad drinking of Wine, whereby 
1c; the Ferments appointed for various Concoctions are whol- 
ly deſtroyed, and the Concoctions themſelves, and the 

bs Wh natural Spirits are vanquiſhed, and diſperſed by the great 
quantity of Adventitious Vapours. But when at one and 
the ſame time, rhe vigour of the Spirits, chat are the In- 
ſtruments of Concoction, are leſſened, and alſo a great 
heap of Humours oppreſſes the Blood, it is impoſſible 
that all the Concoctions ſhould be duly performed, when 
FI the Viſcera are ſo overwhelmed, upon which account 
the Spirits long ago weakened, are now ſuffocated. For 
f this were occaſioned only by a weakneſs of the Spi- 
grits, Women and Children, and thoſe which long Sick- 
neſs has waſted, ſhould likewiſe be ſeized by it; where- 
gas for the moſt part ir invades the ſtrongeſt, and thoſe 
chat have the moſt robuſt Principles of Nature: Vet ir 
bo does not ſeize them till Humours are heapt up, by rea- 
the! Fon of the defect, and Decli nation of the natural Spirits, 


ea: LY 


352 Of Epidemie Diſeaſes from 
by which joyned together the vitiated Concoctions 4; 
perverted, 

Moreover, as every one of the cauſes we have men. 
tioned, promote Indigeſtion, ſo moſt of them occaſion x 
Looſeneſs of the Habit and Muſcles of the Body, by which 
means a paſſage is opened for the receiving crude 200 
indigeſted Humours, as often as they are protruded g 
the outward parts, and when lying long in the Blog 
they increaſe in Bulk, and contract an ill Diſpoſition, aui 
at length acquire a putrefying heat, and can no longer 
be governed by Nature, they break our into a Species 
and fall upon the Joynts, and by heat and ſharpneſs pro 
duce moſt exquiſite Pains in the Ligaments, and Mem. 
branes covering the Bones, which being either weakenel 
and looſened by Age, or by: Luxury or Intemperanc, 
make room for them, when they make an attempt; bu 
this falling of the Humours that generates the Gow, 
which conſtirures the Fir, happens ſooner or later, as 0 
caſion is offered for putting theſe Humours into Mo. 
tion, 

As to the Cure (I will firſt mention thoſe things tha 
are to be omitted.) tho' if we reſpect the Humour, 
and the indigeſtion whereby they are occaſioned, it may 
ſeem ar firſt, that the curative Indications are chiefly tg 
be directed, for the Evacuation of the Humours already 
made, and for ſtrengthing the Concoctions; ſo that 
the heaping up of other Humours may be prevented, 
for as much as rheſe are the more general Indications, 
whereby we ſhould do the buſineſs in moſt other humo- 
ral Diſeaſes ; but in the Gour there is a ſort of Prerogs- 
tive in Nature, for Exterminating the peccant Matter af 
ter its own way, by putting it off upon the Joynts, and by 
diſcuſſing it by inſenſible Tranſpiration. 

There are about three ways propoſed, whereby we 
may eject the containing cauſe of the Gout, vix. Bleeding 
Purging, and Sweating, and none of theſe methods 
will ever perform the Buſineſs. 

Firſt, tho Bleeding may ſeem both to evacuate thoſe 
Humours that are juſt ready for a Deſcent, and allo 
thoſe that have already beſieged the Joynts, yet it plain- 
ly oppoſes that Indication, which the Antecedent caule, 
that is Indigeſtion, ariſing from a Dapravarion and 2 2 

e 


the Year 1675, to the Year 1680. 353 


f& of rhe Spirits (which Bleeding leſſens and oppreſſes 
more) requires, and therefore is not to be uſed ; either 
to prevent the Fit which is feared, nor to mitigate that 
which is now preſent ; Namely, in thoſe that are old; 
for tho that Blood which is drawn out is moſt commonly 
like chat of Pleuriticks, and of thoſe that have a Rheu- 
matiſm, yet Bleeding does as much hurt ro thoſe afflicted 
with this Diſeaſe, as it does good in the two juſt mentio- 
ned: For if Blood is extracted in the Intermiſſion, tho 
a good while after the Fit, there is danger, leſt by the 
Agitation of the Blood and Humours, a new Fit ſhould be 
cauſed more laſting than the former, and attended with 
more violent Symptoms, the ſtrength and vigour of the 
Blood being blunted thereby, by the help of which the 
Nouriſhment of the Diſeaſe ſhould have been diligently 
and conſtantly expelled. | 

And this inconvenience happens as often, as Bleeding 
is us d at the beginning of the Fir; and if it be uſed pre- 
ſently after the Fir, there is great danger leſt Nature, 
the Blood having not yet recovered its former ſtrength, 
weakned by the Diſeaſe, ſhould be ſo much dejected by 
this unſeaſonably uſed, that a Dropſie ſhould be cauſed 
thereby. Bur if the Patient is yer young and has been 
over-heared by hard drinking, Blood may be drawn ar 
the beginning of the Fit; bur if in the following Fits ir 
is continually uſed, the Gout is ſoon confirmed even in 
youth, and will more propagate its Tyranny in a few years, 
than otherwiſe in a great many. 

And then as to Purging, whether upward or down- 
ward, this muſt be noted, that whereas by the inviola- 
ble Law of Nature annexed to the very Eſſence of this 
Diſeaſe, the Fomes of ir ought always to be expelled ro 
the Joynts 3 Emetick or Cathartick Medicines will do 
nothing elſe bur recal into the Blood the peccanr Mat- 
ter, Which was put off by Nature upon the Extremiries 
of the Body; upon which account, that which ought to 
be caſt upon the Joynts, ruſhes perhaps upon ſome of the 
Viſcera, and fo the Life of the Patient is in hazard, when 

vefore it was in no danger at all. Which is often ob- 
ſerved, to be fatal ro thoſe who have been accuſtomed 
to purging Medicines, that they might prevent the Gour, 


1 . or which is worſe) to lefſen the Fit: For when Nature 


A a 53 


154 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 

is put by her uſual method, whereby as being beft and 
more ſecure, ſhe drives the Mv»rbifick Matter upon the 
joynts, and rhe Humours are turned inward upon the In. 
reſtines, and inſtead of Pain in the joynts, where there 
is none at all, or certainly but very little, the poor 
Wrerches are almoſt deſtroyed by Stomach-Sickneſz 
Gripes and Faintings, and with a great Troop of irregy, 
lar Symptoms. 

Therefore I am fully perſwaded, having learnt by 
continual, and repeared Experience, that all purging 
whether by gentle or ſtrong Medicines, ſuch as are ulual. 
ly deſigned for purging the Joynts, do much hurt, whether 
it is uſed in the Fit, to leſſen the peccant Matter, or at the 
end, to ditſipate the Relicks of the Diſeaſe, or in a per. 
fect Intermi;hon, or good Health, ro hinder the approach. 
ing Fir. For I have found at my own Peril, as well a; 
of others, that purging Medicines uſed at any of theſe 
times, have been ſo far from doing good, that they have 
haſtened the miſchief they ſhould have prevented. Firſ, 
therefore purging when the Fit rages, diſturbing Nature 
when ſhe is buſied in ſeparating the Merbifich Matter, 
and in putting it of upon the Joynts, ſometimes cauſes 
a great Confuſion of the Spirits, ſo that the Fir is not only 
increaſed thereby, but the Patients Life is alſo nora little 
indanger'd ; and then Cathartichs uſed at the end of the 
Fir, inſtead of removing the Relicks of rhe Diſeaſe, bring 
on another Fir afreſh, as bad as the former, and thus 
the Sick being vainly deceived, contrive Miſery for then- 
ſelves, which they had not felt, if the Humours had not 
been inraged again : Which Inconvenience I have often 
found, having - prepoſterouſly craved for Medical help, 
to expel as I thought the Relicks of the Diſeaſe. Laſtly, 
as ro purging to be repeated at certain Intervals, and in 
perfect Health to prevent the Fit; tho, which mfiſt be 
confeſs d, there is not ſo mach danger of a new Fit, as 
in the caſe juſt mentioned, when the Patient was not 
wholly freed, yer at this rime ir occaſions a Fir, forthe 
reaſon above-mentioned; and if by chance the Sick is not 
preſently leized, yet it does not at all free him from the 
Diſeaſe, though he takes this or that Purge conſtantly at 
due diſtances, for I have known ſome ſubject to this Dil- 


eaſe, who have not purged only at Spring and Autumn, 
but 


JJ , Ty ON Og et n= oe Tg Io a9 


% 


MA mo FYy — — — — — — Hy — — 


Sr — + 


— 2 


the Tear 1675, to the Near 1680. 355 


hut alſo monthly and weekly, that they might recover 
their Health, and yet none of theſe have eſcaped the 
Gour, for moſt commonly it handled them more cruelly 
afterwards, and with worle Symptoms than if they had 
not taken Phyſick at all. For tho' the ſaid putging 
might take away lome part of the containing Cauſe, yet 
no way conducing to the ſtrengthening of Concoction (ſo 
far from it, that it weakens the ſame, and wounds Nature 
afreſh) it oppoſes only one Cauſe, and ſo is totally unable 
to cure the Diſeaſe, | 

Bur this muſt be noted moreover, that from the ſame 
defect ot Spirits, hereby the Concoctions a re vitiated, 
in thoſe who are accuſtomed to have the Gout, the frame 
of che ſame Animal Spirits is rendred leſs firm and vigo- 
tous, ſo that ir is preſently diſturbed by any cauſe, where- 
by the mind or body 1s violently moved, and ſo very 
fleeting and ſnhattered is it, as it happens to thoſe that are 
ſubject ro Hyſterical and Hypochondriacal Diſeaſes. 
From which Inclination of the Spirits to be diſturbed, it 
happens that the Gour moſt commonly follows the leaſt 
Evacuation. The Tone of the Body being diſſolved, which 
the firmneſs of the Spirirs, whilſt rhey continue brisk, 
keeps compact and vigorous, the peccant matter moves 
without reſiſtance; and by this injury to the Body a bye 
is preſently produced. 

But how pernicious ſoever this Method is, yer ſome 
Quacks are eſteemed for it, by cunningly concealing the 
purging Medicine they ule ; for it muſt be noted, that 
during the purging, the Patient has little or no Pain at 
all; and if purging cou'd be continued many days, and 
no new Fit ſupervene, the Sick would preſently recover 
of that he has now upon him; but truly he will be 
dreadfully puniſhed afterwards, by the Confuſion into 
which the ſaid Agitation of the Humours has precipated 
Nature. 

Laſtly, the Evacuation of the peccant Matter by Sweat, 
tho it does leſs hurt than the above-mentioned Evacua- 
tion, yer it evidently appears to be injurious, for tho 
It do not draw back the Fomes of the Diſeaſe into the 
Bowels, but on the contrary, drives it into the habit of 


the Body; yer for theſe Realons ir does hurt. Firſt in- 


aced, becauſe when the Fir is off, it forces the Humours 
A 2 yet 


— 


-S 


ne... — . — — — 
=> l — 


me of r In ”" <5 & 3 
— yr? — E 
REV» E 
— 2 


— 


— — - 
— — — þ 
— — 


== 
— 


—— 


— . 


EIS — +.» —— — 7 
2 * - — — 
2 = = _ =— 2 Ln 


356 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 
Yer crude and nct prepared for Separation, upon the 
Limbs, by which means it brings the Fit before its time 
and contrary ro Natures Conſent ; and then, becauſe 
the forcing of Sweat in the Fit, does caſt the peccant 
Matter too violently upon the affected Member, it pro- 
duces at the ſame time an intolerable Pain; and if the 
quantity of the Morb:fick, Matter is greater than can be 
contained in the affected Part, it forces it preſently upon 
other Members, and for this reaſon there is a great Ebulli. 
tion of the Blood and other Humours ; and if the Body 
abounds very much with ſerous Matter, fit to produce 
the Gout, there is danger leſt an Apoplexy ſhould be cc- 
calion d. Wherefore in this, as well as in all others, where. 
in Sweat is provoked by Art, to caſt forth the Morbifich 
Matter, and does not come naturally, it is very dange- 
rous to force it out too violently, and beyond that de. 
gree of Concoction, whereunto the Humours to be exa- 
cuated have come of their own accord. And that ex- 
cellent Aphoriſm of Hippocrates, That things concocted, 
not crude, are to be medicated, is of as great uſe in pro- 
voking Swear, as in purging the Belly, which is very e. 
vident in that Sweat that ules to come at the latter end of 
Agues, which if it is moderate and agreeable to the 
— quantity of Febrile Matter of the preceeding 
it, much relieves the Sick: But if it is forced beyond 
Nature's bounds, by keeping the Sick continually a Bed, 
a continual Fever is cauſed, and inſtead of exririguiſhing 
the former Fire, a new one is kindled. In like manner in 
the Gout, the gentle breathing Sweat, which moſt com- 
monly comes in the Morning of its own accord after each 
of the {mall Firs, whereof, as I have (aid, the great Fit 
conſiſts, mitigates both the Pain and reſtleſsneſs where- 
with the Sick has wreſtled all the Night. But on the 
contrary ; when at any time, this gentle breathing Sweat, 
that naturally ſoon goes off, is provoked longer and 
more violently than the Proportion of the peccant Mat- 
ter requires, which was concocted by the laſt Fit, the 
Diſeaſe is increaſed thereby. Therefore in this Diſeaſe, 
and in all others I ever ſaw, except the Plague only, it 
is not ſo much the Phyſicians, as Nature's buſineſs, to 
force Swear, becauſe we cannot know by any means 
what part of Matter is already prepared for ſuch a Se- 
paration 


JJ Ya” ow a OO 


Q 2 FP mA & un on a, ot. MU oa of @ tn=nkoO@ allo. 


- a o& A.  - 


the Tear 1675, to the Tear 1680, 357 


paration, and by conſequence What Meaſures we are to 1&1 
rake for provoking it 1 4 
Now ſeeing it evidently appears from what has been 
(aid, that it is not only in vain to endeavour the cure of 
the Gour, by evacuating-Remedies, but that they are alſo ' 
kurrful ro gouty People, ir remains that we enquire to 15 
what other end the curative Indications are to be directed. 
Indeed I having exactly weighed, and carefully ex- 
amined the foreſaid Phencmena, gather from thence, 
that we muſt have reſpect to two Cauſes chiefly in the 
Cure of this Diſeaſe; the Firſt is, the Antecedent Cauſe, 
or the Indigeſtion of the Humours, ariſing from the de- 
fect of Heat, and the natural Spirits; the other is the 
containing Cauſe, or the hear and boy ling of theſe Hu- 
mours, when they are corrupted and grown ſharp by 
Continuing too long in the Body, which their delay is 
occaſiond by the Indigeſtion above- mentioned; theſe 
Cauſes are ſo abſolutely contrary to one another, that 
thoſe Remedies that do good for this, are injurious for the | 
other; for which reaſon this Diſeaſe is ſo very difficultly [1 
cured; for while we endeavour to remove Indigeſtion "0 
| 


by hor Medicines, there is danger leſt on the other hand, 
weencreaſe the hear of the Humours ; and when on the 
contrary, we woud mitigate the hot and acrid Hu- 
mours, either by cooling Remedies, or Diet, we occa- 
fon Indigeſtion, the natural heat being weakned. But 
here by the containing Caule, I do not only mean that 
which actually beſieging the Joynts, forms the Fit, bur 
that moreover which lurking in the Blood is yet unfit for 
Separation; for all the Morbifick Matter is very ſeldom fo 


i WW clearly caſt out, how long and ſevere ſoever the Fit has 

La been, as that there are no Relicks of it in the Body after 135 
ʒ:le Fit is gone off, and therefore regard muſt be had to this Thy. 
„ cauſe, as well when the Fit is off, as when it rages; bur for as 5960 
d much as the Ejection of the containing Matter is wholly Be 
NMatures buſineſs, it muſt be done by her method alone; for 14 
e nothing can be in the mean time attempted to aſſwage 1 
e the hot and acrid Humours without injury to the Dige- 

"KF ftions, only the Sick muſt forbear hot Mediciness and 

o % Diet, whereby the Humours are inflamed ; ſo that un- 

” dJoubtedly the greateſt and chiefeſt intention of curing a 


= conſiſts, in helping Concoction by removing Indigeſtions, 
"2 Aa 3 whereof 


358 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 
whereof I will now treat; yet fo as that in the Series gc 
my Diſcourſe, I may touch on thoſe Remedies occafc. 


nally, which conduce to the aſſwaging of the Heat, ard 
ſharpneſs of the Humours. 


Therefore whatever aſſiſts Nature in duly perform. 


ing her Offices, either by ſtrengthening the Stomach that 
it may concoct the Nouriſhment well, or the Blcod, chat 
ir may aſſimulate the Chy/e brought into it, or by 
ſtrengtbening the ſolid parts, that they may the better 
convert the Juices deſign d for their Nouriſhment, and 
increaſe into their proper Subſtance. Laſtly, whatever 
preſerves the Organs of Excretion, and the Emunctories 
of the Body in ſuch a State, as that the Feculencics of 
each part may in due time and order be carried off, 
Theſe, and all things of this kind that further the fulfilling 
this Intention, are properly called Digeſtives, whe. 
ther they are Medicines, or rule of Diet, or Exerciſe, ot 
any other of thoſe things which are called the fix Non- 
naturals. 

Theſe kind of Medicines in general are thoſe which 
moderately heat, and are bitter, or gently bite the 
Tongue, for they are very agreeable ro the Stomach, 
they purifie the Blood, and comfort the other parts, 
For inſtance, they are ſuch as theſe, Roots of Angelica, 
Elicampane, the Leaves of Normmood, the leſſer Centaur, 
Germander, Ground-pine, and the like. Allo thofe that 
are vulgarly called Anti-Scorbuticks may be added, as the 


Roots of Horſe-Radiſh, the Leaves of Garden Scurty- 


Graſs, Water-Creſſes, and the like, But yer theſe Acrid 
and pungent Herbs, how pleaſing ſoever they be to the 
Stomach, and how much ſoever they help ConcoCtion, 
are to be uſed more ſparingly than others that corroborate 
the Stomach by their gentle heat and bitterneſs, and 
render the Maſe of Blood more brisk and lively ; for 
they ſtir up the Fomes of the Diſeaſe, that has been long 
formed, and increaſe the heat. 

Some Species of them neatly mixed are better in mj 
Opinion ro concoct the Humours, than any one Simple 
of their Tribe. For tho when we have need of the 
Specifick Virtue of any Medicine, that Rule holds good. 
The ſimpler it is, the better it is, but when we deſign 
ro cure the Sick by ſatisfying this or that Indication, e- 

4 ver 


4 „ 4 . . 5 — Moe 
PR A8 c 
= * 9 Ps 2 * 


6 


" 


R 


* 
5 * * 2 * 5 OF 5 * a *% 1 * | 


— 
wo * W. Os 


* . * 
„ — 3 . a _ * — 8 
3 9 FE * 9 8 * * * 1 CE TO . [ EE 


the Year 1675, to the Year 1680, 359 


very ingredient contribures ſomewhat for the cure of the 
Diſeaſe ; and in this Cale the greater the number of Sim- 
ples 15, the more powerfully does the remedy work, 
therefore various Forms of Medicines rending to this end 
way be neatly framed of the foreſaid, and of the reſt of 
the Materia Medica of this ſort. I prefer an Electuary 
before the reſt made like Venice-Treacle, as' the molt 
excellent for that a mutual Fermentation, of the Simples 
augments the Virtue of them all, as if it produced ſome 
third thing, which in the things joyned has greater Vir- 
rue than any one of them in the ſame quantity, Bur I 
willingly leave the choice of ſuch Ingredients, and the 
Forms wherein they are ro be given, to the diſcreet Phy- 
fician ; for I never thought it my buſineſs to write Re- 
ceipts, as they call them, but rather to note the Indica- 
tions, according to which the Methods of Cure are to be 
directed; and this is not being well- minded, is the Cauſe 
why Empericks boaſt, that they are the chief of the Medi- 
cal Art. 

But for the Advantage of Beginners, I will ſer down 
the Remedy Iam wont to ule, which is compounded after 
this manner. 


Take of the Roots of Angelica, of the ſweet-ſmelling Flag, 
of Maſter-wort, Elicampane, of the Leaves of common 
Normwood, of the leſſer Centaury, of white Hore-hound, 
of Germander, of Ground. pine, of Scordium, of com- 
mon Calaminth,of Feverfew,of Field Saxifrage, d t. John s- 
wort, Golden- rod, Thime, Mint, Sage, Rue, Carduus 
Benedictus, Penny-Royal, Southern. wood, of the Flow- 
ers of Camomile, Tanſie, Lily of the Valleys, Engliſke 
Saffron, of the Seeds of Treacle-Muſtard, Garden-Scur- 
vy-graſs, Carraways, Juniper-Berries, each a ſuffici- 
ent quantity; let the Herbs and Flowers, and Roots, be 
gathered when they have moſt Virtue in them ; let 
them be dried and kept in Paper-bags till they may be 
finely powdered ; to fix Ounces of each well mixed, add 
a ſufficient quantity of purified Honey, and Canary Wine 


to make an Electuary; take two Drams Morning and 


Evening ; or fer want of this, uſe the following. 


A a 4 Take 


— - 
- 2 


—— 
_— 


2 — 


. ———— Cumn 


- 
* 
* 
' 
. = 
: * 
I 
: 
. 3 
: 
* 
. 7 
U ö * 
} 
| 1 
4 
| 
} 
|! 
1 ' | 
| ( \ 
_ 
: 7 
1 
5 
\ * 
14 
Wa 
1 
k 4 
\ I 
Py _ 
19 
95 
1 LY 
} 
'y, 
: 
N j 
: } 
* 
( [i 
# 
l 
\ 
( 
1 *. 
iy i 
' N o 
460 
: WW; 
mn 
i * * 
# 
\ 


— GS = G — — 8 — - 
— 1 — — - —— — 
. — - 
S- 4 — 7 — 
- by 8 — * * 


260 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 


Tahe of the Conſerve of Garden-Scurvey-Graſs, one Ounce 
and an half, of Roman Worm-wood, and of the yellow 
Rind of Oranges, each one Ounce, of Candied Angelica, 
of Nutmegs Candied, each half an Ounce, of Venice. 
Treacle three Drams, of compound Powder of Wake. 
Robin two Drams ; make an Electuary with a ſuffi. 
ent quantity of Syrup of Oranges ; let him take two 
Drams twice a day, drinking upon it Five or Six ſpoon. 
fuls of the followiug Water, 


Take of the Roots of Horſe-Radijh ſliced three Ounces, of 
Garden-Scurvey-Graſs twelve handfuls, of Water-Cref. 
ſes, and Brook-lime, of Saze and Mint, each four hand. 
Fuls, the Peels of fix Oranges, two Nutmegs bruiſed of 
Brunſwick Mum twelve Pints ; diſtill them in a com- 
mon Still, and draw oaly fix Pints of Water for uſe, 


Among the Medicines commonly known, Venice-Treacle 
is the belt to corroborate the Concoction; but becauſe it 
contains a great many Species, that heat roo much, and 
beſides a great quantity of Opium, the Electuary above- 
mentioned, may be more commodiouſly prepared of the 
chief heating, and ftrengthning Vegetables : But we 
muſt rake care to chooſe ſuch Simples, as are pleaſant to 
the Taſte, for the Sick muſt take it a long while, viz. al- 
moſt as long as he lives, and therefore it is very requiſitc 
that they ſhould be palatable. Amottg the Simples, the 

eruvian Bark, is the beſt, for ſtrengthens the Blood, 
and renders it vigorous, if ſome Grains of it are taken 
Morning and Evening. 
And truly as inthis Diſeaſe we now treat of, ſo in 
moſt other Chronical Diſeaſes, theſe and ſuch like Reme- 
dies, that ſtrengthen the Blood, and render it brisk (if 
their Heat do not conſiſt of Vincus Spirits, for reaſons to 
be ſhewn hereafrer) do moſt Good, for as much as every 
Diſeaſe of this kind, if I conjecture right, oughr to be re- 
ferred to one and the ſame Cauſe, to wit, the Indigeſtion 
of the Humours. $042 

Bur ir can no way be made more evident, and better 
proved, than by ſetting in view the Difference that is be- 
tvrixt Chronical and acute Diſeaſes, whereof I _ 

| | rhe 


the Tear 1675, to the Year 1680. 361 


the Reader will not take ir amiſs, if I digreſs a little 
from the buſineſs in hand. As therefore thoſe for the 
moſt part are accounted acute Diſeaſes, which either 
ſoon kill, or are brought ro Concoction, ſo thole are 
Chronical Diſeaſes, which either are not concocted ar all, 
or require a long time for their Concoction. And in- 
deed the very Nature of the thing, as well as the words 
by which ir is expreſſed, plainly fignifies as much : Bur 
the cauſe of Difference which is perceived betwixt theſe 
two kinds of Diſeaſes, is more obſcure, and nor eaſily to 
be cleared. 

I ſuppoſe it will be worth our Labour to ſpend a lit- 
tle time in the ſearch after it; for the clear and diſtinct 
knowledge of theſe things, contributes much towards the 
finding out true and agreeable Indications for the cure of 
theſe Diſeaſes. 

Whether the innermoſt Bowels of the Earth, if it is 


proper to ſay ſo, undergo various Changes, upon which 


account the Air is infected by vapours exhaling from 
thence, which ſeems very probable to me, or whether 
the whole Atmoſphere is infected by an Alteration occa- 
ſioned by a certain Conjunction of Heavenly Bodies: 
jr is moſt certain that for a ſpace of time, the Air 
is tufted with Particles, which are hurrtul to the Oeco- 
nomy of the humane Bodies; and that at another time ir is 
impregnated with ſuch Particles, as are Enemies to the 
Bodies of ſome ſpecies of Beaſts. When at theſe times 
we breath into the naked Blood, the noxious Venom, 
that is an Enemy ro Nature, and fall into ſuch Epide- 
mick Diſeaſes, which that is apr to produce; Nature 
procures a Fever, its uſual Engine to free the Blood 
from any diſagreeable Matter that lodges within, and 
ſuch Diſeaſes are commonly accounted Epidemick, and 
are therefore acute and ſhorr, becauſe they have ſo quick 
and violent a Motion; but beſides, theſe Diſeaſes occa- 
ſion d by an external cauſe, there are other as acute pro- 
ceeding from this or that peculiar Inflammation of the 
Blood, which do not depend on any general cauſe, from 
the Air, but on a particular Irregularity, or intempe- 
ries of particular Bodies, which ſort of Fevers I call Inter- 
current, and Sporadick, which happen almoſt in all years. 
But Chronical Diſeaſes have quite another Genius, for 

| | the 


362 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 


tho an unhealthy Air of this, or that kind may conduce 
much to the generating theſe Diſeaſes, yer they do ng: 
ſo immediately take their Riſe from the Air, but mo 
commonly from the Indigeſtion of the Humours, the com. 


mon Parent of them all ; for when any one has the Prin. 


ciples of his Nature weakned, and worn out either b 

Old Age, or by great and continual Errors in the fx 
Non-narurals, eſpecially in Meat and Drink, or if th- 
Organs of Secretion have been {o weakned, that they 
are wholly unable to purefie the Blood, and to carry off 
its ſuperfluities ; in theſe Caſes a greater ſtock of Hy. 
mours being heapt up, than a Man's ſtrength is able to 
digeſt, the ſaid Humours by continuance undergo vari. 
ous Fermentations, and Putrefactions, and at length break 
out in Specie, and occaſion various kinds of Diſeaſes ac. 
cording to the variety of Depravation, and as thele de. 
praved Juices have various Diſpoſitions, fo they variouſly 


fall on this or that part, which is fitteſt ro receive them: 


and at length by degrees they ſhew their long Train of 
Symptoms, which are wont to ariſe partly from the Na- 
ture of ſuch Juices, and partly from the Confuſion brought 
on thoſe parts, wh ch two joyn d together conſtitute the 
irregularity of Nature, which is marked with the Name 
of ſome Diſeaſe. 

Now it will plainly appear, that ſuch an Impotency 
of Nature for the concocting of Humours, is the princi- 
pal cauſe of Chronical Dileales, if we conſider, that old 
Men whoſe Concoctions are weakened, and the Spirits 
the Inſtruments of them, waſted by the repeated Functi- 
ons of a long Life, are more inclined to theſe Diſeaſes 
than younger People; whoie flame of Life being more 
kindled, ſcatters thoſe Feculencies heapt up, and whoſe 

ans of Secretion are conſtantly aifiſted by the natu- 
ral heat, that they may not be deticient in purifying the 
Maſs of Blood, unleſs they are oppreſſed, and as ir were 
ſuffocated by too great a quantity of Humours, Mote- 
over, thar ſuch an indigeſtion of Humours is the cauſe of 
moſt Chronick Diſeaſes, is manifeſt from hence, viz. be- 
cauſe Winter is more apt to breed ſuch Diſeaſes than Sum- 
mer; tho' ſome of them do not actually come out till 
the latter end of Winter, yet the Stock of Humours on 
which they depend increaſing all the Winter, is inlarg- 


ed 


the Tear 1675, to the Tear 1680. 363 


ed by that cold and raw Seaſon, debilitating Nature, fo 
chat ſhe is not ſo able to preſerve the Oeconomy of the 
Body. Upon which account it happens, that they who 
are very well in Summer, ſeldom eſcape thoſe Diſeaſes 
in Winter, wherennro they are moit inclined. For in- 
ance, rhe Gout or Aſthma, and a Cough, and the like. 
And from hence we may learn the reaſon, why travel- 
ling into more Southerly Regions, does ſo effectually 
conquer thole Diſeaſes, rhe Cure whereof is attempted 
in vain, in colder Climates. The truth & what I have 
ſaid already concerning the general cauſe of Chronical 
Diſeaſes, will moreover manifeſt it ſelf by the great and 
incredible relief which thoſe that are afflicted with moſt 
Chronical Dileaſes, eſpecially with a Conſumprion, re- 
ceive by riding on Horſeback, which kind of Exerciſe 
invigorates and ſtrengthens all the Digeſtions, the natu- 
ral heat being revived by the continual ſhaking of the 
Body, and the Organs deſtined for Secretion, affiſted in 
duly performing their Office of purifying the Blood, ſo that 
a Renovation of the ſpoiled Digeſtions muſt neceſſarily 
follow, and by conſequence, the beſt Conſtitution of the 
Body. 

Wherefare it is manifeſt enough by the Reaſons alrea- 
dy alledged, that not only in the Gout, bur alſo in other 
Chronical Diſeaſes, where no manifeſt Symprom Con- 
tra indicates; ſuch kind of hot Herbs are very beneft- 
cial, for they procure the heat of Summer in the midft 
of Winter; tho if we accuſtom our ſelves to the uſe of 
them in Summer time, they will the berter prevent 
thoſe Diſeaſes, which the contrary Seaſon is wont to pro- 
duce: And truly it they are deferred rill Winter ap- 
proaches, at which time a great deal of Matter is heapt 
up, it is to be feared we fly too late to this refuge. But 
tho as (as I have diſcourled largely before) the Gout by a 
peculiar Diſpoſition, is made worſe by Catharticks ; yet 
in moſt other Chronical Diſeaſes, bleeding repeated as 
often as there is occaſion, and purging is to be ordered, 
before theſe digeſting and corroborating Medicines are 
to be uſed; but when the Patient has once entred upon 


| the uſe of theſe, he muſt go on without purging betwixt 


whiles ; for this muſt be conſtantly maintained, that as 
often as the cure of any Diſeaſe is aſſayed by corrobora- 
| ring 


364 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 
ring Medicines, all Evacuations are wholly injuri. 
ous. 

Laſtly, I do not affirm, that theſe digeſtive Remedies 
now mentioned, are better than all others; but this [ ſay 
that he that can find out the beſt Remedy to anſwer this 
Intention, will do much more in curing Chronical Diſea. 
ſes, than he would think he was able to do, 

But this muſt be firſt taken notice of, and chiefly ob. 
ſerved above all things, I am about to mention concern. 
ing the cure of the Gout, namely, that all digeſtive Re. 
medies whatſoever, whether Courſes of Phyſick, or Diet, 
or Exercile, are not to be taken up by the bye, but muſt 
be uſed conſtantly, and dailj with the greateſt Diligence; 
for whereas in this Diſeaſe, as almoſt in all other Chro- 
nica Dileales, the cauſe of it hath paſſed into an habit, 
and is become as it were a new Nature: No Man in his 
right Senſes, can think that ſome ſmall and ſhort Altera. 
tion, ſuper-induced upon the Blood and Humours, by 
any ſort of Remedy or Diet, can perfect the Cure; for 
the whole habit of the Body muſt be changed, and the 
whole Man muſt be as it were new framed ; for it 1s not 
ſo here, as in ſome acute Diſcales, where he that even 
now was ſtrong, and in perfect Health is ſuddenly ſeized 
with a Fever, and precipitated from the beſt State of 

Health, into the moſt dangerous Diſeaſe. No, the Cale 
of the Gout is quite different, where he that for many 
years together, by indulging himſelf in Surfeiring and 
Drunkenneſs, and neglecting his wonted Exerciſes, is 
worn out by ſloth and negligence, or by hard ſtudy, or 
continual and intenſe thinking, or by ſome other Er- 
rors of Life; as if he had deſignedly perverted the vari- 
ous Ferments of the Body, and oppreſſed the Animal 
Spirits (which are the chief inſtruments of Digeſtion ) 
by which means the Preter- natural Humours that are 
heapt up, break out at length, when they are arrived 
to the higheſt degree, and confound all, the fleſh being 
ſofined, and the joynts weakened, ſo that they rea- 
dily receive the Humours falling upon them. And ſo at 
length another Nature is as it were ſuper- induced by de- 
grees, the priſtine and natural Oeconomy of the Body 
being wholly ſubverted, and deſtroyed: And thoſe Fits 


about which unwary, and unthinking Men are fo buſied, 
| are 


* 


the Year 1675, to the Year 1680. 365 


e indeed nothing elſe, but the Series and order of Symp- 
ums depending on that method, which Nature is wont 
to uſe in driving out the Matter that cauſes the Diſeaſe; 
wherefore he labours in vain, that endeavours to drive 
away this Diſeaſe, by this or that Remedy, or Regimen 
ow and then uſed, For this habit being chiefly founded, 
and conſiſting both in the weakneſs of all the Digeſtions, 
and in the want of the natural ſtrength of the particular 
farts, we mult provide againſt both theſe ills, and the 
frength of the Concoction, as well as the ſoundneſs of 
the Parrs, muſt be reduced and reſtored gradually ro 
the former Stare, and Oeconomy of the Body, tho' to 
perform this fully and perfectly, may nor ſeem poſſible, 
nor only becauſe any habit is difficultly changed into the 
quite contrary, but alſo becauſe old Age, which moſt com- 
monly attends this Diſeaſe, violently oppoſes ; yer the 
Cure is to be endeavoured, as much as the Strength and 
Age will permit: And the nearer or further from this 
mark the Patient is, he will more or leſs avoid the Tyran- 
ny of the Gour. 

And it is moreover to be obſerved, that digeſtive Re- 
medies, either Medical or Dietetick, are chiefly to be 
uſed in the Intervals vf the Firs, and as long as may be 
before the next Fit; for by reaſon of Old- age, much time 
is required, and a conſtant uſe of Medicines, before the 
Corroboration of all the Concoctions, and the Reſtaura- 
tion of the enfeebled Ferments of the Body, and ſuch a 
Soundneſs as is requiſite for the Blood and Viſcera can be 
obtained. 

But tho' thoſe Remedies, and other things of the like 
Nature, may do good, yet this intention of corrobora- 
ting cannot be anſwered by theſe things alone, but Re- 
ſpect muſt be alſo had to thoſe rhinge, which do nor 
properly belong ro Phyſick. And he will be moſt cer- 
tainly deceived, that thinks he can perform the Cure of 
this or ſome other Chronical Diſeaſe by Medicines alone: 
Firſt therefore, a Mediocrity 1s to be obſerved in Mear 
and Drink, ſo that neither more Nouriſhmenr be taken 
in, than the Stomach can decoct, leſt rhe Diſeaſe ſhould 
be heightned by it; nor on the other Hand, muſt the 
parts, by too much Abſtinence, be defrauded of that 


Proportion, whereby the ſtrength and vigour ought ro 


266 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 


be ſuſtained, for by doing ſo, they will be more weake,: me 
ed; for either is alike hurtful, as I have frequently con 
found in my ſelf and others. Moreover, as to the qua. isn 
liry of the Meat, the things of eaſie Digeſtion conſider. WM IK. 
ed by themſelves, are to be preferred before things a Mi 
hard Digeſtion 3 yet regard mult be had to the Patient: be 
Palate. For we muſt rake notice, that that which iz lea 
earneſtly craved for by the Stomach, though of difficuk . the 
Digeſtion, is ſooner. conquered by Nature, than tha lis 
which is accounted to be of eaſier Digeſt ion, if it be of. M. 
fenſive to the Stomach : Bur thoſe things that are rec. ef. 
koned of hard Digeſtion, are therefore to be eaten more 
ſparingly ; aud I ſuppole the Patient ought to feed upon 
one ſort of Meat at a Meal; for various kinds of Fleſh 
eaten at once, diſturb the Stomach more than one (or 
eaten in the ſame quantity; as to other things belides 
Fleſh, let him ear at pleaſure, if they are nor ſharp, not 
ſalted, nor ſpiced; which though they do not injure Con- 
coction, yet they are hurtful, for that they exagitate the 
Fomes of the Diſcaſe. 

As to the Times of eating, a Dinner is only neceſſary; 
for the Bed being moſt convenient to digeſt the Humouts, 
that time ought not to be waſted about concocting the 
Meat; therefore they that are ſubject to the Gout, ſhould 
not eat Suppers, yet they may allow themſelves a large 
dravghr of Small- beer, for ſuch are alſo moſt commonly 
inclinable to breed the Stone in the Kidneys, the Con- 
cretion whereof is much hindered by ſuch a kind of Li. 
quor, drank at this time, the Reins being cleanſed and 
cooled rhereby. 

The drinking of Milk, or a Milk-Dier, either crude 
or boyled, without any thing elſe, except perhaps a 
piece of Bread with ir once a day, has been much uſed 
theſe rwenty Years, and ir his done more good to many, 
than any other kind of Remedy for this Diſeaſe, as long 
as they kept exactly to it: But ſo ſoon as they returned 
to common Diet, tho of eatie Digeſtion, the Gout re- 
rurned more violently than before, and kept them longer; 
for the Principles of Nature being weakened by this Me- 
thod, the dick was rendried leis capable to repel the Dil. 
eale, for which cauſe it was more dangerous, and laſted 
longer, therefore he thar detigus to betake himſelf to this 

method, 


the Tear 1675, to the Tear 1680. 367 


method, ought firſt to conſider ſeriouſly, whether he can 
continue in the uſe of it all his Life long, which perhaps 
is not in his Power, how reſolute ſoever he may be. For 
| knew a Noble- man, who after he had been dieted with 
Milk only, a whole Year with plealure, (all which time 
he went to Stool daily once, or oftner) was forced to 
leave off, becauſe he was ſuddenly bound in Body, and 
the Temper of his Body altered, and becauſe at length 
his Stomach nauſeared Milk,* tho' the inclination of his 
Mind {till continued. But ſome Hypochondriacal People 
of a groſs habit of Body, or who have accuſtomed them- 
ſelves much and a long while to ſpirituous Liquors, can 
by no means bear a Milk-diet. Moreover, that very ſhort 
and fading benefit that they receive by this Diet, to whom 
Milk is agreeable, proceeds hence, vix. not only, for that 
this Diet is moſt ſimple (for I do not doubt, but that 
Barley-broth may do as well, if the Stomach will bear it) 
but alſo becauſe it renders the Blood more ſweet and mild 
by quelling the acrid Particles in it; and moreover, which 
| ſuppole is moſt conſiderable, Milk being a ſort of Food 
very unfit for grown People, ſuppreſſes that Turgeſcency 
of the Humours, which occaſions the Gout ; and for 
that reaſon thoſe few with whom a Milk-dier agrees, are 
ſo long free from the Gour, as they feed upon ir, and no 
longer; for by being wholly unſuitable to the original 
cauſe of the Gour, viz. the weakneſs of the Ferments 
and Concoctions, it is much more Injurious than Penefi- 
cial, And becauſe this has not been ſufficiently regar- 
ded, ſomd unwary People have fell into great and fatal 
Errors; for by endeavouring to oppoſe the containing 
Cauſe, viz. the heat and ſharpneſs of the Humours, 
they have deſtroyed the Concoctions, and all the natural 
Functions. 

As to Liquors, thoſe in my opinion are beſt, that are 
neither as ſtrong as Wine, nor as weak as Water, of which 
ſart is our London Small beer, with or without Hops; for 
extreanis on either hand are hurtful. Firſt as to the Wine, 
tho' the Proverb ſays, Drink Wine and have the Gout, 
and drink no Wine and have the Gout. Yer it is without 
Controverſie, and confirmed by various Experiments of 
gouty People, that Wine de fatto is injurious. For tho 


| it may be ſuppoſed ro do good by helping the Conco- 


c Tione, 


368 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 
ctions, the diſorders whereof, I have long accounted tha 
Antecedent Cauſe of the Gour ; yet with reſpect to the 
containing caule, it muſt be reckoned wholly injurious 
for that it fires and exagitates the Humours, the Fomes 
of the Diſeaſe, already prepared to give Battle; Yer] gg 
not grant that Wine uſed for ordinary drink, does pro. 
mote Concoction, but rather ſpoils ir, unleſs in thoſe 
that have been accuſtomed ro Wine for a long time; fot 
tho' as it paſſes by it imparts ſome hear, yet it certainly 
injures the Ferments of the Body, and deſtroys the natu. 
ral Spirits ; and for this reaſon I ſuppoſe great Drinker 
die of the Gout, Dropfie, Palſie, and other cold Diſeaſes, 
Moreover, a continual ſwilling ot Wine, renders the Bo- 
dy ſoft like the Bodies of Women, whereas temperate Li. 

uors ſtrengthen and confirm the Tene of all the parts; 
fr which reaſon, they that have always uſed ſmall Li. 
quors, ſeldom know what the Gout means. It is more. 
over to be noted, that thoſe Men are moſt inclinable to 
this Diſeaſe, who tho' their natural Concoction is leſſened, 
are nouriſhed more than enough, by reaſon of a certain 
Luxury of the Blood, and they grow bulky by reaſon of 
ſome indigeſted Marter, inſtead of good Subſtance and 
well compacted. And drinking of Wine does more in- 
creaſe this Luxury of the Blood ; and moreover, heaps 
up a new ſtock of Matter, and actually occaſions the 
Diſeaſe, by firing as it were the Fomes of it, which has 
been laid up a long while. And belides the Blood of 
Goury People, being very like that which is taken from 
thoſe that are Pleuriticks, or ſeized with ſome other In- 
flammatory Diſeaſe ; it would be a mad thing to inrage 
it more with ſpirituous Liquors, Nor on the contrary, are 
too cooling Liquors to be uſed ; for theſe by quite ſpoil- 
ing the Concoctions, and extinguiſhing the narural heat, 
produce the greater miſchief; not pain, as Wine doth, bui 
Death ir lelf: As experience reaches in thoſe, who * 
indulging themſelves in drinking Wine, till they are old, 


and betaking themſelves ſuddenly to drink {mall Liquors, 

dave ſoon deſtroyed themſelves. | 
Therefore thoſe that are ſubje& to the Gout, muſt rake 
care that they uſe thoſe Liquors, that can neither caulc 
Drunkenneſs when they are taken in a large quantity, 
nor injure the Stomach by Chilling it; of this kind, at 
ay 


„ 4109.0 QC . vv9594 © 


— "2 ts. io. __— x 


the Tear 1673, to the Tear 1680. 369 


ſaid, isour Small-beer, and a proper Liquor may be made 
in other Countries, by mixing a little Wine with a great 
deal of Water. I count Water by ic ſelf, crude and in- 
jurious, and I have found ir ſo ro my hurt. But Watet 
may be ſafely drunk by young People, wherewith at this 
day, the grearelt part of Mankind quenches Thirſt, being 
more happy with their Poverty, than we with Plenty and 
Luxury. To confirm which, I produce that great Trains 
of Diſeaſes, whereby our Bodies on this account are 
rormented, vix. the Gout, Stone, Apoplexy, Palſie, 
and the like; and that violence upon the Mind, 
whereby it's driven Contrary to its native Rectitude, 
while the adventitious Spirits of ſuch Liquors, compli. 
cared with the Animal Spirirs, ſerving for the forming 
Thoughts, diſturb the Mind, by volatizing it roo much, 
ſuggeſting vain and frivolous Fancies, inſtead of things 
that are ſolid, and of ſome moment, and ſo makes 
us Jeſters, and Merry-fellows, inſtead of Wiſe Men, be- 
rween Which the difference is almoſt the ſame, as be- 
twixt a Subſtance and a Shadow: But enough of 
this. . 
But now tho it may be ſufficient for him that has the 
Gout but a little, and at ſome times only, to uſe Small- 
beer, and diluted Wine, the degree of this Diſeaſe, nor 
niring a more ſevere uſage; yet when the whole 
Subſtance of the Body is as it were degenerated into 
the Gour, he will be unable ro conquer the Diſeale, who 
does not Wholly abſtain from any ſort of fermented Li- 
quors, tho {mall and mild; for all theſe contain 4 pun- 
gent Spirit, and ſome degree of ſharpneſs, and what is 
worſe, as they have a Ferment in them (even as Yeaſt 
put into Liquors, imparts a Fermentative Virtue to the 
whole Maſs) ſo they incline rhe Humours to a perpetual 
Fermentation. 
Therefore a Dietetick drink muſt be preſcribed of 
the Ingredients commonly known, and appointed for 
this uſe for ordinary drink, if it be not too ſtrong ; 
for if ſo, the Humours will be almoſt as much intra- 
ied as by Wine: Arid, on the contrary, ir muſt not be 
o ſmall, as ro hurt che natural Functions, by over- 
cooling them. This ſort of Drink, if it be made of ſuch 
{Ingredients as are leaſt 4s" Ve ro the Patient, wy 
He 


370 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 


the conſtant raking of them, may cauſe ſome loathing 
for a Week or two, will afrerwards be as pleaſing, and 
as acceptable, as any other Liquors, to which he has 
been moſt accuſtomed. And by this kind of Liquor, the 
Appetite will be increaſed, and become more natural 
than ir uſed to be with fermented Liquors. And more. 
over there will be this advantage, that he that uſes this 
Dietetick Liquor for his ordinary drink, may the freer 
indulge himſelf in other Diet, than when he drunk Beer 
or Wine; for the Errors in Diet (all which it is almoſt 
impoſſible for a Man to avoid) will by this means, be 
ſomewhat corrected and amended. But, which is the 
chiefeſt of all, che Patient may prevent the Stone by this 
means, which is commonly the conſtant Companion ot the 
Gour ; for all ſharp and attenuating Liquors, occafion a 
Fir of the Stone, as well as generare ir. The following 
. 55 being of a pleaſant Taſt and Colour, pleaſes me 
ſt. 


Take of Sarſaparilla fix Ounces, of Saſſafras, China, 
and ſhavings of Harts-horn, each two Ounces, of Li- 
Juorice one Ounce ; boy! them in two Gallons of Foun- 
tain-water for half an hour ; afterwards let them ſtand 
covered upon hot aſhes twelve hours, afterwards bol 
it to the Conſumption of a third part; as ſoon as it 5 
taken from the Fire, infuſe half an Dunce of Ani. 

ſeeds ; after two hours ſtrain it, and let it ſtand till its 
clear; keep. the clear infuſion in Glaſs Bottles well ſtopt 
for uſe, 


This Liquor is moſt conveniently uſed at firſt when 
the Patient recovers of the Fir, and he muſt perſevere 
in the uſe of ir all the reſt of his Life, as well when he 
has the Fits, as at other times. For it is not enough rg 
ſtudy new things, when the Diſeaſe is raging ; for in ſuch 
2 Confuſion, and diforderly Motion, Nature can ſcarce 
bear the change of fermented Liquors, which are brisk 
and ſpirituous, for ſuch as are ſmall and without Spirits. 
At the ſame time the above-mentioned Electuary muſt 
be uſed daily, as well in the Fits, as when they are off; 
the heat of this will ſome what allay the wateriſfineſs of 
the Dieteticl Drink, affording a due degree of heat 5 

the 


(> OO 


”m— 2 0-09 


WW wus ©&@ D0 Oo C0 (32 we 


2 
— 


„ „% KK Try flu ” * 


? 
2 
5 
J 
7 
. 
| 
l 
ö 


the Year 1675, to the Tear 1680, 371 


the Blood and Bowels, withour that agitation which uſed 
to be occaſioned by the hear of fermented Liquors, 

If any one ſhould object, that that Life is ſcarce vi- 
tal, wherein a total Abſtinence from Wine and other 
fermented Liquors is oblerved : I anſwer, it muſt be con- 
ſidered, whether it be not much more miſerable, and leſs 
tolerable, ro be racked and dreadfully tortured with the 
Gour, grown ſtrong by continuance (for when the Diſ- 
eaſe is gentle, this is not requiſite) than to be confined 
to this Liquor; the uſe of which being continued, he 
may indulge himſelf in almoſt all ſorts of Food: Not to 
repeat now, that this Drink (as well as all other —_ 
grows pleaſant by Cuftom, Certainly he that has felt 
this Dileaſe, if he be a Man, will nor long diſpute which 
is beſk, 


Yer notwithſtanding, if the Patient by reaſon of a 


long, and too great ule of intoxicating Liquors, or by 
rea 

withour Wine, or ſome other fermenred Liquor, he can- 
not leave it off ſuddenly without great danger, the doing 
whereof has been fatal to many, Therefore in my opini- 
on he ſhould not uſe the Dietetick Apozem above deſcri- 
bed; but if he be reſolved to uſe it, let him be accuſto- 


med to ir leiſurely (drinking a draught of Wine at Meals 


for ſome time) more like a Remedy than a Diet, till che 
Decoction becomes more familiar: Bur Spaniſh Wine is 
to be preferred in this Caſe before French or Rheniſh 


Wine, the two laſt being apt to inrage the Humours, and 


to increale the Fomes of the Diſeaſe, tho' they are very 
grateful ro the Stomach, Moreover, they are almoſt as 
crude, and ſcarce more concocted than our Syder, and 
befides they are not ſo Cordial and hot as the Caſe requires. 
And ſo much may ſuffice for the Meat and Drink of gouty 
People. 


There is another thing tho' it may ſeem ſmall, yer is 


of great moment, as well for digeſting the Fomes of the 
Diſeaſe, wien the Fir is violent, as for hindring the Ge- 
neration of tht Matter, when the Fit is off; ro wit; that 
the Patient eſpecially in Winter go to Bed early; for 
beſides, bleeding and purging, nothing deſtroys the 
ſtrength of Nature more than watching a Nights, which 
every fickly Perſon can affirm by Expericnce, if he con- 

b 2 ſiders 


on of old age or weakneſs, cannot concoct his Meat 


372 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 

ſiders how much brisker, and more chearfully he riſes 
when he goes to Bed early, and how languid and faint, 
he is when he ſate up late; and tho it may ſeem as well, 
if he lies a Bed ſo many hours, whether he goes to 
Bed ſooner or later: For inſtance, whether he goes to 
Bed at Nine, and riſes at Five, or goes to Bed at Eleven, 
and riſes at Seven; yet it is not ſo, and I ſuppoſe chiefly 
for this reaſon, viz. in the Day- time the Spirits are diſ- 
ſipated, either by the Exerciſe of the Body or Mind, 
which in People that are fickly are ſo infirm and weak, 
that they have need of Reſt earlier in the Evening; for 
the approach of Night cauſing as it were a Relaxation 
of the Occonomy of the Body, which was kepr up in 
the Day-rime, by the influence of the Sun, it is neceſ- 
fary that the heat of the Bed ſhould ſupply the want of 
the Sun, eſpecially in Winter. Bur in the Morning, the 
Spirits being refreſhed and invigorated by the Reſt of the 
foregoing Night, and the warmth of the Bed beſides, 
for that the enſuing day adds firmneſs and ſtrength to 
the Tone of the Body, rifing early at this time, tho' an 
hour or two is taken from the Morning fleep, Nature is 
not ſo much injured, as by Evening watchings protra- 
ed an hour or two. Wherefore I would perſwade thoſe 
that are ſubject to the Gour, to go to Bed early, eſpeci- 
ally in Winter, and to rie early, tho' ſleep ſomewhat 
ſhorter may intice them to lie longer ; for ſleeping in the 
Morning, prevents ſo much fleep the next Night, and fo 
at length a force being brought upon Nature, and its wile 
Inſtructions deſpiſed, Night is turned into Day, and Day 
into Night. 

Moreover, the tranquility of mind muſt be by all 
means obtained; for all Perturbations, when they break 
the bounds, mightily diſſolve the Frame of the Spirits, 
that are the inſtruments of Digeſtion; and ſo by conſe- 
quence much promote the Gout. Therefore the Sick 
ſhould prudently conſider his own mortal Condition, and 


not fooliſhly imagine that he is freed from thoſe troubles, - 


that neceſſarily follow it; for whether he ſuffers this 
Affliction of mind, either by his own fault, or the fault 
of others, he can never preſcribe Laws to the World, 
which has not been always hitherto obediegt to any one, 
how Potent and Wile ſoever hie has been; nor does ne 
a 


„% — = z23 = „ Fu =, 2 RV © wi: 


the Year 1675, to the Year 1690. 373 


all things fall out ſo exactly, according to any ones 
mind, as he fondly imagines, bur ſuddenly as he is bu- 
fed in mind abour the ordering of things, he becomes 
the Specimen of humane frailty, having unreaſonably de- 
prived himſelf of the Enjoyment of the fading Fruits of 
Life. The ſame inconvenience follows too great an Ap- 
plication of mind to ſtudy, and ſerious things; for Me- 
lancholy always attending this Dileale, more than any 
other, thoſe that are ſubject to ir, are wont to tire and 
overwhelm the Animal Spirits, by thinking much and 
long, without the Artificial help of Books; and they do 
o mightily over-think, that the Oeconomy of the Body, 
cannot longer preſerve ir ſelf whole: For which reaſon 
in my Opinion, this Diſeaſe ſeizes (except my ſelf if you 
pleaſe) very few Fools. 

Bur the Exerciſe of the Body is more advantageous, 
than all other things that are uſed, ro hinder the Indige- 
ſtion of the Humours, (which I reckon the chief cauſe 
of the Gout) and to corroborate the Blood, and to re- 
ſtore ſtrength to the parts: But it muſt be obſerved, 
which I have mentioned above, that as in this Diſeaſe, 
more than in any other chronical Diſeaſe, the Habit of 
the whole Body ought ro be changed; the Exerciſe of 
the Body, unleſs it 1s daily, will do no good ; for this 
kind of Exerciſe intermitted by Turns, as it does ſcarce 
conduce any thing to the change of the habir of rhe Bo- 
dy grown languid and effeminate, by Sloth and Indul- 
gence, ſo perhaps it may prove injurious, by occaſioning 
the Fit, when the Patient has di{.uſed it a long while, 
But this Exerciſe ought not to be violent, but ſuch as is a- 
greeable ro Old-men, which are moſt uſually the Sub- 
jects of the Gout. For too violent a Motion of the Bo- 
dy does too much diſſipate the Spirits, and by conſe- 
quence hurts the Concoctions, whereas conſtant and mo- 
derate Exerciſe ſtrengthens them. Tho' this may ſeem 
hard to a Man, who beſides Old-age aud Sloth, and the 
unfirneſs of the Body for Motion, which is as it were 
natural in this Diſeaſe, is moreover puniſhed with Pain; 
and yer if this be omitred, nothing which has been al- 
ready found out will do any good, and as the intervals 
of the Firs without conſtant Exerciſe of the Body, will 


not be long, ſo ſuch an one will be more prone to breed 
| | 2 the 


374 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 


the Stone which is more dangerous, and more rormenting 
than the Gout. | 

Moreover (which is of great moment) the Stony mar. 
ter is much increaled, by long reſt in che Joynts of the 
Body, eſpecially of the Fingers, io that at leugrh they arc 
wholly deprived of ail Motion. For how confidently lo- 
ever lome People affiim that the Matter of theſe Stones 
is nothing elle but rhe Tat of the Blood put off upon 
the Joynts, yet it will eaſily appear to any one that does 
a little weigh the thing more ſcriouſly, tha: when a great 
quantity of unconcocted Matter, cavfing the Gour, flows 
upon ſome of the Joynts, and renders the neighbouring 
parts tumid a long while, at laſt it happens, that partly 
by reaſon the Aſſimulative Virtue of theſe is choaked, and 
partly by reaſon of a ſuffocating Obſtruction, which this 
dull Humour breeds in them, rbe ſaid Matter is genera- 
red, Which is turned into this kind of Subſtance, by the 
heat and pain of the Joynts, and is daily increaſed, chan. 

ing the Fleſh and Skin into its own Nature, which now 
fies naked, and may be picked out with a Needle, and 
is like Chalk, or Crabs- eyes, or ſome ſuch thing. But 
now this ill may be prevented by daily Exerciſe, by which 
the Humours cauſing the Gout, which are apt to ſeize on 
one part, are duly ſcattered through the whole Body. 80 
that it comes to paſs as I have oblerved my ſelf, that long 
and daily Exerciſe does nor only hinder the Generation of 
this very Matter; bur alſo diſſolves the Stones when they 
are hard and old, if they have not prevailed ſo far, as to 
change the outward Skin into their own Subſtance. 

As to the kind of Exctciſe, riding on Horſe-back, when 
Old-age, or the Stone does not hinder, is much to be pre- 
ferred before the reſt: And truly, IJ have many times 
thought with my ſelf, that if any one knew a Medicine 
which he could alſo conceal, as effectual in this, and moſt 
Chronica] Diſeaſes, as conſtant and daily riding on Horſe- 
Þack, he might eaſily ger a vaſt Eſtate. If this cannot be 
uled, riding in a Coach does almoſt as well; and on this 
account at leaſt it is well with gouty People, for their 
Riches which inticed them to Luxury, whereby the Diſ- 
eaſe was bred, can provide them a Coach, which kind of 
Exerciſe they may uſe, hen they cannot the other. 


Bur 


1 


r _— Gn "I IFRS OG. 9 , . SP TW V 


— "x Py WY 4. OD 00. - OT .. .. 


the Tear 1675, to the Year 1680, 373 


Bur it is to be obſerved, thar ir is beſt ro uſe Exerciſe 
in a good Air, viz. in the Country, and nor in a City, 
where the Air is filled with Vapours exhaling from the 
Shops of various Arrificers, and thickened by the Cloſe- 
neſs of the Buildings, as it is here in London, which is ge- 
nerally thought to be the moſt ſpacious City in the whole 
World. But how great the difference is betwixt the Ex- 
erciſes in the Country, and Exerciſes in Town, any one 
that has the Gout will ſoon find. 

As to Venery, he that is old and gouty (being now 
deſtitute of a ſtock of Spirits, whereby the Concoctions 
ought ro be promoted, and by conſequence his Foynrs, 
and the neighbouring parts to them, roo much weak- 
enced and looſened without this adventitious Deſtruction) 
is equally as improvident in my Opinion, if he indulge 
himſelf in theſe Allurements, as he that having underta- 
ken a Journey, ſhould conſume all his Proviſions before 
he ſers out; for beſides, the Miſchief he brings on him- 
ſelf, by nor reſtraining the impotent Deſires of feeble Age, 
he deprives himſelf of the great Privilege of enjoying 
that Jubilee which 1s reſerved as the great and ſpecial Fa- 
vour of Nature for old Men only, whereby in the laſt 
Scene of their Lives, they are at length emancipared from 
the impetuoſities of Luſt, which like a ravenous Beaſt 
worried them all the time of their Youth, Night and 
Day: For the full ſatisfaction of theſe Appetites can 
no way compenſate for that long Train of Miſeries, that 
either accompany or follow it. And ſo much for the Re- 


gimen. * 


But tho Rules of this kind reſpecting Diet, and the 
other Regimen, if they are carefully obſerved by thoſe 
that are ſubject ro the Gout, may preſerve them fram 
violent Fits of it, and may reſtore that ſtrength to the 
Blood and ſolid parts, whereby they may be freed from 
the many Miſeries, on which Account this Diſeaſe ex- 
ceeds humane Patience, and at length becomes mortal; 
yet after ſome Intervals, eſpecially at the latter end of 
Winter, they will be ſometime ſeized with the Gout: 
For tho' in Summer time, when the Tone and Vigour of 
che Blood is excited and preſerved in irs Stare by the 
hear of the Sun, and there is likewiſe a due Elimination 
of the Humours through the Pores, it is reaſonable to 
| N Bb4 ſup- 


92 
_ - — — — — — — - - - — — — — 222 = — — — 
E 2 = - - _ — — * = — ä — 2 
2 - S - — — = — — 6 pat 2 — — — 7 
4 * a _ = - — —— —— 
* >< — 2 A ; _ — * A * 8 — — * = £2 _ = - 
1 r 8 — 2 _— — — — — ——ů— 
— - - — —— X 2— - "7, * 2 — — — — — — == _ "2 = 
= - - — 
_ N N — - — — — — — - 
2 — * 2 I x — — —— - = = * . a = 


— — — 


— 
— — 


— 


_ — FF. 
— _— k — - A 


376 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 

ſuppoſe, that the Concoctions ſhould proceed much bette: 
than in Winter; yer when Winter approaches, the ſtrength 
of the Blood being leſſened, and rhe Perſpiration through 
the Pores hindered, there muſt needs bc a great heap of 
ind:gcited Matter, which by its long continuance, will 
form a Species accompanied with proper S mproms, and 
produce a Fit, as ſoon as occaſion is offered, either by the 
Humours put into motion by the nearer approach of rhe 
Sun, or by drinking Wine, or by violent Exerciſe, or by 
any other evident Cauſe. 

It is manifeſt from what has been ſaid, Thar he that 
endeavours to cure this Diſeale, ought to make it his by. 
fineſs to change the Habir of his whole Body, and to re. 
ſtore its old Conſtitution, as much as Age, and other 
Circumſtances will permit, which muſt be endeavoured 
in the ſpaces betwixt the Fits; not when the Fits are on, 
for when the Fomes is not only generated, bur now is 
caſt upon the Joynts, it is too late to ſtrive to change 
it, or to caſt it out any other way, for it is to be ejected 
by no other method than Nature ſhews, wherein alone 
We muſt acquieſce; which is obſerved in the Fits of 
Agues, and for which reaſon we do nothing till the Heat 
is over: Nor is he more abſurd, that is anxiouſly bu- 
fied about taking off the Heat, Thirſt, and Reſtleſneſs, 
2nd other Symptoms of theſe Fevers, than he that thinks 
he has cured the Gout, when he has only laboured to re- 
ſtrain the Symptoms; for by this means he has only ren- 
dred the Cure of it more difficult; for the more he eaſes 
the Pain, the more he obſtructs the Concoction of the Hu- 
mours, and the more he takes off the Lameneſs, the more 
he hinders the Expulſion of the Morbifick Matter. More- 
over, the more the Fury and the Sharpneſs of the Fit is 
ſuppreſſed, it will not only laſt longer, but the ſpace be- 
twixt the Fits will alſo be ſnorter, and leſs free from eve- 
ry degree of the Symptoms which accompany this Diſ- 
eaſe ; which no one will deny, that has well conſidered 
what J have treated of above concerning the Hiſtory of 
this Diſeaſe: 3 | : SOT 

But now tho no'greater matter muſt be attempted du- 
ring the Fir, only the removing thoſe Symptoms, which 
a falſe method of Cure ſomerimes occafions, yer ſeeing 
all allow that this Diſeaſe procceds from an 3 

FE an 


ty We aA 1 


the Tear 1675, to the Year 1680. 377 


and an Exuberancy of Humours, it may perhaps be con- 
venient for the Patient to abſtain from Fleſh for ſome 
days, when he is firſt ſeized, and in the place of it, ro 
uſe ſimple Barley-broth, or ſome ſuch kind of Food, 
which ſort of thin Diet conduces much towards the leſſen- 
ing the Mor bifick Matter, and will give Nature an op- 
portunity to digeſt it ſooner. But for as much as there 
is a vaſt difference betwixt the Body of one Perſon and 
another, {ome not bearing Abſtinence from fleſh, but by 
reaſon of it are ſeized with a Confuſion of the Animal 
Spirits, with fainting and other Symptoms, which uſe 
to befal Women that are ſubject to Hyſterical Fits, theſe 
people are injured if they forbear Fleſh any longer than 
their Stomachs loath ir, which ſeldom las beyond the 
firſt or lecond Day of the particular Firs, all which 


joyned together as I mentioned before, make a whole 


Fit; but whether any one eat Fleſh ſooner or later, 
great care muſt be taken, that they eat no more durin 
the Fit, than is neceſſary to ſuſtain Nature. Nor is les 
care to be taken about the quality of the Diet; for as 
in the Intervals of the Fits, ſo more eſpecially when the 
Fit is preſent, the Sick ought ro take the greateſt care, 
that he do not at all err in the quantity, or quality of 
his Meat or Drink. And moreover, more than ordina- 
ry care muſt be taken in obſerving any other Regimen, 
as well as this in the Intervals; and tho' the Pain, as 
well as the unfirnels for Motion, may ſeem to con- 
tra-indicate Exerciſe, which I have commended above 
all orher things, yer this labour muſt be undertaken. 
For tho' at the beginning of the Fit it may ſeem impoſ- 
fible, that the Sick ſhould bear ro be carried into a 
Coach, and to be ſure he is much leſs able ro bear the 
Motion of it; and yet if he try it, he will ſoon perceive 
that he is leſs pained by ſuch a Motion, than when he 
keeps at home in his Chair. And moreover, he has this 
advantage, if he ride ſome hours in his Coach, in the 
Morning and after Dinner, that whereas when he ſate at 
home all Day, he lay awake the greateſt part of the 
Night, now he can fleep away the Pain a great part of 
the Night; for very moderate Exerciſe does ſo weary a 
Gouty-man, that he falls aſleep. And beſides, the ſame 
Exerciſe dees ſomeWhar prevent the Stone, which an _ 
| ife 


9 


> — P 
- ̃”F— , : 


278 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 
Life moſt commonly cauſes. But what is moſt confige: 
rable, the total imporence of the Limbs for Motion, i; 
helped by conſtant Exerciſe, which happens to many af. 
ter the firſt or ſecond long Fir, the Tendons of the Hams 
and Heels being contracted; for when by reaſon of the 
tormenting Pain, they have allowed themſelves to he ſtil 
a long time (being unwilling to extend their Legs, when 
the Pain has ſeized their Knees) at length they are de. 
prived of the Motion of their Legs and Feet, all the re 
of their Lives, as well when the Fits are off, as whey 
they are on. Furthermore in old Men, whole Concotti- 
ons are much vitiated, and who by reaſon the Dileale 
has afflicted them many years, have as it were the very 
Subſtance of their Bodies turned to the Gout, it is not to 
be hop'd that the Diſeaſe without Exerciſe, can ever be 
brought to Digettion ; for when the Diſeaſe is too ſtrong 
for Nature, they often die by Fainting and Sickneſs, 
which the abundance of the Furniture for the Diſeaſe 
that cannot be concocted produces, and they are de- 
2 by this Matter, that cannot be concocted, as by 
oyſon. 8 

Bur notwithſtanding what has been ſaid of the Uſe- 
fulneſs of Exercile in the Fits of the Gout, yer if the 
Sick by reaſon of the violence of the Fit, is as it were 
overwhelmed preſently by the finſt Aſſault of it, (which 
happens to thoſe for the moſt part in whom the Gout has 
now come to its height, nor is it yet grown gentle by a 
Courſe of many years) in this Caſe, if the Sick is con- 
fined to his Chamber, it will alſo be convenient, tha: 
he keep bis Bed for ſome of the firſt Days, until the vio- 
lence of the Pain is abated, for the Bed does ſomewhat 
{upply the want of Exerciſe; for the continual uſe of 
it does more powerfully digeſt the Morbifick Matter in 
a few days, than keeping up in many, eſpecially at the 
beginning of the Diſeaſe, if the Sick can abſtain from 
Fleſh without fainting, or other ill Symptoms, and be con- 
rented only with Barie y-broth, Small- beer, and the like. 
But we muſt take notice, That if the Gout is inveterate, 
and inclines the Sick to Fainting, Gripes, a Looſneſs, and 
ſuch kind of Symptoms, he will ſcarce avoid being de- 
ſtroyed by one of the Firs, if he do not uſe Exereiſe 


ina free and open Ait: For a great many Gouty People 


have 


* 


= OT + ww 0? 


„„ 


e 
e 
h 
8 
a 


* 


the Tear 1675, to the Tear 1680. 379 


have periſhed by theſe Symptoms, to whom they have 
been obnoxious by being confined to their Chambers, and 
elpecially to their Beds; whereas had they bore the Fa- 
tigve of riding in a Coach the greateſt part of the Day, 
they had not died ſo ſoon. For tho he that is troubled 
with Pain only in one of his Limbs, may confine himſelf 
to his Chamber, yer if another, that inſtead of violent 
pain is afflicted with Sickneſs, and the other aforeſaid 
Symptoms, ſhould he do the ſame, would endanger his 
Life; and indeed it is well for the Sick when the Pain is 
ſo violent, that he cannot bear Motion, for then there is 
no great need of it, the very Pain, which is the bittereſt 
Remedy in Nature, ſecuring his Life. 

But as to the Symptoms of the Gour, we muſt apply 
our ſelves to thoſe whereby the Life of the Patient is in- 
dangered ; the weakneſs and faintneſs of the Stomach, 
with Gripes of the Belly as from wind, is the rnoſt fre- 
quent of theſe which befalls thoſe, who either have Been 
ſubject to the Gour many years, or thoſe, who tho' they 


have nor been long afflicted with ir, have notwithſtanding 


invited this miſchief roo early, by ſuddenly changing ſpi- 
rituous Liquors, for thoſe that are thin, and much cool- 
ing, or by applying repelling Plaiſters, and other cooling 
Medicines to the parts affected, ro aſſwage the Pain; up- 
on which account the Material Cauſe of the Diſeaſe, which 
ought to have been put off upon the Joynts, is caſt upon 
the Bowels. I have tryed many things for the Fits of the 
laſt Years to leſſen this Symptom; but nothing did ſo 
much good as a ſmall draught of Canary Wine taken now 
and then, when the Sickneſs and Faintneſs afflict the Sick: 
Nor is red French Wine, nor Venice Treacle, nor any o- 
ther Cordial thing which I have yer known, ſo effectual. 
But we muſt imagine that neither this Wine, or any other 
Cordial, if Exerciſe be nor uſed, can wholly preſerve the 
Patient. . 

But if any one Symptom ſcarce bearing a Truce, comes 
ſuddenly by reaſon of the ſtriking in of the gouty Mat- 
ter, and threatens Death, we muſt not truſt to the 
Wine, nor to the Exerciſe above commended; but in 
this Caſe if it does not fall upon the Head; but upon the 
natural or vital Parts, we muſt immediately fly to Lau- 
lanum, namely, give twenty drops of Liquid LO 

| | mixe 


ö 
. 
[ 


390 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 


mixed with a ſmall draught of Epidemick. water, and le: 
the Patient compoſe himſelf to reſt in his Bed. But if the 
Matter occaſioning the Gout produces a Looſneſs, becauſe 
it is not yer caſt upon the Limbs, if it be not the Criſis of 
a particular Fit, and if notwithſtanding Laudanum above 
commended, and Exerciſe of all ſorts, (for this muſt be 
firſt uſed for the Cure of the Leoſne(s) the Diarrhea con. 
tinues, accompanied with Sickneſs and Gripes, there i; 
only one Remèdy, that I know, viz. ro provoke Sweat, 
by a Method and Medicines deſigned for this uſe, which 
it it be performed for rwo or three days, Morning and 
Evening, for two or three hours at a time, it moſt com- 
monly ſtops the Dzarrhea, and forces the Fomes of the 
Diſeaſe upon the Limbs: I cured my ſelf by this method 
{ome years ago, after I had imprudently caſt my (elf into 
this Diſeaſe, by drinking cold Water for my ordinary 
Drink, when I had uſed Cordial and aſtringent Medicine; 
of various ſorts in vain. 

Fhere is another Symptom nor ſo frequent, though [ 


have ſeen ir divers times, viz. a Tranſlation of the pec- 


cant Matter upon the Lobes of the Lungs, when a Win- 
ter Cough, by reaſon of cold taken in time of the Fir, 
has by degrees drawn the Matter upon the Lungs, the 
Limbs in the mean time being wholly, or almoſt freed 
from the Pain and Swelling, by reaſon of the Tranſlati- 
on of the peccant Matter upon another Region; in this 
one Caſe the Curative Indication is not to be directed to 
the Gout, but this Symptom is to be treated like a true 
Peri pneumonia, viz. by bleeding repeated, and cooling and 
thickening Medicines, and Diet; for the Blood drawn in 
this Symptom eſpecially, is like the Blood of Pleuriticks 
exactly. Moreover, the Sick muſt be purged betwixt 
the Bieedings, whereby the filth that is fallen upon the 
Lungs may be carried off. But Sweating how powerful 
ſoe ver it is in forcing the Fomes of the Diſeaſe upon the 
Limbs, does hurt in this Caſe, by hardening the Matter 
that is thruſt upon the Lungs; upon which account 
ſma!l Abſceſſes are generated, and at length the Sick cer- 
rainly dies. 3 

Moreover it is to be noted, that almoſt all Gouty Peo- 
ple, when they have conflicted a long time with this 
Diſeaſe, are ſubject to the Stone in the Kidneys ; and 


that 


r JW - r 5 On  v Co CTY hay, CY VB. FVY 


the Year 1675, to the Year 1680. 281 


hat they are wont to be troubled with Nephritich Pains, 


eicher in the State, but moſt commonly at the Declination 


of a general Fir, Which does not only torture him much, 
bur alſo weakens him much, whereas he was bur roo 
much weakened, and worn out before. In this Caſe, ſet- 
ting aſide all other Remedies, ler him preſently take a Gal- 
lon of Poſſer-drink, wherein two Ounces of the Roots of 
Marſh-mallows have been boyled, and let the following 
Clyſter be injected, 


Take of the Rooos of Marſh-mallows, and Lilies, each one 
Ounce, of the Leaves of Mallows, Pellitory of the Wall, 
Bears-breech, and of the Flowers of Camomile, each one 
handful ; of Flax and Fenugreek-ſceds, each half an 
Ounce ; beyl them in a ſufficient quantity of Water, to 
a Pint and a half; diſſolve in the ſtrained Liquor of 
brown Sugar, and Syrup of Marſh-mallows, each two 
Ounces, mingle them, make a Clyſter : as ſoon as he 
has rendred all the Poſſet-drink by Vomiting, and has 
rejected the Clyſter, let him take a large Doſe of Liquid 


Laudanum, viz, twenty five drops, or fifteen Grains of 
Matthew's Pills. 


If any one enquires for external Remedies to eaſe the 
Pain of the Gour, I hitherto know none, tho' I have try- 
ed many in my ſelf and others, excepring things cooling 
and repelling, the uſe whereof I have ſhewed above, is 
dangerous; and I confidently affirm, that the greateſt 
part of thoſe, who have periſhed in the Gour, have nor 
been ſo properly killed by che Diſeaſe, as by an impro- 
per uſe of Medicines. Bur if any one will try the Vir- 
tue of external Medicines, which are certainly accounted 
Anodynes, do not ler him impoſe upon himſelf ; by apply- 
ing them at the Declination of a particular Fir ; at 
which time the Pain is about to ceale of ir ſelf; but ra- 
ther let him uſe them at the beginning of the Fit, and 
then he will ſoon perceive, how fruitleſs they are; and 
how vain his hopes; for indeed theſe Epithems may do 
hurt ſometimes, but they can never do any good; for 
which reaſon I have uſed no external Remedies many 
Years. The Pultis made with white Bread and Saffron 
boyled in Milk, a ſm 8 quantity of Oyl of Roſes being 

a 


added 


—— x DOTS — 


382 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 
added, did heretofore do me more good than other 
things, and yet this ſignified nothing at the beginning of 


the Fit; therefore if the Pain be very violent, it will be . 
better for the Sick to keep himſelf a-bed, till the Pain js eaſe 
abated, than to uſe external Anodynes. But it will not Ret 
be amiſs to take a little Laudanum in the Evening, if the Ife 
Pain is intolerable, otherwiſe it will be better 0 
omit it. | of 
But now ſeeing I am ſpeaking of external Remedies, wh! 
I muſt ſay ſomething of the Indian Moſs, called As len 
much eſteemed of late for the Cure of the Gout, if i: 72 
be burnt a little upon the part affected. Tho' this kind the 
of Remedy is ſaid to be received from the Oriental In. hes 
dians, being before wholly unknown by the Europeans, * 
yet it will appear to be known amongſt us many Ages, wr 
to him that ſhall conſult the Writings of Hippecrates, pub. Wl ® 
liſhed above two thouſand Years ago. He ſays in his oy 


excellent Treatiſe of Diſeaſes, that if the Pain continue: 
obſtinate in any one part, and cannot be expelled by 
Medicine, in whatever part it is, you muſt burn it with 
crude Flax; and afterwards ſpeaking of the Gout, he 
ſays the ſame things are good which are proper in the 
Diſeaſes of the Joynts, and indeed this Diſeaſe is long 
and grievous, but not deadly: Bur if the Pain remains 
in the Fingers, burn the Veins in the Fingers above the 
Joynts with crude Flax. Now I ſuppoſe none will think 
that there is any Specifick difference betwixt the Flame 
of Flax, and of this Indian Moſs, no more than he can 
ſuppoſe, that a Fire kindled with Pieces of Oak can do a- 


ny thing more than a Fire made of the Wood of the | 
Aſh-tree. This burning of the Part affected may be "Wo 
uleful for mitigating the Pain, the moſt ſpirituous Patt _ 
of the Morbifick matter caſt oft upon the Joynts being F 

drawn out by it: But the benefit obtained by this means, - 
becauſe it does not any way cure Indigeſtion, the ante- * 


cedent cauſe of the Gout, muſt needs be very ſhorr and 


fading, and to be uſed only, when the Gout is begin- bo 
ning; for when the Gour, as it ſometimes happens, is Di 
turned inward, either by its long continuance; or by an 
unſeaſonable, and undue Uſe of Medicines, and ſo at- 

flicts rhe Patient rather with Sickneſs, Gripes, and a 
great many other Symptoms of this kind, than Wi 

aln, 


the Tear 1675, to the Year 1680. 383 
pain, I ſuppoſe no ſober Man will think chat Fire is to be 


' WI vcd: 3 

f What I have ſaid is all I know of the Cure of this Diſ- 
© Wl caſe. If any one objects, that there are many Specifick 
5 Remedies for the Gour, I freely confeſs I know none, an 
Js | fear thoſe that promiſe ſo much are as ignorant as I 
e am; and truly it is to be lamented, that the noble Arr 


0 of Phyſick ſhould be fo crouded with theſe Trifles, 


lenorance and Falſneſs of Writers; for in almoſt every 
kind of Diſeales, ſuch kind of things are cried up, as if 
they were divine, by ſuch as make a Trade of theſe Tri- 
les; or Which is more ro be wondered at, this mad Hu- 
mour does nor only prevail in Diſeaſes, that are indued 
with a Type, bur in ſuch alſo, as are not at all formed, 
and proceed from ſome hurt of the Organs, or from an 
external Occaſion, and impoſes upon Men, as to other 
things very prudent ; and this appears from ſuch things, 
as are commonly accounted Specificks for Contuſions, 
ſuch are Sperma Ceti, Iriſh Slate, and the like, all which 
do only divert the Method, whereby this Malady oughs 
to be treated, as will be manifeſt ro him, who ſhall try. 
how much ſafer and ſooner it may be cured by Bleeding 
and Purging, uſed alregnately, till the Sick is well, choſe 
Trifles being wholly neglected, which are cuſtomarily 
; given after once Bleeding, and by that Solicitation. of 
Swear, which is wont to proceed from the Uſe. of 
them, heating of rhe Parts, before inclined to an Inflam- 
mation, the life of the Sick. is indangered without any 
reaſon, 

But if what I have propoſed fignifie nothing, and I 
ſeem not ſagacious, and too ſparing of Medicines, I will 
propoſe all that Lucian has odd fully in his Trage- 
dy of the Gout, from whence one may chuſe Externals 
and Internals, and perhaps he will find them as effectual, 
as many of thoſe things that are cried up by ſome. Luci- 
an brings in the gouty Perſon ſpeaking thus to thoſe that 
2 they have ſome ſecret Remedies to cure this 

lleaſe. 


Us invictam me Dominam dolorum 
Ionorat podagram in terri mortalium? 


Quam 


which are impoſed upon the credulous, either by the 


= ck 
_ > po 


- = . 


_—— 


| 
| 
4 


4 
10 
5 
1 0 


© — 
—— - 


+ : Ky 
— — . — - 


— 
— * 


— * 
— — 4 


AM * £& 
En . 
—_— ——ä—ʒä—4—d CO — 


384 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes fron 
Quam neque thuris vapor placat, 
Neque effuſus ſangus aras ad incenſas ; (narig, 
Non templum divitiarum undique ſuſpenſis ornatum 4). 
Quam neque Apollo medicamenty expugnare valet, 
Omnium medicus in celo Deorum ; 
Non filius Apollinis doctiſſimus Aſculapius, 
Poſt quam enim enatum eſt primum hominum genu, 
Conantur omnes meam elidere potentiam, 
Miſcentes ſemper medicamentorum artificia, 
Alius aliam in me experitur artem. 
Terunt plantagines, & apia mihi, 
Et fol ia Lactucarum; & ſylveſtrem protulacam; 
Alii Marrubium ; alii Potamogeitonem; 
Alii Urticas terunt; alii Symphytum ; 
Alii Lentes afferunt ex paluſtribus lecta; 
Alii Paſtinacam coctam; alii folia Perſicorum, 
Hyoſcyamum, papaver, cepas agreſtes, mali punici cortices, 
Pſyllium, thus, radicem Ellebori, nitrum, 
Fænum Græcum cum vino, Gyrinem, Collamphacum, 
Cyperiſſinam Gallam, pollinem hordeaceum, 
Braſſice decoctæ folia, gypſum ex Garo, 
Stercora montane capre, humanum oletum, 
Farinas fabarum, * Ali lapids; 
Coquunt Rubetas, mures-areneos,* lacertas, feles, 
Ranas, Hyænas, Tragelaphos, Vulpeculas, | 
Quale metallum non exploratum eſt mortalibus ? 
Qui non ſuccus > Quali non arborum lachryma d 
Animalium quorumwvis ofſa, nervi, pelles, 
Adeps, ſangun, medulla, ſtercus, lac. 
Bibunt alii numero quaterno pharmacum * 
Alii octono: ſed ſepteno plures. 
Alius vero bibens hieram purgatur: 
Alius incantaments impoſtorum deluditur: 
Judæus alium ſtultum excantat nactus: 
Alius vero remedium petit ab hirundini nido; 
Ego autem hu omnibus plorare impero, 
Et facientibus hæc atque irritantibus me 
Soleo occurrere multo iracundior. 8 
Is vero qui cogitant nihil adverſum mihi, 


Benignam adhibeo mentem, facilij que fis, 


ky kw 


Mk FyY@Y A co. uu cr KM = co... 


J- 


the Tear 1675, to the Year 1680, 385 


do not at all doubt, but the moſt prudent of rhoſes 
who having a long while conflicted with this Diſeaſe, and 
wholly deſpairing of a Cure, will approve of the Chorus, 
that makes the Cataſtrophe of this Tragedy. 


112 O ubique gentium celebrata afferas (nobis) dolo- 

rem, 0 podagra, 

Levem, facilem, non acutum, brevem, haud ſævientem, 

Tolerabilem, fatile deſinentem, parum validum; ambulati- 
ones non impedientem. 

Multi ſunt modi miſerorum : 

Sed exercitia dolorum, & conſuetudo 

Podagricos ſoletur. 

Ideoque æquo animo, 0 complices, obliviſcimini 

Dolorum. Si ea que placent non fiunt, 

Tamen etiam prater ſpem accidentibus viam invenire 

Solet Deus. | 

Quivs ſuſtineat podagra laborantium 

Deludi & derideri: 

Talis enim hujus morbi natura eſt, 


To conclude ; The method which I here deliver is 
built upon a ſtrict Examination of the foreſaid Phæno- 
mena, and by following it, I have eaſed the Diſeaſe in 
my ſelf and others, yet a perfect Cure, whereby a Man 
may be freed from a diſpoſition to this Diſeaſe, yet lies 
hid, and I know not when, or by whom it will be brought 
to light; yet notwithſtanding I hope that I have been 
ſome way beneficial to Mankind by this Treatiſe, by 
faithfully diſcovering thoſe Rocks, whereon I and ma- 
ny others have been wrecked ; and moreover the beſt 
Method I have yet known, and I promiſe no more, tho 
by my long Courſe of thinking, I am induced to be- 
lieve that ſuch a Remedy will be ſome time found out; 
and if ever it happen to be, it will expoſe the Ignorance 
of the Dogmatical, and then ir will appear, how much 
they are deceived in the Knowledge of the Eſſences of 
Diſeaſes, and in the Medicines they uſe for them; a 
plain inſtance whereof we have in the Diſcovery of the 
Peruvian-bark, the beſt Specifick for Agues. For how 
many Ages were the Wits of the moſt diligent Men ex- 
erciled in finding out the Caule of Agues, whereby eve · 


(Cc ry 


386 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 


ry one adapted a Practice beſt agreeing to the Theory he 
had framed : But how thoſe ways of Cure were able 
to defend the Theorems is manifeſt from thoſe things, 
whereof we have yet a freſh remembrance, in which, 
placing the various Species of Intermittents in the vari- 
ous Humours abounding in the Body, they were wont 
to direct the Method of Cure to the Alteration and Eva. 
cuation of theſe Humours : But how e they 
managed it, the ill Succeſs of their Endeavours, but e- 
ſpecially the happier Uſe of the Bark makes manifeſt, by 
the help whereof now, not regarding theſe Humours, nor 
Diet or Regimen, by only obſerving a due method of 
giving the Bark, we do the Buſineſs effectually, and (ſcarce 
ever fail, anleſs the Sick be unneceſſarily kept in Bed, 
whilſt it is uſed, Yer ſo great is the Virtue of this Re- 
medy, that notwithſtanding this Inconvenience, viz. be- 
caule the Fever is heightned by the heat of the Bed, the 
Sick is molt commonly cured by it. In the mean while, 
till the perfect Cure of the Gout be found out, which all 
Phyſicians ought to deſire, eſpecially I, ler this Treatiſe 
be kindly received as it is: Bur if it be otherwiſe, I fo 
well underſtand the Humours of Men, that I ſhall nor be 
much deceived, and I ſo well underſtand my Duty, that 
{ ſhall not be diſcouraged ; and if the tormenting Pains, 
the unfirnels for Motion, and the reſt of the Diſeaſes of 
the Body, wherewith I have been afflicted for the greateſt 
part of my Life, together with the loſs J have ſuſtained 
in my buſineſs by Sicknels, can acquire eaſe for others, I 


hall receive, now I am paſſing into another World, 


{ome Fruit of the Miſeries of this kind I have felt in this 
Life.“ 


— — — —_— 


Of a D ROPSIE. 


WS 


Þ Ver y Age of Man, and both Sexes, are ſometimes at- 


flicted with a Dropfie : Bur Women are more incli- 
ned ro this Diſeaſe than Men: Bur ir (ſeizes theſe eſpeci- 
ally when they are in Years, and Women when they 
have done breeding. Bur it ſomerimes ſeizes barren 


Women when they are young; the Pits by the impreſſi- 
Q!1 


the Tear 1675, to the Year 1690; 287 


on of the Fingers in the Small of the Leg, that are e- 
ſpecially conſpicuous at Night, and that vaniſh in the 
Morning, are the firſt Signs of this Diſeate. But nor ſo 
certain a Sign of an approaching Dropſie in Women, as 
in Men, for Women with Child, and ſuch as have a 
ſtoppage of the Courſes upon any Account, are often ſo 
affected: Nor does ſuch a Tumour in Men certainly in- 
dicate a Dropſie; for when an Old Man, of a groſs Ha- 
bir of Body, has for ſeyeral Years been troubled with an 
Aſthma, and has been (ſuddenly freed from it in the Win- 
ter, a great Swelling preſently ſeizes the Legs, that reſem- 
bles an Hydropick Swelling, which is more in Winter 
than in Summer, in a rainy Seaſon, than in clear Weather, 
and yer he is accompanied with it as long as he lives, 
without any great Inconvenience. And yet notwirhſtand- 
ing, generally ſpeaking, a Swelling of the Legs, is to be 
accounted a Sign of the ſupervening Dropſie in Men alſo, 
eſpecially, if rhole ſo affected are ſhorr breathed, which 
Tumour increaſes daily in Bulk and Quantity, till the 
Legs containing no more Warer, the Thighs are ſwelled, 
and afterwards the Belly, which being filled with Serum, 
continually put off by the Blood, diſtends it by degrees to 
irs utmoſt Capacity, ſo that often it contains many Gallons 
of Water, which ruſhing upon the Navel, ſometimes cau- 
ſes a Rupture there. | 

Three Symptoms accompany this Diſeaſe, difficulty of 


Breathing, little Urine, and great Thirſt ; the difficulty 


of Breathing riſes, from the Water oppreſſing the Dia- 
phragm, upon which account the natural Motion of it is 
obſtructed, the Urine is rendred ſparingly, becauſe the 
Serum of the Blood, which ought naturally to be voided 


by the Urinary Paſſages, is now pur off upon the Caviry 


of the Belly, and upon other parts fit ro receive it; the 
Thirſt is occaſioned by the Putrefaction of the ſerus Hu- 
mour, which, by long continuance in the Body, becomes 
acrid and hot; upon which account the Sick is a ways fe- 
veriſh and thirſty. 

Proportionable to the Bulk of the Sick increaſed in rhe 
Parts, wherein the Diſeaſe is ſeated, he waſts daily more 
and more in other Parts; at length when rhe Quantity 
of the Water is ſo great, chat it can no longer be con- 
tained within the Belly, it breaks out upon the vital and 

e 2 noble 


- — — — _ 
— Tz 


r — 


E 
— — 
— — 
2 
2 " 


3 


_— — 


2 


* 


2 F 2 
„ Dat — * * = 
— T5 
_ . w 
—_—_ by - -- 


— 
* 


8 1 5 .<E 
_ — — 25 
— — — 
— ; 
— n 3 
3 
a». - * — = . -” 


3 — 
L 2 ” 8 - — 
2 p — = Las 
- = "2 * —_— — 
9 _ 
* _ 42 2 0 . 
2 — 
2 * 5 — 4 — F< 
Sw EE: 
% 


int 


* 


— 


= — 


= 
2 


—_— 


298 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 
noble Parts, and he is as it were drowned in a De. 
uge. 


reaſon whereof, being now unable to turn the Aliment in. 
to its Subſtance, it neceſſarily caſts it off upon the Extre. 
mities, and depending Parts of the Body, and preſently 
into the Belly alſo, wherein, as long as it is in a ſmall 


Quantity, Nature frames ſome ſmall Veſicles to contain 


it: But at length increaſing above meaſure, ir is included 
only by the Peritonæum. 

The Blood is weakned moſt commonly by too great an 
Evacuation, either by Veneſection, or by any other way, 
or by ſome long Diſeaſe, or by the deſtructive Cuſtomof 
drinking ſpirituous Liquors immoderately, by which means 
the natural Ferments are deſtroyed, and the Spirits diſſipa- 
ted, and hence it is, that exceſſive Drinkers ar2 oftneſt af. 
flicted with this Diſeaſe, tho' it be a cold one; and alſo 
on the contrary, the drinking of Water in thoſe who ac- 
cuſtomed themſelves to generous Liquors, injures the Blood 
as much. 5 
But in Women, which is to be noted, another Cauſe of 
a Dropſie, very different from theſe, is to be found, viz, 
a heap of Matter or obſtruction of one of the Teſticles, 
which by degrees confounds the Craſis of it; upon which 
Account, the Tunick of it is wonderfully ſtretched by the 
Fomes of the Diſeaſe, firſt repoſited in the ſaid; Teſticle, 
which being about ro crack, Nature makes ſonde Veſicles 
to receive the Humour: But at length one or more of 
them being broken, and exqnerating themlelves into the 
Cavity of the Belly, the ſame Symptoms occur, which we 
have deſcribed above in a Dropſie: But of this kind | 
have treated heretofore. Cn 

There are alſo two other Species of Swellings of the 
Belly, that reſemble a Dropſie, both frequent in Wo- 
men; the firſt. is a preternatural Excreſcence of Fleſh 
in the Parts within the Belly, which makes it as bulky, 
as when Water is included in it; the other Species ari- 
ſes from Wind, . which occaſions not only a Tumor, but 
other Signs of breeding; this Widows are chiefly ſub- 
ject to, or Women that were not marrfed till they were 
in Years, and theſe in their own ͤ judgment, and in the 
opinion of their Midwives, which they conſult as their 

ee Oracles 


The Cauſe of this Diſeaſe is Weakneſs of the Blood, by 


ther | 


tion at 
contra 
ſtrong 
ing th 


the Tear 1675, to the Year 1680. 389 


Oracles in theſe matters, think they feel the Child move 
at the accuſtomed time, and ſo to the uſual time of the 
Birth, and moreover they are ſometimes ſick, as breeding 
Women uſe to be; moreover their Breaſts ſwell, and have 
Milk in them, ſo that they often provide Child-bed-Linen ; 
But at length their Bellies aſſwage by degrees, as they in- 
creaſed, and their hopes fail them: But neither of theſe is 
to be referred to the Diſeaſe we are now ſpeaking of. 

The true and genuine curative Indications, as they natu- 
rally ariſe from the foreſaid Phenomena, are wholly to be 
directed, either to the Evacuation of the Waters contained 
in the Belly and other parts, or to {trengrhen the Blood ro 
cut off the Spring of them. 

As to the Evacuation of the Water; it is of great mo- 
ment to obſerve diligently, thar in Hydropical Perſons, 
thoſe Purges that work ſlowly, or nor ſufficiently, do more 
hurt than good; for all purging Medicines being inimical 
to Nature, upon which Account they purge, ſomewhar 
weaken and hurt the Blood; wherefore unleſs they pals 
quickly, and are preſently expelled by moving the Mar- 
ter, which they cannot carry off with themſelves, and by 
exagitating the Blood rumulruouſly, they increaſe the Tu- 
mour more, which appears plainly in their Legs, who are 
{o gently purged; wherefore, that purging may be uſed 
for the advantage of the Patient, you muſt know, whe- 
ther he be eaſily or hardly purged ; for on this depends 
all the buſineſs of the Cure, and accordingly it will be ea- 
ſie or very difficult. 

Wherefore when you are to uſe Hydragogues, you muſt 
carefully reſpect the Eaſineſs or Difficulty of the Pati- 
ents purging, which can be certainly known no other 
| way than by enquiring diligently how other purging Re- 

medies, uſed at another time, operated; for in Bodies 
there is a certain Idiohncraſie, as to purging eaſily or 
difficultly; and therefore he will endanger very often 
the Patient's Life, who makes the ſenſible Tempera- 
ment of the Body his Rule in this Caſe; for it many 
times happens, that they that are of a ſtrong Conſtitu- 
tion are eaſily purged, whereas they that are of a quite 
contrary Conſtitution, are not cafily purged with the 
ſtrongeſt Catharticks ; and indeed this Caution concern- 
ing the unaptneſs of the * Body to bear purging, 
| 7 1s 


w ee R.. — - 
9 —— LG 
— Wm 


— 


= 
= "CS 5 = 2 
rr 
= a - = OS 


— 
== 
* 


* 8 ca 
a — 


— 


* 


g — — — — 
— — — . y — 8 2 
— — 2 - > 
— 
6 > © _— 
_- 
b — — — 
— - — 5 — . 
— - * 
0 _ 
CR  —3 S- 2 — 
5 2 G41 1 


p 
. 


os > — — 


= * . 


m2 


2 - > — —.— ä 
ki —— — 3 


— 
| 4 
— 


= — 


4 <” ” 
r 
- 


— > 


4 — — 
2 


"F- 
— 


390 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 

is not only to be minded in Hydragogues ; bur in all other 
ſor ts of Purges ; for 1 have often obſerved an Hyperca. 
tharſis occaſioned by Lenitive Portions, when the Phyſi. 
cian has nor enquired as he oughr, whether the Patient 
was eafily or difficultly purged : But becauſe a Dropſie, 
as I ſaid before, above all other Diſeales, requires the 
ſtrongeſt and quickeſt Purges ; and becauſe in this Diſ- 
eaſe gentle purging, that may de good in ſome other Dif. 
calcs, oug.it by no means to be admitted here; for Pur. 
ges of this kind do not only diminiſh the ſwelling, but in. 
creaſe it;) for this reaſon I ſay, ſtrong and large purg. 
ing 1s to be preferred before ſuch as is weak, eſpecially 
ſeeing we have Laudanum to ſtop it, if it ſhould work too 
much. 

Moreover, in all Purges uſed for the Cure of a Drop- 
fie, this muſt carcfully be noted, viz. that the Waters 
be evacuared as faſt, as the ſtrength of he Sick will 
permit; for the Patient ought to be purged every Day, 
unlels by reaſon of the weakneſs of the Body, or the 
too violent Overarion of the preceding Purge, it ought to 
be omitted for a Day or two; for if purging be repeated 
only ar great diſtances, tho' it purge much, we ſhall give 
occaſion to the Waters to gather again, and by means of 
the Truce, being ignorant of the Victory gained almoſt, 
inſtead of being Conquerours, we ſhall be ſhamefully 
roured, and leave the buſineſs undone. Moreover there 
is danger left the Water by its long continuance among 
the Bowels ſhould putrefie them; and belides, which is 
of no ſmall moment, the Waters put into a Motion by 
the foregoing Catharticks are more inclined to injure the 
Body, than when they are quiet; wherefore for this 
reaſon, as well as others before mentioned, we muſt an- 
ſwer this intention which reſpects the Waters contained 
within as ſoon as may be; nor muſt we deſiſt from it, or 
ceaſe purging, unleſs neceſſity urge, till all the Water is 
evacuated. 

This is moreover to be obſerved, which is plain from 
Practice, that almoſt all Hydragogues by a peculiar Ge- 


nius of their own, if they are given by themſelves 


to thoſe that are difficultly purged, do not ſucceed 
well, and a large Doſe of them rather promotes a Tu- 
mult in the Blood than Purges, le that the Tumour 
RO When 


the Year 1675, to the Year 1680, 391 


which ought to be leſſened, is increaſed thereby, and 
therefore in ſuch Bodies, they are uſually mixed with 
things that purge gently, ro quicken them; yer notwith- 
ſtanding in thoſe that are eaſily purged, Hadragegues work 
quickly, and with great Succeſs. | 

Wherefore for thoſe that are eaſily purged, Syrup of 
Buck-thorn alone purges Water plentifully, which Remedy 
indeed, Purges in a manner only Water, and evacuates a 
great quantity of ir, and does not diſturb the Blood, nor 
render the Urine high coloured, as other Purges uſually 
do, and this Syrup has but one ill Property, viz. that 
whilſt it is working, it makes the Sick very thirſty. But 
if you give the greateſt Dole of it to thoſe that are diffi- 
cultly purged, it will not give many Stools, nor bring a- 
way ſo much Water from them as it ought. 

I remember very well, (for this was my firſt Hydropick 
Patient) Twenty Seven Years ago, or thereabour, I was 
called ro Weſtminſter, ro one Mrs. Saltmarſh, an honeſt 
and pious Gentlewoman, her Belly was incredibly big ; I 
gave her an Ounce of the foreſaid Syrup before Dinner, 
as the Cuſtom was then, it can ſcarce be imagined how 
much Water ſhe evacuated by Stool, and that without any 
Tumult, or Faintneſs, which ſo incouraged me, that I 
gave it daily, only when ar any time ſhe was weak, Jo- 
mitted ir for a Day or two, and ſo the Waters being gra- 
dually drained, the Belly daily afſwaged, and ſhe perfectly 
recovered, and I with rhe juvenile Confidenceof an unex- 
perienced Man verily believed, that I had got a Medi- 
cine that would cure any manner of Dropſie: But I found 
my miſtake within a few Weeks, for ſoon after I was cal- 
led to another Woman that had the ſame Diſeaſe, that 
came upon a long Quartan Ague, I gave the ſame Syrup, 
and followed the Diſeaſe by the frequent Repetition of it, 
and by increafing gradually the Doſe. But having en- 
deavoured in vain to evacuate the Waters, rhe purge nor 
working, the Tumour of the Belly increaſed, and the 
Sick diſmiſſed me, and as I remember recovered by ” a 
Aſſiſtance of another Phyſician, who preſcribed more effe- 
ctual Remedies. . 

Wherefore when it is manifeſt, that the Sick is of ſuch 
a Conſtitution, that gentle Purges will not do the buſi- 
neſs quickly, and eaſily, ſtronger muſt be uſed; in which 

C 4 Caſe, 


P 


2 9 — an 2 — — 
— — bh 


— 
—— — 


— 
— — — = 
- 
- 
=— * 
— —— — 
— — 


— — 
— 
. — — 
2 — 


— — 

—— 
— 
— 


— — 
— — 


= _— 


== - > — — — * 
. = : 


My 
W 
! 
| 9 
1 
4 
I 
165 
i 
F 
N 
1 
. 
1 14 
: 


- x E 
„ 2” ,” 
ws * _ 


3 


0 
1 m _— 


1 - 
1 2 
D = 
as 5 


* 3 — 
— * — r. — 
* — 


392 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 

Caſe, as I hinted juſt now, ir is to be noted, that tho! 
few Hydragegues, given by themſelves, ſucceed, yet being 
mixed with Lenztives, to quicken them, they are effectu- 
al enough in ſuch kind of Bodies. For inſtance, I have 
frequently preſcribed the following Potion with Suc- 
cels. 


Take of Tamarinds half an Ounce, of the Leaves of 
Senna two Drams, of Rhubarb one Dram and an half , 
boyl them in a ſuff.cient quantity of Water, to three 
Ounces, in the ſtrained Liquor diſſolve of Manna, and 
- Syrup of Roſes Solutive, each one Ounce, of Syrup of 
Buck-thorn half an Ounce, of the EleQuary of the 
Juice of Roſes two Drams ; mangle them and male 4 
Potion. | 


But it muſt be given only to ſtrong Pcople. Ir purge; 
when nothing elſe will, as 1 have found by much Expc. 
rience. Or: 


Take of White-wine four Ounces, of Falap finely powdred 
ene Dram, of Ginger powdred half a Scruple, of Syrup 
of Buck-thorn one Ounce, mingle them, make a Potion 
zo be taken early in the Morning, every Day, or every 
other Day, according to his Strength. 


Another form of Medicine that I frequently uſe follows, 
which they may conveniently uſe, who nauſeate the Re- 
petition of other Purges, which heats the Patient in pur: 
ging and ſtrengthens him: For inſtance, | 


Take of the Roots of Falap beaten, and Hermodacty les, 

each half an Qunce, of crude Scammony three Drams, 

; of the Leaves of Senna two Ounces, of Liquoriſh raſped, 

of the Seeds of Aniſe and Carraways, each half an Ounce; 

of the Tops of Wormwood, and the Leaves of Sage, 

> each one handful ; infuſe them cold in three Pints of 

common Aqua Vitæ, ſtrain it as you uſe it, let a ſpoon- 

ful be taken at Bed-time, and two the next Morning, 

zncreaſing, or decreaſing the Doſe according to its Ope- 
ration. | 


855 But 


* Is CE Dp? . 


pi 


the Tear 1675, to the Tear 1680. 393 


But two Medicines remain, which I count the beſt for 
thoſe that are difficultly purged, and ſtronger than any I 
have mentioned above ; I mean Elaterium, and the infu- 
ſion of Crocus Metallorum ; Elaterium, or the Feccula of the 
wild Cucumber works powerfully in a {mall quantity, and 
evacuares plentifully the Feces, and watry Humours ; two 
Grains of ir, generally ſpeaking, is a ſufficient Doſe for 
moſt Bodies; I uſe to mix them with one Scruple of the 
Pill Ex duobus, and ſo make three Pills ro be taken in the 
Morning. 

As to the infuſion of Crocus Metallorum, one Ounce 
and an half of it, or for ſuch as are purged difficultly 
two Ounces, given in the Morning, and repeated daily 
according to the ſtrength of the Sick ; tho ar firſt, 
it may ſeem only to evacuate the Water lodged in the 
Stomach, yer ar length it will free the Belly from Wa- 
ter; for beſides, that it uſually works downwards, 
when the Vomiting ceaſes, ir neceſſarily alſo, by the 
great Agitation, and Concuſſion of the Stomach, and 
Bowels encompaſſed round with Water, evacuares ir, by 
Paſſages which are not very open: Bur if the foreſaid 
Vomit does not ſufficiently Purge the lower Belly, I uſe 
to add, ſometimes tho rarely, after the third or fourth 
Doſe of the infuſion of Crocus Metallorum by it ſelf, the 
Electuary of Roſes, or the Syrap of Buck-thorn, For in- 
ſtance, 


Take of the Water of Carduus Benedictus three Ounces, 
of the infuſion of Crocus Metallorum one Ounce and a 
half, of the Syrup of Buck-thorn half an Ounce, of the 
Electuary of the Juice of Roſes two Drams, mingle them, 
make a Potion. 


It is plain, that there are ſecret Paſſages, through 
which the Waters are carried from the Cavity of the 
Belly ro the Inteſtines; for we daily obſerve, that Hy- 
dragogues evacuate ſuch a great quantity of Water from 
the Belly by Stool, as if it were contained in the very 
Inteſtines. But becauſe we cannot well ſolve, how ir 
ſhould be, I cannot but mention that famous Saying of 
the wiſeſt and beſt Phyſician, according to the opinion of 
all Ages, viz. Hippocrates, in his Book De Priſca ä . 

| ome 


294 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 


Some Phyſicians and Sophiſters, ſays he, ſay, That it 3; 
impoſſible to know the Arr of Phyſick, unleſs you know 
what Man is, and how he was firſt made, and compa. 
ed ; bur I, ſays he, think, that thoſe things that are 
ſaid and written by ſome Sophiſters and Phyſicians of Na. 
ture, more properly belong to the Art of Painting than to 
Phyfick, 

Bur (left this Divine Author ſhould be accounted Er. 
roneous, or Emperichs ſhould ſeek a Cloak for their own 
Ignorance from this place) I declare, Thar I, according 
to my beſt thoughts about Practice, (which ought to be 
the Touch- ſtone of the Profeſſors of Phyſick) ſuppoſe, 
that it is abſolutely neceſſary, that a Phyfician ſhould 
well underſtand the Structure of the humane Body, that 
he may be the better able to conceive and form true 
Ideas of the Nature ard Cauſes of ſome Diſeaſes : For 
he that is ignorant of the Fabrick of the Reins, and of 
the Paſſages tending to the Bladder, cannot gueſs, whence 
thoſe Symptoms ariſe, that proceed from the Stone in 
the Pelvx, or from being thruſt deep into the Ureter,, 
Chirurgeons allo ought to underitand the Structure of 
the Humane Body, that in their Operations they may be 
the better able ro abſtain from thoſe Veſſels and Part, 
which if they ſhould be violated, would deſtroy the Pa. 
tient; nor can they well reduce diſlocated Bones to 
their natural Places, unleſs they curiouſſy inſpect, and 
well underſtand the frame of rhe Bones, called a Ske- 
leton. 

Therefore ſuch a knowledge of the humane Body is 
abſolutely neceſſary, and he that has it not, will, as they 
ſay, Fence winking with ſome Diſeaſes, or go to Sea 
without his Compaſs. Moreoyer this knowledge is ea- 
ſily and ſoon acquired; for it may be ſhortned more 
than other things that are more difficult; for it may be 
learned by ſight in humane Bodies, or in ſome Animals, 
and that very eaſily by ſuch as are not ſharp witted: But 
in acute Dileaſes, which kind contains more than two 
thirds of Diſeales; and moreover, in moſt Chronical 
Diſeaſes, ir muſt be confeſſed there is ſome Specitick 
Property, which no Contemplation, reduced from the 
Specularion of the humane Body can ever diſcover ; 


wherefore, that Men ſhould nor ſo place the main of the 
| buſinels 


; 

J 
ö 
q 
4 
2 
J 


the Year 1675, to the Year 1680, 395 


buſineſs upon the Diſſection of Carcaſſes, as if thereby 
the Medical Art might be rather promored, than by the 
diligent Obſervation of the Natural Phenomena, and of 
ſuch things as do good and hurt, is I ſuppoſe what the 
Divine Old Man would have chiefly avoided in the a- 
foreſaid place, and that he does not banter and contemn 
the general Knowledge of the Fabrick of the humane 
Body. 

And truly ſo great, and wile a Men muſt need 
know thar all the Diſceveries that can be made, cannor 
exceed ſuch a general Knowledge; for tho, by a dili- 
gent ſearch in diſſecting Bodies, the greater Organs, 
which Nature ules in performing her buſineſs, appear, 
and allo ſome Veſſels, through which rhe Juices are 
tranſmitted from theſe ro other parts: Yet what is the 
Original, and primary Cauſe of this Motion, the Eyes 


cannot ſee, nor can the beſt Microſcope diſcoger thoſe 


ſmall paſſages through which the Chyle, for Example, is 
ſtrained through the Inteſtines into the Chyliferous Veſ- 
ſels, or by what Paſſages the Blood paſſes through the 
Arteries into the mouths of the Veins. Moreover, there 
are moſt innumerable, and fine Pores and Paſſages in 
the wonderful Frame of Man, which none can fo much 
as Dream of, ſo rude and unlearned, (pardon the Ex- 
preſſion) is our knowledge, and in a manner only con- 
verlant about the outſide of things, and only riſes ro the 
70 br, and to only underſtand things are ſo ; but can by 
no means teach the cauſes of things. However it be, we 
may without much difficulty underſtand as much as is 
ſufficient, according as the Nature of the thing will allow, 
to direct us in the Cure of thoſe Diſeaſes, which require, 
as we ſaid above, ſuch a Knowledge, ſo much elpeci- 
ally as may force us to worſhip the Divine Artificer with 
the greateſt Humility of Mind, while we contemplate 
his wonderful Workmanſhip in thoſe things, which 
our reaſon can diſcover to us, and that which is much 
more excellent in other things, which we can no way 
ſearch into. 

And as Hippoorates blames thoſe who waſt more time 


in ſtudying Curioſities in Anatomy, than in practical 


Obſervations, and by conſequence of Nature it ſelf : In 


like manner any prudent Man in this Age may blame 


thoſe 


os —— 
— — — 
= 
— 2 
i — 
"= — — — 
V 2 ——— —— ů % 


San ” **,.o< _ 
a+ 
— — . 


v DX od Be 


. — 
- = _ = 
- . - 
- P — . 2 — 
— * "= 
* 


* 


=> 
£ — — 8 4 = N 
_ = - — — — - - x 9 —_— — - * * - i 
— - - Fo: 
6 N ho — ba. 0 a * ” — = — 
F " * - _ * — - = W - * — 
** . 2 6338. - - - 8 6 ” k 
r was AS Hee aL : <A | 6 
: : A - a. 
— = 9 > : 8 - = 


— — 


4 > « * 
— 


„ 
— — 
— * " . 
4 Gn — a — 2 
—” 2:5 > — 2 > * 
4 _— 
; 
— AF 


— — * 


AL — — 


2 — 


= _ It 2 
= 2" 
- — _ 


* 
- = 
„ — 

1 


396 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 


thoſe that think the Art of Phyſick, can be no ways ſo well 
improved, as by new Chymical Inventions ; for tho' we 
ſhould be very ungrateful, if we ſhould nor freely acknow. 
ledge that help which we have received from Chymiſtry, 
it having ſupplied us with ſome good Medicines, and 
ſuch as are very fit to anſwer Indications, among which 
this very Emetick, of which we now treat, is not the 
leaſt ; wherefore the Art is very laudable, if it be reſtrain. 
ed to the Bounds of Pharmacy: Bur they are to be blam- 
ed, who ſo heat apd diſtract their Brains, that at length 
they think, the Arr of Phyſick is chiefly Deficient for 
want of great and effectual Remedies, that can only be 
prepared by the Chymiſts, whereas he that weighs the 
thing well, will find, that the chief defect of the Practice 
of Phy ſick does not proceed from the want of means to 
anſwer this or that intention, but becauſe we do not 
know, what that intention is, that is to be farisfied ; 
whereas every Apothecaries Boy, in a quarter of an hours 
time can tell me, with what Medicine I ſhall Vomir, 
Purge, or Sweat, or how I ſhall cool one that is hot: But 
he ought to be well skilled in the Practice of Phyſick, that 
can teach me as certainly, when this or that kind of Re- 
medy is to be uſed, through the whole Courſe of Diſeaſes 
and Cures. 

And truly I am very certain, that nothing can fo 
much conduce to form the Judgment right in this mat- 
rer, as an exact Obſervation of the natural Phenomena 
of Diſeaſes, and likewiſe of thoſe things, which are ob- 
ſerved in Practice, from what does good or hurt, whe- 
ther they are the Remedies uſed, or the method, where- 
with we endeavour to cure the Diſeaſe: If theſe things 
are diligently compared one with another, they will 
ſhew the Nature of the Diſeaſe, and moreover, from 
whence the curative Indications are to be raken, much 
better and more certainly, than if I ſhould direct my 
Courſe to the Speculation of the Nature of this or that 
Principle of rhe concreted Body, as by the Stars ; for 
the moſt exquiſite Diſſertations of this kind are nothing 
elle but Metaphors neatly deductd and adorned, and 
which, like all other things, that are founded upon 
Imagination, not upon Nature it ſelf, will vaniſh and be 
worn out by time, whereas the Judgments of 8 

uilt 


Phyſt 
riſe f 
they 

ſtanc 
beats, 
forbe 
ſtance 
firſt 
the A 
the 
taugb 
incre: 
wont 
from 


* the Tear 1675, to the Tear 1680. 397 


built upon the Verity of things will continue as long as 
Nature does. 

Bur tho Hypotheſes built upon Philoſophical Speculati- 
ons are altogether vain becauſe no Man is indued with in- 
tuitive Knowledge whereby he can lay down Principles, 
on which he may preſently build; yer if Hypotheſes flow 
from things done, and from thoſe Obſervations only, 
which practical and natural Phenomena ſuggeſt, they will 
remain firm and unſhaken, ſo that tho the Practice of 
Phyſick, if you reſpect the order of writing, may ſeem to 
riſe from Hyporheſes, yer if they are ſolid and Genuine, 
they in ſome ſort owe their original to Practice; for in- 
ſtance, in Hyſterick Diſeaſes, I do not therefore uſe Chaly- 
beats, and other things that invigorate the Blood, and 
forbear things that Evacuare, (unleſs upon ſome Circum- 
ſtances, and uſe rather Paregorick Remedies ; ) becauſe 
| firſt took it foꝶ granted, that this Diſeaſe proceeded from 
the Animal Spirits being weakned and broken : But when 
the conſtant Obſervation of practical Phenomena had 
taught me, that the giving of purging Medicines always 
increaſed the Symptoms, and that things contrary, were 
wont to quiet the ſame Symptoms, I took my Hypotheſes 
from this and other Obſervations of the natural Phænome- 
na, ſo that the Philoſopher ſhould here ſerve the Empericks 
Bur if I had began with an Hyporheffs, I ſhould have been 
as mad, as he that ſhould go about to Tyle a Houſe, be- 
fore he has laid the Foundation, which is only proper for 
thoſe to do, that build Caſtles in the Air, as they ſay, and 
they have a Privilege to begin at which end they pleaſe. 

Bur to return to the buſineſs, whatſoever theſe paſſages 
are through which the Water paſſes from the Cavity of 
the Belly into the Inteſtines, J am certain, that Vomit- 
ing provoked by the ſaid Emetich does powerfully eva- 
cuate the ſame ; and not only downward by Stool, bur 
allo upward through the Stomach and Mouth in the Act of 
Vomiting 3 for after Vomiting twice or thrice, the Waters 
do not ſeem ſo much to be drawn by the Secretory force 
of the Medicine, as to run with a full Stream, the ſtoppa- 
ges being broken and opened, which appears plain enough 


by the frequent impetuous Irruption of them betwixt the 
ipaces or intervals of Vomiting. 


Laſt 


- 
ax: : a 
— 

: — — 

11 wy _ - * © 

* 

— 

> oat tr roms « 
— — — _ „ 

- 


'_ 


— — 


A A ‚ a 


— —— 


— 
— — 


— 
oy Ig. 
2 
* 
— © 
2 


# - 


DEE 
7 - 


398 Of Epidemicb Diſeaſes from 


Laſt Auguſt a certain poor Woman of Fifty five Yeajs 
of Age, or thereabouts, implored my help; ſhe had an 
Ague, a long while, and afterwards was Priſoner three 
years; ſhe had ſuffered much by Cold, and her Belly was 
bigger, than ever I ſaw any before. I gave her an Qunce 
and an half of the infuſion of Crocus Metallorum, three 
days following, afterwards every other day, according 
to her ſtrength, till ſhe had taken fix Doſes ; her U. 
rine was quite ſtopt, after ſhe had Vomited ſometimes 
at firſt, bur ſhe rendered it again ſometime by Intervals, 
tho very rarely; the oftner the Vomit was repeated, 
the greater quantity of Water was wont to be ejected, 
and towards the end by the Mouth as well as by Stool. 
But after the third Doſe, the Tumour began to ſubſide, 
and to be leſſened; and after Fourteen Days, by the 
Thread wherewith I ordered her Body to be meaſured 
when it was ſwelled, ſhe appeared to beya Yard leſs in 
Compaſs, and by Computation ſhe evacuared ſome Gal. 
lons of Water upward. and downward, ſo that whereas 
before ſhe was forced to ſleep in her Bed upright, fear- 
ing if ſhe ſhould lie down, ſhe ſhould be ſuffocated by 
the weight of the Waters, now ſhe could ſecurely lay 
her Head upon the Pillow, and turn from ſide ro fide as 
ſae pleaſed. Bur becauſe the ſaid Vomits, by reaſon of 
the violence of their Operation, did raiſe the Vapors, 
as they call them, to that degree, that it was nor ſafe 
any longer to uſe them, and yer notwithſtanding, ir was 
very manifeſt by the remaining ſwelling of rhe Belly, 
and the motion of the Water, which ſhe perceived, as 
often as ſhe turned her ſelf from fide to fide, alſo by the 
Pits remaining in the Leg, after being preſſed by any 
thing, that there was yet much Water in the Body; where- 
fore I was forced to finiſh the Cure with purging things, 
properly ſo called ; rherefore afterwards I preſcribed 
either the purging Potion above-mentioned, or ſome o- 
ther Hydragigue, ſeldomer or oftner, according as her 
ſtrength, and the Vapors would permit. For purging 
downwards does in ſome fort alſo occaſion Hyſterich dil- 
orders, tho' not ſo great and violent, as Emeticls are 
wont to do. I continued this method till ſhe ſeemed 
quite well, and while ſhe was under cure theſe things 
worth Obleryation occurred; firſt on thoſe days, ſhe did 

not 


Vapo! 
very 

rer, W 
ſparin 
from 

ſioned 
nion « 
a day 
began 
rile u. 
ing, t 
Purge 
which 
ſudde 
Purge 
being 
her C 
lently 
forege 
Hyſter 
and a 
great 
of W. 
very 
yer th 
Evaci 
which 
I was 
for fo! 
peatec 
by at 
appea 
But 
welle 
infu ft 


where 


the Tear 1673, to the Tear 1680. 399 


got purge, ſhe voided a great quantity of Water by 
Stool, and towards the latter end by the Urinary-paſſages 
a Gallon, tho' I did not allow her to drink above a Pint 
and an half, or a Quart for each day; ſo that all the paſſa- 
ges ſeemed to be every where open. Secondly, it is worth 
notice, that when the Cure was almoſt perfected, the 
Vapours were raiſed by the Purges, and the Belly ſwelled 
yery much upwards, as it were filled again with Wa- 
ter, which yer I knew could nor be, becaule ſhe drank ſo 
ſparingly ; and therefore, that the Tumour aroſe only 
from wind, which proceeded from the Confuſion occa- 
ſioned by the Purges ; and the event confirmed my Opi- 
nion of it; for tho' ſhe evacuated a Gallon of Water in 
a day when ſhe was purged, yet notwithſtanding, ſhe 
began to ſwell preſently, nor did the Tumour abate, bur 
riſe up to the Throat, and cauſed a difficulty of breath- 
ing, till the Body freed from the diſturbance of the 
Purge, had obtained its natural ſtate, and quiet; after 
which, the ſwelling and other Symptoms vaniſhed of a 


ſudden, till they were irritated again by the ſucceeding N 
Purge. Laſtly it is ro be noted, that the ſaid Womar a % | 
being about Fifty five years of Age, and nor having had 10 
her Courſes for many years, yer they broke our again vio- 4 
lently, which Flux of weakned blood being added to the 1 
foregoing Evacuations, wonderfully increaſed the Train of Wy 1 be 
Hyſterick diſorders, namely, a violent Pain in the Back, 16 5 4 
and about the Region of the Spleen, the Head · ach, and a © {Fl 
great Catarrh ; moreover, tho' after ſo great a quantity LR 
of Water evacuated by Vomir, Stool, and Urine, ir was 10 } 
very probable, that much could not remain in the Body, 6 LI 
yet the Belly ſwelled as much as it uſed ro do, when no ip 7 
Evacuation was uſed. Wherefore to quiet theſe Motions, N. 1 
which cauſed a diſturbance for a Week after the laſt Purge, . 4 
I was forced to give an Ounce and an half of Diacodium Wt 
for four Nights following, which Doſe was allo to be re- % £241 
peated within three hours, if ſhe did not fall aſleep, where- e 
by at length all things were quieted, and the Tumour dil- 1 Jy: 
appeared, | £ "BY 


But it is to be noted, that if the Belly be bur a little 
lwelled, the Waters are not ſo eaſily evacuated by the 
infufion of Crocus Metallorum, as in a great Dropſie, 
where there is a very great quantity of Water; for the 

2 bulk 


—_— 
— 75 A 
— - 
- 
— =. 


_—_— 
oY 
ww 


wh 
„% „„ N - — — 
1 — OE 
> al, mt — 
- af : 
— gt 


EY 
— 
* 


[ 
Bet 
4. 


Wo < 2 a —5 2 — 
. 


2 28 = — 
— - — — 
— — 
_ 


— 


* o 
ö 
S > - C 


— 


uy 


400 O Epidemick Diſeaſes from 


bulk of the Water, when it is agitated, and ſhook by th; 
Operation of the Vomir, wonderfully conduces to the 
Evacuation of it. Whercfore, unleſs the Belly be very 
much ſwelled, it is beſt to do all by things that purge 
downwards. 

There is another Medicine that is very common, and 
ſimple, that cures a Dropfie in the fame manner that 
does we have now mentioned, namely, three handfuls of 
the inner Bark of Elder raſped from the Wood into two 
Qrarts of Water and Milk mixed rogether, and boyled 
to a Pint; half a Pint of this Decoction ir to be taken 
in the Morning, and the other half in the Evening daily, 
till the Patient is well. This Remedy Vomits and Pur. 
ges, in like manner as Crocus Metallorum does, and ſo 
cures the Diſcaſe the ſame way, and not by any ſpecifick 
Quality ; for when ir performs neither of theſe Opera- 
tions, or if moderately or ſparingly, it does no good at 
all: Bur when it does effectually work either way, but 
eſpecially if both ways, it cures this Diſeaſe in a wonder- 
ful manner. 

But truly ir ſhould be carefully minded, which often 
happens, that Water is put off upon the Legs and Thighs, 
and alſo into the Belly, and yet it muſt be by no means 
evacuated upwards or downwards: For inſtance, when 
ſuch a Tumour follows a long Conſumption, or when it 
is occaſioned by the Putrefaction, or fault of the Bowels, 
or by the Tone of the Blood, if it be lawful to ſay 
fo, not only relaxed but ſpoiled, the Spirits being quite 
exhauſted, or by reaſon of the long continuance of a 
Fiſtula in the fleſhy parts, which has heaped up a great 
quantity of Sanies, or by too great a weakneſs and Eva- 
cuation of the Humours and Spirits, by Salivation, 
Sweating or too much purging, or by a thin Diet in the 
cure of the French-pox, which has been ſtricter rhan was 
neceflary : In theſe and other Diſeaſes occaſioned in this 
manner, the fick is nor only nor relieved by purging, 
bur the Tone of the Blood being more weakned there- 
by, the Diſeaſe is increaſed ; wherefore in theſe Cales, 
the whole of the buſineſs is to be performed by ſuch 
things, as ſtrengthen and confirm the Blood and Bowels : 
Among other things of this kind, beſides Remedies that 
comfort, which are to be memioned below, I have es | 

tainly 


the Year 1673, to the Year 1680. 401 


tainly found, the change of the Air, and exerciſe in à 

free Air, ſuch as the Sick can bear, having anſwered this 

Indication excellently well, the Spirits being by this 

means revived, and the Organs of Secretion fitted to 
rform their Office again. 

It alſo happens that when there is none of the Caſes 
mentioned above, we mult not always anſwer the Inten- 
tion, which reſpect the Evacuation of the Water, either 
by Purging or by Vomiting ; for when rhe Patient is of 
a weak Conſtitution, or a Woman that is very ſubject 
to the Vapours and Diſorders of the Animal Spirits, we 
cannot perform the buſineſs by Cathartichs, much leſs by 
Vomits; here therefore, the Evacuation of the Warer 
muſt be managed by Diuretichs, among which, tho' ma- 
ny are much cryed up in the Writings of Phyſicians, yer 
think rhe molt effectual, not ro ſay the only, are made 
of Lixivial Salts. It matters nor, of what kind of Ve- 

table the Aſhes are made: But becauſe, ſcarce any 

other Vegetable can be eafier got than Broom, and be- 
cauſe it is well approved of in this Diſeaſe, for the moſt 
part I order a Pound of the Aſhes of it to be infuſed 
cold in two Quarts of Rheniſh-wine adding to it one 
or two Pugils of common Morm-word; the Sick muſt 
take four Ounces of the Liquor filtrared in rhe Morn- 
ing, at five in the Afternoon, and in the Evening daily, 
till the Tumour vaniſhes, with which Remedy alone, I 
have known ſome Dropſies, that were counted deplora- 
ble cured in thoſe, whole weak Conſtitutions could not 
bear Purging. | 

The Warers, to haſten to the ſecond Intention, which 
are the next cauſe of the Diſeaſe, being quite eva- 
cuated, but half the Cure is performed moſt common- 
ly, unleſs the weakneſs of the Blood, which is the Ori— 
gin of the Diſeaſe, be removed by a long and daily uſe 
of heating and ſtrengthening Medicines, to prevent a 
freſh Stock of Waters; for tho' it often happens in young 
People, that when the Waters are well purged off, they 
recover without any more ado, their natural heat be- 
ing freed from the Burthen of the Waters, ſupplying the 
Room of Remedies, yet in ancient People, and in o- 
thers, who are of an infirm Conttitution, it is abſolute- 
Iv deceſſary, preſently after the Waters are quite eva- 


cuated, 


<< . 
2 2 — 8 — 


—_— -* 


402 Of Fpidemick Diſeaſes front 


cvared, to uſe thoſe Simples, which heat and invigorate 
the Blood, among which, thoſe things which I have com- 
mended above, tor the cure of the Gout, whether they 
are Remedies or the fix Non-naturals may be uſed, be. 
fides thole which ſhall be mentioned by and by (only 
Wine, from which we ought wholly- ro abſtain in the 
Gout, is not only, nor hurtful in a Dropſie, but very 
Beneticial if it be uted for the ordinary Drink) for theſe 
two Ditcalcs agree in this, viz, rhe ſame ſtrengthening 
Remedies refitt the Original Cauſe in both; bur it mutt 
be contfeſſed, that we being taught in both by the mani. 
feſt Fhcmomena, and by thoſe things that do gocd or hurt, 
that theſe and mot other Chronical Diſeaſes take their 
rite from weaknels of the Blood and Indigeſtion, and 
being able to know no more, we have as yer, but a Su- 
periicial Knowledge of Diſeaſes, being not able to pene- 
trate into the Effential Differences of them, and the (pe. 
Cilick Depravations of the Humours, progceding from 
{auch Indigeſtions, which indigeſtion is the common cauſe 
of all; nor can we any way underſtand thoſe various 
Specifications, which in acute Diſeaſes, flow from one 
and the ſame cauſe, vi. the Inflammation of the Blood; 
wherefore, as well in rheie, as in Chronical Diſeaſes, 
Specificks being wanting, we are forced to direct the 
Cure, not to the eſſential Natute of the Diſeaſe, but to 
the more general cauſe of them, varying now and then 
the method of Cure, either according to the ſpontane- 
onus indication of Nature, which ſhe uſes in Eliminating 
Diſeaſes, or following the Guidance of Experience, ſhew- 
ing by what kind of method of Cure every Dileaſe yields 
eaieir. » 
Moreover, in order to the fulfilling this intention of 
wh'ch we now treat, viz. that the Blood be corrobora- 
red, whether the Evacuation of the Water be effected by 
this Diuretick, or by Purging or Vomiting, as above, 
ir is abſolutely neceſſary, that the Sick, if his conditi- 
on will allow of it, be ordered to drink Wine all the 
while he is in Cure (bur he muſt nor begin drinking 
of Wine before the Paſſages are lomewhar opened, and 
a way made for the Water) or at leaſt, inſtead of Wine 
che belt Strong-beer ; becaule all ſorts of ſmall and cool- 
ing Liquors, how agrecable loeyer they may be to the 


Pakite 


the Year I675, to the Tear 1680, 403 


Palate of the Sick, who is almoſt always thirſiy in this 
Diſeaſe, render him more Phlegmatick, and further the 
Increaſe of the Water: Therefore they are rarely or ne- 
ver to be allowed, but on the contrary, generous Li- 
quors, if they are not diſtilled Spirits, do ſo promote 
Health, that ſometimes they cure alone at the beginning 
of the Diſeaſe, when there is not much Water in the 
Belly, eſpecially when they are impregnated with 
heating and ſtrengthning Herbs. In poor People 
for inſtance, the Narrowneſs of whoſe Fortune could 
not allow of better Remedies, I uſe to order for 
their ordinary Drink, Strong-beer, wherein a ſufficient 
Quantity of the Roots of Horle-radiſh, of the Leaves 
of Common-Wormwood, Garden-Scurvygraſs, Sage, 
the leſſer Centaury, and the Tops of Broom have been 
put: For ſuch as are rich, Canary-wine may be impreg- 
nated in the like manner with the ſame bitter Herbs, a 
Draught whereof may be taken twice or thrice a Day 
with the Medicines above mentioned; but Wormwood- 
wine may be uſed inſtead of it, if it be more pleaſing ro 
the Palare, whereof the Sick may take nine Spoonfuls at- 
ter two Drachms of the digeſtive Electuary deſcribed in 
the Treariſe of rhe Gour, ar the Medicinal hours, that 
is, in the Morning, at four in the Afrerncon, and at 
Night. This Electuary anſwers this intention excellent- 
ly well, and very much excels all other corroborating 
Medicines whatever: Bur here great Care muſt be ta- 
ken, that the Sick drink very ſparingly ſmall Liquors; 
becaule all whatever they be ſomewhat increaſe the Wa- 
ter; for a total Abſtinence from Drink has cured ſome; 
wherefore if theſe Liquors are ſometimes to be indulged, 
the Sick mult drink very ſparingly of them. But be- 
cauſe this Diſeaſe is wont to be accompanied with great 
Thirſt, which is moreover increaſed by abſtaining from 
ſmall Liquors, ir may be convenient for the Sick to waſh 
his Mouth often with cold Water ſharpened with Spirir of 
Vitriol, or he may hold now and then Tamarinds in his 
Mouth, or chew a Limon, but he muſt ſwallow neither, 
by reaſon of the Coldnels of them which increaſes the 
Diſeaſe. 

Bur amongſt Corroboratives, Steel is the chief at the 
beginning of the Diſeaſe, for it heats and invigorates 


D d 2 the 


£&-- l 
— —_— 


2 
2 
5 — 


* 
22 4 
8 bs 
— 2 
- 2 


8 il. 248 
- = — = 
— — 
- 


«1% — - —— 
8 - wu 2 
2 — 
— En 
2 © oh 
Þ —— — — 


— 
— 
— . 
; 3 
— . 
— , 
a — _ 
3 
— — = 
- — 


2 * 
zv— . 
” Ban” 


_ —_ 


— 
_ — 
— 


2 — 
OE 


oy 


— A 
- 3 


— — p ů v ů — E. 
Fe __— — LAGS > - = 
. FR. —— — 
= — 
. "+ 1 A 
.._— cape A—— 


—— — — — 


404 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 
the Blood ; for which reaſon alſo Garlick is good ; and 
I have known a Dropſie cured by it alone, Without any 
Evacuations, by the Preſcription of others, not my 
own. 

But it is to be obſerved, that that Dropſie which 
{wells only the Legs, or the Belly, but moderately, does 
not preſently require to be cured by Vomit and Purges ; 
for it often yields to the foreſaid heating and ſtrengthen- 
ing Liquors : Bur above all you mult take great notice, 
when the Cure of this Diſeaſe is managed only with 
{irengthening and lixivial Medicines, the Sick mult by no 
means be purged with any gentle or ſtrong Medicine, 
whilt we endeavour to ſtrengthen the Blood; for the Ca- 
thartick deſtroys what has been done by the corroborative 
Medicine, as any one mult needs acknowledge, who has 
obſerved the Swelling to begin to aſſwage by Ule of Cor- 
roboratives, and to be preſently increaſed by Purging : 
For tho' when we endeavour to anſwer the Intention of e- 
vacuating the Waters, it may not be improper to give now 
and then Corroboratives: Yer when all the Buſineſs de- 


pends on ſtrengthening the Blood, we muſt wholly abſtain, 


from Catharticks. 

But it is to be noted, that the Sick is not always cu- 
red, when we anſwer both theſe Intentions, vix. when 
the Water contained in the Belly is wholly evacuated, 
and allo when heating and ſtrengthening Medicines have 
been uſed to prevent a new Stock of Water, for it of- 
ten happens, that a Dropſie continuing for many Years, 
the Waters lying along while upon the Bowels, pervert 
their Subſtance, and half boils them as it were, and 
quite corrupts the Bowels and the Neighbouring parts, 
generating preternatural Glands, and ſmall Bladders full 
of Santos, and turning all things contained in the Cavi- 
ty of the Belly into a ſort of Corruption, as Diſſection 
©{covers in the Carcaſles of rhoſe who die of an invere- 
ate Dropſie, and when the Diſeaſe is at this height, it 
comemns, as far as 1 ſee, the help of Art; yet it is the 
Duty of a Phviician, ſeeing he cannot certainly know 
now mich the Bowels are hurt, to endeavour the Cure 
all he Can, by things that evacuate and ſtrengthen, and 
not to detvyund, or cauſe the Patient to do ſo ; and for 
is reaſon, ie mult nſe & utmoſt Endeavours in this 

Cale; 


the Year 1675, to the Year 1680, 405 


Caſe ; becauſe in very many Diſcaſes, when the Fomes 
of the Diſeaſe is quite carried off, Nature that aflifts us 
Night and Day, wonderfully contrives of her own ac- 
cord to free the Sick from the pernicious Reliques of the 


Diſeaſe; wherefore every Dropſie, how inveterate ſocver 


it be, although it has mightily injured the Bowels, may 
be treated in the ſame manner, as if it were juſt be- 
Ne 
5 Topick or external Remedies, ſo far as I can obſerve, 
perform no great matter in this Diſeaſe ; thoſe are leaft 
hurrful, which are applied to the Belly to diſcuſs the 
Swelling in the Form of a Cataplaſm or Liniment: Bur 
do not ſee by what means they can diſcuſs the Water; 
bur there are other things preſcribed by ſome, inſtead ot 
Remedies, that inſtead of doing good, do much hurt; of 
this ſorr are Ointment made of the ſtrongeſt Cathar- 
ticks, and applied to the Belly, Bliſters allo applied ro 
the Thighs and Legs, ro evacuate the Water when the 
Parts are much ſwelled: Bur both theſe are dangerous: 
for by the firſt the cathartick Force of the Simples is 
ſometimes ſo thruſt into the Muſcles and Membranes, 
that an Hypercatharſis is occaſioned, that can never be 
ſtopped by any Remedies: But Bliſters, that are wont 
ro be applied to the foreſaid Parts by Empiricks, quite 
extinguiſh the natural Heat, which was almoſt over- 
whelmed before by the Waters, the Animal Spirits be- 
ing alſo deficient, and ſo they often occaſion a Gan- 
grene, which is too frequent in this Caſe; the ſlighteſt 
Wound is very difficultly healed in the Fleſh of Hydropi- 
cal Perſons, eſpecially in a depending Parr ; becaule rhe 
very Subſtance of the Fleſh in theſe Parts ſo much abound 
with Warer, that the Humour, having gor any Paſſage, 
perpetually flows, and thereby hinders the healing of the 
Wound; nor in my Opinion can a Paracenteſis, or the 
Puncture by a Needle, that is commended by ſome, be 
uſed with leſs hazard, and greater Succeſs than Bli- 
ſters. s 
But to conclude, tho' this Diſeaſe, when it is come to 
a true Dropſie of th: Belly, is always counted deplora- 
ble, yet it will appear, if it be treated as above, that it 
may be as certainly cured, if the Bowels are not corrup- 
ted, as many others which are nor reckoned ſo deadly. 
Dd 3 Bur 


— ; 
— 
- — —ö — — 
- 
- 4 — 
— >= > adit 


d — — 
— —  —— — 


— D— — — — — - — 
- 2 RE” —_— — — — 
— . — — 
% hs = — — > <A 
2 > * — — 20 - 
— —vu— 


5 -» 


— 


* * — ==> 4 


— 


— 
- . WL a * 3 - * 52s 
X A 2 * -- 
— — 


1 
4 
[Ro] 
; 
0 TY 
18 


406 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 


Bur perhaps ſome will blame thele Remedies, for being 
fmple, and plainly inartificial ; I ſhould rather blame his 
Wickedneſs, for Jilliking that others thould be cured with 
{ach fimple Medicines, when he would be glad, that him- 
ſelf, his Wite, or Children, when they are at any time 
ſick, might recover theit Health by the moſt contemptible 
means; moreover, the Coxcomb expoſes himſelf; for 
the Pomp and Dignity of the medical Art, is nor ſo much 
ons Sn by neat forms of Remedies, as by curing Dil. 
caſcs. 

This is all I have to ſay of theſe two Diſeaſes, and I 
think I ſhall ſcarce treat of any other; bur as to rhole 
1 have already publiſhed, if any one ſhould vouchſafe to 
read them bur once, J am very ſorry, that I ſhould oc- 
caſion his loſs of time; bur if he will read them often, 
and ponder them well, I do nat at all queſtion, but he 
will receive ſuch advantage by them, as will in ſome 
ſort anſiver the Deſires. and great Labour, which I have 
beſtowed on the making and compoſing rheſe Obſerva- 
tions; for he can only know with what fincerity they 
have been delivered, by being converſant in the Pra- 
ctice ot them, ard by being as diligent and curious a 
Searcher for Obſervations as I was before him; and if 
in thoſe few things 1 have written, I have wholly fol- 
lowed Nature, not pinning my Faith upon the opinion 
of any Man, how great ſoever he is, I am ſure all wile 
Men will pardon me, who cannot be ignorant that there 
are two ſorts of Men, who equally obſtruct the Im- 
provement of the Art of Phyſick; the firſt are thole, 
who adding nothing for the increaſe of the Art which 
chey profeſs, deſpiſe others who never lo little improve it, 
who hyde their defect and floath under the Pretext of re- 
verence to Antiquity, from whence they lay they muſt 
not recede a Nails breadth : But why thovid we confels 
thar all other Arts, which are nor of ſo great Importance 
to Men, ſhould be ſo much improved, without any pre- 
jadice to the Ancients, and Phyſick alone, ſhould be 
reckoned altogether perfect? Could not the Inventors 
of the more certain Art of Sailipg, which now prevails, 
try the ule of the Compaſs, which ſucceeds ſo well, but 
they muſt forſooth contemn the firſt that were ſo un- 
5xillfal, that they could not direct their Courſe * 

| ther 


the Tear 1673, to the Tear 1680. 407 


ther way than by the view of tlie Stars, and the windings 
of the Shore? Or muſt the more accurate and perfect Art 
of making and governing Ships in fight, whereby now-a- 
days, the Weſtern Inhabitants of Europe excell all others, 
defame theſe Ship-wrights, who made the Navies, that 
fought hererofore at Actium, or Auguſtus, or Math Antho— 
ny, Who were ſuch great Generals and Admirals? Besides, 
there are moſt innumerable examples of things found out, 
which far excel the Inventions of the Ancients, the Con- 
trivers whereof are no more to be ſuppoſed injurious to 
the Memory of the Ancients, than that Son is to his Fa- 
ther's Fame, who increaſes the Eitate left him by his Care 
and Induſtry. There is alſo another ſort of Men, who 
out of Leviry of Mind, affecting the Title of Wits, trou- 
bleſomely intrude Speculations that no way advance the 
cure of Diſeaſes, not ſo properly ſnewing the way to Phy- 
ſicians, as making them ſtray from it by their Tons Fatuus, 
Nature has beſtowed lo much Wit on theſe People, as 
enables them to trifle learnedly with ir: Bur {he has 
failed them in the prudential part, whereby they ſhould 
know, that they can underſtand nothing no other way, 


than by Experience, which unveils Nature; forthe abject 


Condition of the humane Nature, being unable to rile to 
an intuitive Science, is reſtrained to the rarrow bounds 
of Knowledge, which it receives from the five Senſes, yet 
notwithſtanding a Man may become as prudent, as the 
humane Lot will allow : Bur a Philoſopher, according 
to the Auguſt Majeſty of the Name, no mortal Man can 
ever be: Bur all the Philoſophy of a Phyſician conſiſts 
wholly in ſearching the Hiſtory of Diſeaſes, and for Re- 
medies, Which are found by Experience to be able to 
cure them, obſerving, as I ſaid in another place, the me- 
thod of Cure, which right reaſon, (founded upon rhe 
common and natural way of thinking, and not the Com- 
nientaries of Speculations) dictates to him. 


D d 4 POS 


- 
>. = 
* 3 8 — . = 
* —— 2 


2 


>, _ 


- — 
— 


—— 
— 


— 
— — 
— 


— — — 


— 
* — 


= 


- 


—_— 
— 


25 


PR 


- — 
* 


* 


— =y = 
— - 


6 


. * 2 ® 
Ds 


Di. N 
et == 
a — — 


* 
3 


— — 
I LL 

-4<- 
- 


p. 
— 


Dr - 
— 

- " 

= = . 


— 


ITS 


r Ex: 
_ * = 


40? Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 


POSTS ee. 


Y the Reader's leave, I will add one thing of no ſmall 
moment, in finding out and curing Fevers, which, if 

I had not forgot, ſhould have been mentioned in a more 
proper Place, I have oblerved that every Year, from the 
beginning of Winter to the height of the Spring, a certain 
Fever invades, which, both as to the Symptoms and Cure, 
plainly differs from the S:ationary, or Epidemick Fever of 
the general Conſtitution, which then prevails, and there- 
fore ro be reckoned amongſt thoſe Fevers, which I call 
Inter- currents. Ir ſeems to riſe from the Frigidity of the 
Air, and the thickneſs, and moiſture of it; for by this 
means, the Pores of the Skin are ſhur, and the Blood by 
reaſon of Tranſpiration hindered, is burthened with a 
heap of ſerous Matter, which ar length becoming offen- 
five, and putrefying by its long conrinuance, eafi'y kin- 
dies a Fever upon taking Cold, or upon ſome flight occa- 
fion ; and if the Matter cauſing the Diſeaſe be very much, 
that Fever ariſes, which I deſcribed under the Title of a 
Baſtard Pecripneumonia, Chap. 4th Se. 6th of my Book of 
acute Diſeaſes, But if the Humour does not fo much a- 
bound, it only produces thole Symptoms, which Iam now 


about ro deſcribe, The Sick for a day or two, after the 


beginning of rhe Fever, is ſometimes hot, ſometimes cold, 
he complains of a Pain in his Head and Limbs, and of 
Reſtleſsneſs over his whole Body; his Tongue is white, 
and his Pulſe not much unlike the Pulſe of a well Perſon; 
his Urine is thick, and very red, his Blood is like that of 
Oleuriticks ; there is molt commonly a Cough, bur the 
Difficulry of Breathing, Straitneſs of the Breaſt, and Pain 
of the Head in Coughing, as if it were cleft, does not ac- 
company this Cough, as they are wont in a Baſtard Peri- 
pneumonia. And moreover, this Fever is nat accompanied 
with the more remarkable Signs of a Peripneumonia, tho 
it differ from it only in degree; I call this the Winrer-Fe- 
Ver. | 

This Diſeaſe, tho at its firſt coming, it has only the 
Symptoms that ariſe from taking Cold, ver if it be ill 


managed, 


the Tear 1675, to the Year 1680. 409 


managed, it draws after it a long Chain of great Ills, 
which at length kill, for when the Sick is confined to his 
Bed, and has been puniſhed with I know nor whar Cor- 
dial things to provoke Sweat, and carry off the Fever, 
(bur irs ſeldom done) a Delirium, Lethargy, a Languid 
and inordinate Pulſe, dry Tongue, red Spots, and ſome- 
times looking: almoſt livid, too often accompany this Fe- 
ver. This and ſuch like Symptoms, altho' ſome impure 
them to Malignity, as they love to term it, yet they are 
really to be aſcribed to ill Management; for this Fe- 
ver of its own Nature, having too much of an Inflamma- 
tion, the Blood is yet more fired by Cordials: and 
keeping continually a Bed, ſo that the Spirits are driven 
into Confuſion, and inordinate Motions, and the Mor- 
bifick, Matter being caſt upon the Brain, all things go ro 
wreck, 

In curing this Fever, I propoſe this method, viz. ro 
cauſe a Revullion of the ſtock of Flegm abounding, that 
was heapr up by the Analogy of Winter, by bleeding, 
and to carry it off by repeated Purges, and in order to 
this, as ſoon as J am called, I order Nine or Ten Ounces 
of Blood to be drawn from the Arm, and the next day I 
give my common purging Potion, v:z. 


Take of Tamarinds haf an Ounce, of Sena two Drams, 
of Rhubarb one Dram and an half; boyl them in a ſuf- 
ficient quantity of Water; to three Ounces of the ſtrain- 
ed Liquor, add of Manna, and the Syrup of Roſes Solu- 
tive, each one Ounce ; mingle them, make a Potion to 
be taken early in a Morning. 


] repeat this Potion twice, a day being betwixt each 
Purge; if all the Symptoms do not go off before, of the 
Days he does nor purge ; if he has a Cough, I order him 
to take the pectoral Decoction, and a Linus made of Oil 
of ſweet Almonds, and of the Syrups of Maidenhair and 
Violets, now and then, and to ſuppreſs the too great heat 
of the Blood. If the Fever be very raging, I preſcribe an 
N of the cold Seeds; however the following 

ulep. 


Take 


B 


2 
— 
— — 


— 5 
_ 
- =. — 


— 
— 


8 


A_ 


hs 
, a 1 % Log * 
. ar, — 3 * — we ” 


— 
—— — — 
— 


4. — 
— 


I. 


5 


32 


— - -- 
w— 42 


* * — — —— 
* ——— — 


gy, — — - 
42 * = ” 


_ -—_—_ 


EX 8 
* 


2 


— 
34 


IR 


2 K 2 


— 
n ry 
Pu 5 WTI — — —— 


8 
— 
= 
— 
1 - — 


—— 
— _ 9 — 8 


410 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 


Take of the Waters of Water Lillies, Pu\ſlain, and Ly. 
tice, each four Ounces, of Syrup of Limens one Ounce 


and an half, of &yrup of Violets one Ounce ; mingle 

1 Av 5 ere let Hi dri A . O 
them, F: 11 J, * vercof er DMN 1749 az oft as he 
will, 


In the mean while, I order the Sick ro keep from Beg 
adays, ard from caring Fieſh ; but after the firſt or ſe. 
cond Purge, 1 allow, that now and then he ſhould drink 
a Draught of thin Chicken-Broth. But it is to be noted, 
that if any violent Symptom, as difficulty of breathing, 
or a lanching Pain of the cad in Coughing, ſhew that 
this Diſeaſe is near a Baſtard Peripneumonia; in this Calc 
both Bleeding, and Purging are ſo often to be repeated at 
due Intervals, till all the Symptoms quite vaniſn, and the 
Sick is to be treated carefully in the manner we have de. 
ſcribed in the {aid Chapter. Bur it is very rare that this 
Fever whereof we now ſpeak, is ſo violent, that after once 
Bleeding, and thrice Purging, it ſhould want more Eva- 
cuation : But enough of this, tho I thought it neceſſary to 
mention it, that this Winter Fever might not be counted 
Stationary, or a general Epidemich Fever of any Conſtitu- 
tion, for Icertainly know, that many Men have died, ei- 
ther becaule this was neglected, or not known, 


— 


lt 
—— 


6 


To the Worthy, aud Learned Dr. Charles Good. 
all, Fellow of the College of Phyſicians. 


Hen I reſolved to Publiſh what I lately obſerved 
concerning the Fever of this preſent Conſtitution, 
thought I ought to Dedicare it to you, worthy Sir, a- 
bove all others, and J count J onght to do it chiefly for 
two Reaſons; Firſt, becauſe you are my Faithful Friend, 
and Conſtant Companion, and have always ſtood by me, 
and defended me againſt all that have any way oppo- 
fed me, which you did not do ſo much for my ſake, as 
on the account of a generous Principle, and a great and 


honeſt mind, whereby you were induced to fide with 
Truth, 


the Year 1675, to the Tear 1680. 411 


Truth, when almoſt every Phyſician inveigh'd againſt 
me; and yer there is no reaſon I ſhould be angry with 
them, nor indeed am I angry with them, ſor ſo many 
Quacks that boaſt of their Fancies and Fictions, have ſo 
often impoſed on the World, in order to increaſe their 
Fame, that it was the Duty of Wiſe and Ingenious Men 
not to admit preſently without Examination, ſuch things 
as I propoſed, that were contrary to the received Me- 
thod of Practice. Yer notwithſtanding I am as much 
obliged to you, and therefore I thought it my Duty to 
teſtifie publickly my reſpects to you; for ſcarce any 
Virtue more becomes humane Nature, when it is arri- 
ved at the very height; for as Kings endeavour to ren- 
der their Favourites illuſtrious, and to diſtinguiſh them 
from others, by Titles of Honours, and Coats of Arms, 
ſo when Nature would ſeparate this or that Man from 
the crowd and herd of Men, ſhe is wont to make him 
grateful, that being as it were the Mark and Cha- 
tacter of a noble Spirit. This is the other reaſon why 
I dedicate eſpecially this Treatiſe to you, viz. becauſe 
we Deng familiar and converſant together daily in a 
manner for many Years, you know beſt whar Pains I 
have taken in collecting Obſervations, for the Hiſtory 
and Cure of thoſe Diſeaſes. I have publiſſid: And tho 
I have not Printed them altogether, and at once, but at 
ſome Years diſtance, according as I came to under- 
ſtand them, yet notwithſtanding, I think them ſo lame 
and imperfect, that 3 ought rather ro be aſhamed, 
than to expect Praiſe from them; bur however it be, 
this ar leaſt may be ſaid in my excuſe, viz. that tho 
che ſpace of Thirty Years, wherein I have been very di- 
ligent in the Obſervation of Diſeaſes, may ſeem ſuffi- 
cient to make a greater Progreſs in the Knowledge of 
them than I have made; yer I boldly affirm, that rho' ſo 
much time is more than needs to confound the Brain with 
Theorems and Fictitious Comments, collected from 
Books (all which no more conduce to the Cure of Diſ- 
caſes, than the Art of Painting to the Art of Navigati- 
on) yer four times the number of Years would nor be 
lufficient, even for a Man that is conſtantly employ'd in 
the Practice of Phyſick, ro perfect the ſame in every 
part of the phyſical Art. I have endeavour'd all I could, 

to 


es. 
© ——_ 


— 
_ 


— - > 
a „ 
— 
. 2 - — * 


— 
_ 
— — 
- — — —p—— — 
4 - : = I N - 


-2 


i — 


-# 


A 2 


* 
S — 


1 
— 

— — 
r 
2 - - ws 

— — 
cc 4a-, 
= = — 


—* 
3 
= =_ * 


2 


2 ' x - 


— 
ar _- 


412 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 


to collect rhe moſt accurate Obſervations, and I hays 
publiſhed them forthwith, that if there was any thing that 
was good in them, the Publick might preſently receive it: 
and therefore having done my Duty, my mind is quiet, 
and I am not at all ſollicitous, how others will eſteem my 
Writings. 1 will only add this, that as he that does not ya. 
lue them will do me no hurt, ſo he that only reads them 
bur once, will not be much benefired thereby. But to pal 
by theſe things, I btſeech you, candid Sir, to accept kind. 
ly of this Treatiſe, whereby I publickly own how much] 
reſpect you, which alſo all others do, that know leſs of 
your Virtue than I do; nor can any one imagine, that | 
who no way depend on you, flatter you, when I publickly 
profeſs, that as you are ſecond to none in the Art you ex. 
erciſe (to ſpeak modeſtly) ſo you excel all others I ever 
kney for Integrity, and Honeſty. May you live long after 
I am dead, and be the chief Phyſician, not ſo much for 
ſcraping Money together, for the benefit of your Poſterity, 
(which compared with what follows is in a manner agree- 
able to the Nature of a Beaſt) as by ſhewing the World 
by what means the Difficulties in curing Diſeaſes, that 
have hitherro perplex'd, and overcome the medical An, 
may be removed, indoing which, you, if you pleaſe, may 
build on the Foundation I have laid; only I would have 
you kindly, and publickly correct the miſtakes J have per- 
haps made, in my Obſervations either in the Hiſtory or 
Cure of this, or that Diſeaſe, when you ſhall be better in- 
formed by long, and repeated Experience, and in ſo doing 
you will nor injure the Memory of the Dead, who when 
he was living defired above all things the furtherance of 
the medical Art, by whomſoever it was done; yet not ſo 
much by Learned Comments, on the Nature of Diſeaſes 
(wherewith we have been already a long while nauſeated) 
as by a certain and faithful Method of Curing them. Fare- 
wel, worthy Sir, and continue your Kindneſs to me 


Your Obliged Servant, 


Tho. Sydenham. 


Theo 


muc 
| Feby 


rea 


he 


W Riies.. 


r t TS: v 


* 1 


bh” Bb 
OS 


the Year 1675, to the Year 1680, 413 


The Monitory Schedule, concerning the coming 
of the new Fever. 


Fro my Old Age, worn out almoſt by long Sickneſs 
may well require on that account a Writ of Eaſe, and 
a Ceſſation from deep Thought, the labour of the Brain; 
yet I could not forbear, but I muſt be buſied in the pro- 
curing the Health of others, tho' even by the loſs of my 
own, when my Acquaintance informed me of the entrance 
of a new Conſtitution, from whence proceeded a new ſort 
of Fever, much unlike thoſe that lately reigned. 

We muſt remember that in Autumn 1677 intermittent 
Fevers firſt encreaſed and advanced daily, and were Epi- 
demical till they came to their State; afterwards they de- 
creaſed by degrees, and ſo rarely appeared the laſt Years of 
this Conſtitution, that they could not be counted Epide- 
mical ; and on this account we muſt likewile take notice, 
that the two laſt Years of the Conſtitution now going off, 
had two very ſevere Winters, eſpecially the laſt ſave one, 
viz, the Year 1683 3 in which the Seaſon was ſo vehe- 
mently cold, that no Man living ever ſaw the like as to 
the intenſe degree of the Cold, and the long time it held. 
For the noble River of Thames was ſo froze that it eaſily 
ſuſtained, like a folid Pavement, Coaches running about 
upon it, and Shops well furniſned in a manner of Streets, 


| 2nd great crowds of People. Tho the following Year 84, 


did not equal the preceding, either as to the Extremiry of 
Cold, or obſtinate Duration of it, yer it did not come 


much behind it as to either; but as ſoon as it thawed in 


| February, in the Year 85, this Fever began, that I now 


treat of, which I rake to be a new ſort of Fever, and 


| holly different from that which has prevailed for theſe 
| Fight Years laſt pait. 


I cannot certainly ſay, whether the change of this 


| Conſtirution is to be attributed to the Alrerarion of the 
manifeſt Qualities of the Air, which ſucceeded for theſe 
wo Winters; for I have obſerved, that Alrerations as 
the ſenſible Qualities of Years how different ſoever, 


i have 


— - — _ * 
— ˙ ˙t.é 
| —— » * 9 = — - E — 


— 2 
— 


SE. acc 


* 9 
— — — ' . 
3 


— - 


4s 
v 
7 
D 
4 


414 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 


have not produced Species of Epidemick Dileaſes ; and that 
a certain Series of Years (tho one Year has differed from 
another, as to outward Appearance and Temperament) 
have notwithſtanding all agreed in producing of the ſame 
Species of Stationary Fevers; which when 1 had conſide- 
red lerioully, I was of the Opinion, as I have mentioned 
in another Place, that the change of a Conſtitution chiefly 
depends on ſome ſecret and hidden Alteration in the Boy. 
els of the Earth, paſſing through the whole Atmoſphere, 
or from ſome influence ofthe Celeſtial Bodies. Tho it is 
to be obſerved here, that when the Depuratory Fever 
heretofore went of, a very dry and violent Froſt from 
the beginning of Winter 64. froze up all things, nor did 
it abare at all till the beginning of March, at which time, 
as ſoon as the Froſt went off, a Peſtilential Fever, and 
ſoon after the Plague began to rage. But however this 
may be, the Fever which we now treat of began at the 
time aforeſaid, viz. in February 84, and was more ſpread 
through all the parts of England, and more Epidemical in 
other places than here in London, the Year before, and this 
1 
When I was fir called to this Fever, I firmly be lier. 
ed, it was not of that kind of Fevers, which I call 
Stationary, but rather of the Family of Inter- currents, 
which come promiſcuouſly almoſt in all Years ; to wi, 
that it was nothing elle than that Baſtard Peripncumonia, 
which ] have heretofore deſcribed in my Book of acute 
Ditcaſts, only with this difference, that in this Fever the 
Symproms did not appear now and then, Which were 
more Pathognomenick, in the Peripneumenia; ſuch are a 
violent Cough, a violent Headach in Coughing, cleaving 
as it were the Head, a Giddineſs upon any Motion, and 
a great Diflicuity of breathing, all which did moſt com- 
monly accompany the Baſtard Peripreamonia, When 
therefore the Bookſeller defired a new Edition of my 
Works ar thar time, I publiſhed my Conjecture in the 
Poſtlcripr, in which I perceive my lelf miſtaken ; and 
truly, I was led into this Error, by the great and ma- 
nifen Agreement, which was between this Fever, and the 
forclaid Poripreumonia, Which comes riow and then every 
Winter; but the Summer coming on, which was wont 
wo vaniſh thele Peripzermentci, Fevers, and this on 
With- 


with 
mon. 
ger 

the 

Dilc 
be C 
war 
dian 
conl 
by 1 
he | 
trut 
orea 
cord 
not 
wh 
are 
and 
out 

too 
ſtitu 
mat 
Diſe 
ſiare 
and 
and 
brar 
com 
mor 
Cor 
4c 
10 18 


the Year 1675, to the Tear 1680. 415 


withſtanding continuing, I was ſoon convinced of my Er- 
ror, being wholly perſwaded that it was to be reduced to 
2 new Conſtitution, 

After as diligent a ſearch as I cou'd make, the Symp= 
roms I obſerved are, and were for the molt part thele. 
The Sick is cold and hor by Turns, and often complains 
of Pain of his Head and Limbs ; the Pulſe is like the 
Pulſe of thoſe that are well; Blood taken away is moſt 
commonly like the Blood of Pleuriticks; the Patient for 
the moſt part is troubled with a Cough, which together 
with other $ymproms accompanying a gentle Feripneu- 
monia, goes off ſo much the ſooner, by how much lon- 
ger the Diſeale invades from the Winter, A Pain ſeizes 
the Neck and Jaws, ſometimes ar the beginning of the 
Diſeaſe, bur it is leſs than in a Quinley ; rho' the Fever 
be continual, yer it has violent Exacerbations often tos, 
wards Night, as if it were a double Tertian or Quori- 
dian. The Sick is much indangered by keeping his Bed 
conſtantly, tho' he has but very little Cloaths on, for 
by that means the Fever being rurned upon the Brain, 
he ſoon falls into a Coma or Phrenſie; and to ſpeak 
truth, the Inclination of this Diſeale ro a Phrenſie is ſo 
great, that ir often creeps on of a ſuddain of its own ac- 
cord, without any ſuch occaſion. But the Phrenſie does 
not riſe with ſo great fury in this Fever, as in that with 
which thoſe that have the Small- pox, and other Fevers, 
are ſeized ; for the Sick rather doats, muttering now 
and then ſome odd Words. Petechie very often break 
cut by reaton of the unſeaſonable Uſe of Cordials, and 
too hot a Regimen, and in young People of a hot Con- 
ſtitution, Purple- ſpots, the certain Signs of a high Inflam- 
mation, as well in this as in any other kind of acute 
Diſeaſes ; and ſometimes Eruptions, which they call Mi- 
iares, ſprinkle themſelves over the Surface of the Body, 
and are not very unlike the Meaſles, only they are redder, 
and when they go oft they do nor leave behind thoſe 
branny Scales which are ſeen in the Meaſles ; tho' they 
come ſometimes of their own accord, yet moſt com- 
monly they are forced our by the Hear of the Bed and 
Cordials. The Patients Tongue is either moiſt or dry, 
according to the Method which has been uſed ; when 


| i is dry, it is of a duskiſh Colour in the middle, which 


18 


>. 


2 


— = W—_- - 8 2 D_ — —— 


"» 


% 


* 


— — 
— + 
oY 
— 


- W — Oz 
Fe SE. = n 
140 = - 


98 


I 


- _ 


ONS 
3 


1 2, 


_ 2 5 2 
—— — —— 


— 
_— 
. _—_ 
s w — 12 
9 OO - 


+ 
* 
** . 


— 


aw 


— 2 
& 2 5 
0 


— - — 


———ů— — — 
I 
Z 2 — 


= Vw Ax. 
3 — 
= — 
— 
— 
* 


416 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 


is hemmed round with a whiriſh Fringe: but when it j- 
moiſt, it is all white, covered alſo with a white and fil- 
thy Skin: For if the Sick be too much heated by the 
Method uſed, rhe Tongue is moſt commonly dusky and 
dry, but if not, it is moiſt and white. This is alſo to be 
affirmed of Sweat, which flows according to the different 
Method aforeſaid; for if the Sick be treated with too 
much heat, it is in a manner viſcous, eſpecially about the 
Head; and tho' it flow freely, and from all parts, yet the 
Sick has little eaſe by it: So that it is evident that ſuch 
Sweats are only Symptomatical, not Critical. Sweat 
forced by Art at the beginning of the Diſeaſe, uſed to put 
eff the Morbifick matter, if not on the Head, at leaſt up- 
on the Limbs. But when the Fever has poſſeſſed the 
Head, and the Phrenſie has once prevailed, then no ſigns 
of the Fever remain, only the Pulſe is ſometimes quicker, 
ſometimes ſlower, But at length, when by ill manage- 
ment, the Spirits are driven into a Confuſion, the Pulſe is 
inordinate, with a Subſultus of the Members, and Death 
ſoon follows. 

As to the Cure: Theſe figns of the Peripneumonia, which 
accompanied this Fever laſt Year in February, in which 
it firſt began, made me believe preſently after Winter, 
as I ſaid before, that it onghr to be reckoned with the 
Family of Peripneumonicks ; and therefore I preſently be- 
took my ſelf ro that Method, which I have heretofore 
commended in the Cure of a Baſtard Peripneumonia, 
which truly was very ſucceſsful to me, in thoſe few, I 
was ſcarce able to take care of becauſe of my Sicknels, 
and to others who were pleaſed to try it upon my Com- 
mendation. Whatever it was that perſwaded me to uſe 
this Method, I am now fully ſatisfied, having conſidered 
the Phenomena of the Diſeaſe, and the Temperateneſs of 
rhe laſt Year, which followed the rwo cold Winters (eſpe- 
Cially of the Winter, if it could be called fo, for it brought 
with it no conſiderable Co'd) I ſay it is evident to methat 
this Fever is nothing elſe than a ſimple Inflammation of 
the Blood, and that therefore the curative Indications are 
wholly to be directed to the ſuppreſſing of rhe ſaid Inflam- 
mation, by proper Remedies and Methods. 


There 


the Year 1675, to the Year 1680. 417 


Therefore I proceed after this manner ; firſt I order 
ten Ounces of Blood to be taken from the Arm; and in- 1 


commonly to that of Pleuriticks) does not eaſily bear 
repeated bleeding; but if a difficulty of breathing, a 
lancing Pain of the head in coughing and the like, ſig- 
nify that this Dileaſe tends to a baſtard Peripneumonia, 
then bleeding and purging are to be repeated, until all 
the Symptoms totally vaniſh, as I have ſaid in the Chap- 
ter of a Peripneumonia; and ] deſire this may be ſeriouſly 
minded. 

In the Evening I apply a Bliſter to the Poll, and next 
Morning give this lenitive Potion. 


Take of Tamarinds half an Ounce, Leaves of Senna two 
Drachms, Rhubarb one Drachm and an half ; boil them 
in a ſufficient quantity of Mater to three Ounces in the 

ſtrained Liquor diſſolve of Manna and Syrup of Roſes 
Solutive, each one Ounce ; mingle them and make 4 
Potion to be talen early in the Morning. 


Which I order to be repeated every other Day for 
thrice ; and this or the like Paregorick to be taken at Bed- 
time after every Purge. 


Take of Cowſlip-water two Ounces, of Diacodium one 
Ounce, of Fuice of Limons freſh drawn two Spoonfuls; 


deed this Fever (how like ſoever the Blood be moſt 0 


mingle them and malle a Draught. ; © 
f Viz, To prevent the Sick's being Comatoſe, by reaſon 4 
> of the Confuſion of the Animal Spirits, which purging 9 
often occaſions, by the Tumult ir raiſes in the Blood and „ 

f Humours of thoſe that have Fevers; which Symptom is 7 | 
5 cured by Hypnotick Medicines, tho' they ſeem to pro- "44 
r more it : For which reaſon nor daring to give a Purge in {$1 
a the Comatoſe Fever of the Year 73, I perſiſted in the . 
F Uſe of Glyſters; for I knew that purging Medicines 1 
4 uſed at that time, preſently cauſed a Coma, which per- 1 
1 haps would have happened otherwiſe, if I had thought 90 


of giving a Paregorick after ſuch a Purge. But when the 
Sick does not purge, we muſt not give a Paregorick at 
Bed- time, leſt it hinder the Operation of the Cathartick, 
E e which 


5 
= , 
— 


* a —— — 
2 — — 5 
= - 


* — 899 — 
- " FX. % = 
* — — 2 1 
Py . = 1 * — -- * „ — * 
: r == 
- 
— — 2 - X Po >— 


416 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 


ishemmed round with a whitiſh Fringe: but when it is 
moiſt, it is all white, covered alſo with a white and fil. 
thy Skin: For if the Sick be roo much heated by the 
Method uſed, the Tongue is moſt commonly dusky and 
dry, but if not, it is moift and white. This is alſo to be 
affirmed of Sweat, which flows according to the different 
Method aforeſaid; for if the Sick be treated with too 
much heat, it is in a manner viſcous, eſpecially about the 
Head ; and tho it flow freely, and from all parts, yet the 
Sick has little eaſe by it: So that it is evident that ſuch 
Sweats are only Symptomatical, not Critical. Sweat 
forced by Art at the beginning of the Diſeaſe, uſed to put 
eff the Morbifick matter, if not on the Head, at leaſt up- 
on the Limbs. But when the Fever has poſſeſſed the 
Head, and the Phrenſie has once prevailed, then no ſigns 
of the Fever remain, only the Pulſe is ſometimes quicker, 
ſometimes flower, But at length, when by ill manage- 
ment, the Spirits are driven into a Confuſion, the Pulſe is 
inordinate, with a Subſultus of the Members, and Death 
ſoon follows. 

As to the Cure: Theſe figns of the Peripneumonia, which 
accompanied this Fever laſt Year in February, in which 
it firſt began, made me believe preſently after Winter, 
as I ſaid before, that ir ought to be reckoned with the 
Family of Peripneumonicks ; and therefore I preſently be- 
took my ſelf ro that Method, which I have heretofore 
commended in the Cure of a Baſtard Peripneumonia, 
which truly was very ſucceſsful to me, in thoſe few, I 
was ſcarce able ro take care of becauſe of my Sicknels, 
and to others who were pleaſed ro try it upon my Com- 
mendation. Wharever it was that perſwaded me to ule 
this Method, I am now fully ſatisfied, having conſidered 
the Phenomena of the Diſeaſe, and the Temperateneſs of 
rhe laſt Year, which followed the two cold Winters (eſpe- 
Cially of the Winter, if it could be called fo, for it brought 
with it no conſiderable Cold) I ſay it is evident to methat 
this Fever is nothing elſe than a ſimple Inflammation of 
the Blood, and that therefore the curative Indications are 
wholly to be directed to the ſuppreſſing of the ſaid Inflam- 
mation, by proper Remedies and Methods. 


There 


md 5 3 8 © Tx * , / . TO 


md md 


re 


l 


the Year 1675, 10 the Tear 1680. 417 


Therefore I proceed after this manner; firſt I order 
ten Ounces of Blood to be taken from the Arm; and in- 
deed this Fever (how like ſoever the Blood be moſt 
commonly to that of Pleuriticks) does not eaſily bear 
repeated bleeding; bur if a difficulty of breathing, a 
lancing Pain of the head in coughing and the like, ſig- 
nify that this Dileale tends to a baſtard Peripneumonia, 
then bleeding and purging are to be repeated, until all 
the Symptoms totally vaniſh, as I have ſaid in the Chap- 
rer wy a Peripneumonia; and ] deſire this may be ſeriouſly 
minded. 


In the Evening I apply a Bliſter to the Poll, and next 


Morning give this lenitive Potion. 


Take of Tamarinds half an Ounce, Leaves of Senna two 
Drachms, Rhubarb one Drachm and an half ; boil them 
in a ſufficient quantity of Water to three Ounces z in the 

ſtrained Liquor diſſolve of Manna and Syrup of Roſes 
Solutive, each one Ounce ; mingle them and make 4 
Potion to be taken early in the Morning. 


Which I order to be repeated every other Day for 
thrice ; and this or the like Paregorick to be taken at Bed- 
time after every Purge. 


Take of Comſtip- water two Ounces, of Diacodium one 
Ounce, of Fuice of Limons Freſh drawn two Spoonfuls 
mingle them and make a Draught. 


Viz. To prevent the Sick's being Comatoſe, by reaſon 
of the Confuſion of the Animal Spirits, which purging 
often occaſions, by the Tumult ir raiſes in the Blood and 


 Humours of thoſe that have Fevers ; which Symptom is 


cured by Hypnotick Medicines, tho' they ſeem to pro- 
more it : For which reaſon nor daring to give a Purge in 
the Comatoſe Fever of the Year 73, I perſiſted in rhe 
Uſe of Glyfters; for I knew that purging Medicines 
uſed ar that time, preſently cauſed a Coma, which per- 
haps would have happened otherwiſe, if I had thoughr 
of giving a Paregorick after ſuch a Purge. Bur when the 
Sick does nor purge, we muſt nor give a Paregorick at 
Bed · time, leſt it hinder the Operation of the Cathartick, 


E e which 


418 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 


which is to be taken the next Day, (which is uſual tho 
it be taken late) bur if it do not wholly ſtop it, it will 
render it leſs effectual. It is a Rule with me in this and 
other Epidemick Fevers, not to purge either in the be- 
ginning or ſtate ot the Diſeaſe, unleis Bleeding hath been 
tirſt nſed : Which indeed by being either neglected or 
violated has occaſion d the Death of many, eſpecially of 
Children, as I have in another place admoniſhed by way 
of Caution. 

But we muſt take notice, that tho for the moſt part 
the above-mentioned Evacuations ought to be uſed in the 
Cure of this Fever; yet often the Patient, if he be a 
young Man or Infant, prelently recovers after bleeding, 
and being once purged : And there is no occaſion for 
more, the Fever being conquered by the firſt ; but on 
the contrary it is ſometimes neceſſary that Purges ſhould 
be uſed oftner than we ſaid before. For it ſometimes 
happens, tho' rarely, that the Sick being freed by this 
Method, relaples in a few Days after by reaſon of the 
Febrile Matter growing crude again; but it is preſently 
carried off by the Purge repeated the fourth time; tho 
this new Fever ſeldom happens under this Method, unlels 
it be occafion'd by Aphthe, coming at the latter end of 
the preceding Fever, and now being at their height, recal 
it; which Fever is indeed only Symptomatical. And the 
Hickcocks returning by Intervals often follow it, which al- 
ſo remain for ſome Days after the Fever is gone off; but 
at length vaniſh of their own accord, as the Patient gets 
Strength, which is diligently to be obſerved, for as much 
as there is no danger from the Hickcocks, coming at the 
latter end of this Fever, unleis many Medicines are over 
officiouſly and unprofitably crammed in, and then Death 
is inſtead of the Phyſician; but both the Aphthæ and 
Hickcocks, or either of them, if they do not go off of 
their own accord, bur continue a long while, may be 
eaſily cured by the Peruvian Bark, viz. one Ounce with 
a ſufficient Quantity of the Syrup of Erratick Poppies, ei- 
ther in the Form of an Electuary, or Pills taken after 
the manner I ſer down heretofore in my Epiſtle to Dr. 
Brady, and drinking upon it a Draught of Poſſet- drink. 
Which Remedy I have found by Experience more cer- 
tain in this caſe than any other whatever; if its gy a 


the Year 1675, to the Tear 1680, 419 


be not ſpoiled (as commonly it is) by the Patient keeping 
his Bed continually. 

I ſomerimes preſcribe the following, or the like, on the 
Days the Purges are not taken: 


Take of Conſerves of Mood. ſorrel, of Hips, eachon? Ounce; 
Conſerves of Ba:berrics half an Ounce, Cream of Tartar 
one Drachm, with a ſufficient quantity of Syrup of Li- 
mons ; make an Eleftuary ; of which take the quantity 
of a Nutmeg thrice a day, drinking upon it ſix Spoon- 
Fuls of the following Fulep, 


Take of the Waters of Purſlain, Lettice, and Cowſlips, 
each thre: Ouzices, of Syrup of Limms an Ounce and an 
half, of 5yrup of Violets one Ounce ; mingle them, make 
a Fulep, 

Or, : 

Take of Fountain-wæter one Pint, of Reſe-water, of the 
Juice of Limons, of MWiite-fſugar, each four Ounces ; 
boil them over a gentle Five, till all the Scum be riſen: 
Take three Ounces at pleaſure, 


Bur in all theſe things I forbear the uſing of Spirir of 
Vitriol, tho' it be very cooling, becaule ir is not proper 
in any Dileaſes that are cured by purging, by reaſon it is 
ſo very ſtyptick, not to mention now the Mineral- nature 
of this Spirit. 

It often happens, eſpecially towards the end of this 
Fever, that the Sick, when he is treated after this man- 
ner, ſwears now and then of his own accord in the 
Night, by which all the Symptoms of the Diſeaſe are 
very much mitigated : But not withſtanding, ſeeing we 
cannot truſt to ſuch Sweats, we muſt by no mea:'s in- 
termit the foreſaid Method; becauſe if the Sick ſhould 
indulge rhoſe Sweats for a longer time, the Fever, which 
the preceding Purges had in ſome ſort overcome, would 
apain revive ; for if the Swear be protracted beyond rhar 
time, in which the Febrile Particles prepared by due 
Coction are wholly carried off, the Sweats that follow 
do nothing elſe, but kindle the Flame afreſh ; wherefore 
tho' thoſe Sweats which flowed ſpontaneouſly were per- 
chance critical, with . 9 the caſting out of 0 

a 3 e. 


420 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 
Febrile Matter, which is fit for Expulſion, yer the others 
that follow may be only Sympromarical, and ſo do more 
hurt than good. To be ſhorr, the gentle heat of the Bed 
at Nights opportunely favours ſuch Sweats as of their 
own accord come in the Night; wherefore the Sick 
ſhould have no more nor thicker Cloaths on, than he uſed 
to have when he was well, nor ſhould any hot Reme- 
dies be given, Only ler him keep his Bed a little longer 
than he was wont in the Morning following, and after- 
wards let him go on in the Method of Cure above pre- 
ſcribed. 

His Diet is to be Oat- meal and Barley-broaths, and 
now and then a roaſted Apple, and after the ſecond Purge 
Chicken-broath. I order Small- beer cold for his ordina- 
ry Drink, and the white Decoction made of one Ounce 
of Harts- horn calcined, and boiled in three Pints of com- 
mon Water, and afterwards ſweetened with white Su- 

ar. 

, It is not neceſſary, as I have ſaid in another place, af- 
ter the taking of two Purges, to forbid the eating of 
Chickens, and the like, of eaſie Concoction; for this way 
of Cure by purging indulges the ſame, which could not be 
allowed, if he went on another way; moreover after the 
laſt Purge, if the Fever has a little ſpent ir ſelf, and is not 
yet turning to an Ague, three or four Spoonfuls of Cana- 
rv-wine may be taken Night and Morning, and after 
Dinner, for ſome Days, by which the Strength may be 
ſooner recovered, and the Febrile Fits averted. 

But for as much as this kind of Fever is more prone 
than any other I ever yet ſaw, to aſſault the Head, nei- 
ther can it be removed from thence without great diffi- 
culty: I ſeriouſly adviſe my Patients, that they lie a- bed 
naked only a Nights; bur if they are ſo very weak 
that they cannot fir upright, I permit that they ſhould 
lie upon their Bed and Couch with their Cloths on, with 
their Heads a little elevated; neither do I allow them 
any more Fire in their Chambers, than when they are 
well, 

And as this R-gimen is to be obſerved from the be- 
ginning, in all that are ſeized with this Fever, (excepr- 
ing Women taken on the firſt Days of Child-bed) ſo ir 
is neceſſarily injoined, when the Phyſician is Fn to a 

atient, 


Q — . —— & = © — 2 


QA 


| 


ae A + 


mA wvow 3a. ca fy = = A 09 


the Year 1673, to the Year 1680. 421 


Patient, who, becauſe of too hot a Regimen, has been 
ſeized with a Phrenſy, Petechiæ or Purple- ſpots, or any 
other Signs of a violent Inflammation; for in this Caſe 
tho Blood be taken away, tho the Body be lightly co- 
vered, and whatever cooling Liquors are drunk, yet the 
Fever will nor ceaſe till the Sick keep from Bed-a-days, 
for as much as the Heat of the Ambient Air, kept in by 
the Coverings, too much exagitates the Blood, and the 
lying Poſture of the Body forces the ſame with violence 
on the Head ; but when the Phrenſy has once prevail- 
ed, by reaſon of an ill Method, it cannot preſently be 
tamed, neither is it ſafe to endeavour the Cure by re- 
peated bleeding and purging beyond the Bounds pre- 
ſcribed; bur at length it will go off at its own time, 
and of its own accord, by the help of the Method a- 
bove-· mentioned. But nothing conduces more to the 
removal of it than ſhaving the Head ; and therefore I 
always order it without applying a Plaiſter, only a Cap 
ſo thick as may compenſate the loſs of the Hair, or at 
leaſt defend rhe Head from external Cold ; by rhis means 
the Head is extreamly cooled and refreſhed, ſo that by 
degrees it may be able to vanquiſh the hot Impreſſions 
that cauſe the Phrenſy. 

And whar has been ſaid of a Phrenſy, may likewiſe be 
affirmed of a Coma that comes upon this Fever, in 
which, as in the ſaid Phrenſy, the Febrile matter is car- 
ried up to the Head; and ſo, if you except the White- 
neſs of the Tongue, there are no ſigns of a Fever; for 
rhe Patient ſeems to be alrogether freed from it. In this 
Symptom, as in the other, Carharricks, Sudorificks, Bli- 
fters, and the like, are not only uſed without Succeſs, 
but do a great deal of hurt; for ſuch Evacuations pro- 
cure Death, ſooner than the Cure of this Symptom: 
Wherefore after general Evacuations by bleeding and 
purging, the Buſineſs is to be committed to Nature and 
Time, tho this Symptom terrify the By-ſtanders; for 
tho the Patient be ſtupid for a long time, yer he will 
recover his Health after many days, if he be not conti- 
nually kept a- bed, but is taken out of it a-Days, and 
laid upon a Couch, or on the Bed with his Cloaths on; 
in the mean while his Head may be ſhaved, and at the 
latter end of this Symptom, three or four Spoonfuls of 

7 Ee 3 8 Canary. 


422 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 


Canary-Wine ma be given twice a Day. But TI have 
treated largely of this in the fifth Section, and ſecond 
Chapter of my Book of acute Diſeaſes, where I diſcour- 
ſed of a notable Coma, that accompanied that Conſtitu- 

tion. 
But as to the Fever the Phyſician is not to be deterred 
from making the foreſaid Evacuations, if upon feeling 
the Pulſe, he ſhould perceive a twiching of the Mem. 
bers, or a convulſive Motion of the Body; for as much 
as in ſome kind of Diſeaſes of the Nerves, both bleed. 
ing and purging do not only not do hurt, bur are ne. 
ceſſarily preicribed ; of which I will produce an Expe- 
riment I made in a certain kind of Convuliion, which is 
vulgarly called Chorea Sancti Viti, of which Diſeaſe I 
cured no leſs than five, by bleeding and purging by In- 
tervals; of which ſort of Diſeaſe I will ſpeak ſomewhat, 
ſeeing 1r occurs opportunely, and evidently confirms the 
Truth of what 1 have now aſſerted. Chorea Sancti Viti 
is a ſort of Convulſion, which chiefly invades Boys and 
Girls, from ten Years of Age to Puberty: Firſt, it ſhews 
its {elf by a certain Lameneſs, or rather Inſtability of 
one of the Legs, which the Patien drags after him like 
a Fool; afrerward it appears in the hand of the ſame 
fide; which he that is affected with this Diſeale, can 
by no means keep in the fame Poſture tor one moment, 
if it be brought to the Breaſt, or any other Part, but it 
will be diſtorted to another Poſition or Place by a cer- 
rain Convulſion, let the Patient do what he can. If a 
Cup of Drink be put into his Hand, he repreſents a thou- 
ſand Geſtures, like Juglers, before he brings it to his 
Mouth; for whereas he cannot carry it to his Mouth in 
a right line, his Hand being drawn hither and thither by 
the Convulſion, he turns it often about for ſome time, 
rill at length happily reaching his Lips, he flings it ſud- 
denly into his Mouth, and drinks it greedily, as if the 
poor Wretch deſigned only to make ſport. For as much 
as this Diſeaſe ſeems to me to proceed from ſome Humour 
ruſhing in upon the Nerves, which provoke ſuch Pre- 
ter- natural Motions, I think the curative Indications 
are firſt ro be directed to the leſſening of thoſe Humours 
by bleeding and purging, and then to the ſtrengthening 
the Genus Nervoſum, in order to which I kg =" 
thod ; 


W wal ww gw bf 


the Tear 1675, to the Tear 1680. 423 


chod: I take ſeven Ounces of Blood from the Arm, more 
or leſs, according to the Age of the Patient; the next Day 
I preſcribe half, or ſomewhat more, (acccording to the 
Age, or the more or leſs diſpoſition of the Body to bear 
purging) of the common purging Potion above-deſcribed, 
of Tamarinds, Sena, Sc. in the Evening I give the fol- 
lowing Draught : 


Take of Black-cherry-water one Ounce, of Langius's Epi- 
leptich-water three Drachms, of old Venice-Treacle one 


Scruple, of Liquid Laudanum erght Drops ; make a 
Draught, f 


I order the purging Potion to be repeated thrice, once 
every other Day, and an Anodyne Draught the ſame 
Nights ; afterwards I preſcribe bleeding and purging as 
before, and ſo alternately I bleed and purge till the Sick 
has bled three or four times, and after every Bleeding 
purge ſo often as his Strength will bear; only ir muſt dili- 
gently be noted, that there muſt be ſo much ſpace between 
the Evacuarion, that the Sick receives no Damage from 


thence. In thoſe Days purging is nor uſed, I preſcribe as 
follows : 


Take of the Conſerve of Common Wormwood, of the yellow 
Rind of Oranges, each one Ounce ; Conſerve of Roſemary- 
flowers, half an Ounce ; of old Venice-Treacle and Nut- 
megs candied, each three Drams; of Ginger candied 
one Drachm, Syrup of the Fuice of Citrons a ſufficient 
Quantity; make an Elettuary ; of which take the Quan- 
tity of a Nutmeg inthe Morning, and at five a Clock in 
the Evening, drink upon it five Spoonfuls of the follows 
ing Wine, ; | 


Take of the Roots of Peony, Elicampane, Maſter-wert, An- 

gelica, each one Ounce ; of the Leaves of Rhue, Sage, 

Bettony, Germander, white Hore-hound, and the Tops of 

the leſſer Centaury, each one handful ; of Funiper-berries 

fix Drachms, the Rinds of two Orangess let them be cut 

and infuſed cold in ſix Pints of Canary-wine ; ſtrain it 
as you uſe it. 


Ee 4 Take 


424 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 


Take of Rhue-water four Ounces, of Langius's Epileptich- 
water and compound Briony Water, each one Ounce, 
Syrup of Peony ſix Drachms ; mingle them and make a 
Fulep ; take four Spoonfuls every Night at Bed-time, 
with eight Drops of Spirit of Harts-horn :, Let a Plaiſter 
of Gum-Caranna be applied to the Soles of the Feet, 


The more the Sick recovers, the leſs he drags his Foor, 
and the Hand is ſteddier, ſo that he can bring the Cup 
more directly to his Mouth; which are certain Signs 
how much better he is, bur'tho' ro perfect the Cure, I 
do not adviſe that he ſhould be bled more than three or 
four times, yet purging and altering Medicines are to be 
uſed till he is quite well. And becauſe he that has once 
this Diſeaſe may eaſily relapſe, I think it expedient that 
he be blooded and purged for ſome Days the next Year 
about the ſame time, or a little before the Diſeaſe firſt in- 
vaded. And truly I ſuppoſe that the Epilepſie of the adult 
may go nigh to be cured by this Method, if the Remedies 
preſcribed were well proportioned to their Age, tho by 
realon I have ſeldom met with this Diſeaſe, I have nor 
yet tryed it ; bur this by the bye. 

It ſometimes happens in Women ſubject ro Hyſterick 
Firs, that when the Cure has been managed by the fore- 
{aid Evacuations, the Fever continues after bleeding and 
purging, tho repeated; in this Caſe the Fever that now 
prevails is plainly continued by the Commotion of the 
Spirits cauſed by the Evacuations; and therefore all o- 
ther things being omitted, the curative Indications are 
only to be directed to the quieting of the Fury of the Spi- 
rits, if there be no Signs of a Peripneumonia, or Inflam- 
mation about the Vital Parts. In order to which an Ano- 
dyne, that is ſufficient to cauſe Sleep, ought to be pre- 
ſcribed every Night, and alſo Hyſterick-remedies pro- 
perly ſo called, twice or thrice a Day, ſuch are Pills made 
of Galbanum, Aſſa-fetida, Caſtor, and the like ; and Ju- 
leps of the ſame nature, deſcribed in my Treatiſe of Hy- 
ſterick Fits. Moreover that Meat and Drink which is 
moſt agreeable to the Appetite of the Patient ought to be 


allowed to recover the Strength, and to ſuppreſs rhe Va- 
Fours, as they call them. es 


We 


the Tear 1675, to the Year 1680. 425 


We have ſaid already, that this Fever had both the laſt 
Year, and eſpecially rhis, a certain Exacerbation daily a- 
bour Night, not much unlike the Fir of an intermittent Fe- 
yer. Wherefore thoſe Phyſicians that had found by Expe- 
rience that all thoſe Fevers, which did any whit intermit 
(and oft thoſe that did nor intermit at allꝰthrough that Se- 
ries of Years, from Seventy Seven to the beginning of 
Eighty Five, were certainly cured by the Peruvian Bark, 
treated this Fever with the ſame Remedy: Bur tho' it 
was reaſonable, yet moſt commonly it did not ſucceed ſo 
well as in former Years. For upon a diligent Search I 
found, that tho a great quantity of the Bark was given, 
yer it rarely cured the Sick, and ſo very rarely, that I ra- 
ther impure the recovery of the Patient ro ſome lucky e- 
vent of the Diſeaſe, than to the Virtue of the Bark, ſo that 
it wholly loſt that curing Vertue and Certainty it had in 
the forelaid Years : I mean the Fever we treat off now, 
which is ſomething like a Quoridian ; but when there is a 
Type of a genuine Tertian, or of one invading every o- 
ther day, the Bark is as effectual ar this time as ever; ſo 
that it is very evident, that this Fever was quite different 
from that of the former Conſtitution, for as much as the 
uſe of the Bark does now no good, and this is heightened 
by Wine, Cordials, and other hot things; all which well 
enough agreed with the uſe of the Bark, and alſo with 
that Fever, | 

Moreover we muſt obſerve, that this Fever raging all 
the Summer, eſpecially that of this Year, the Diſeaſe did 
often ſhew it ſelf, not ſo much by the Pathognomonick 
Signs of a Fever, viz. by Hear and Inquietude; as by 
Gripes ſometimes dry, and ſometimes looſe, yet notwith- 
ſtanding the Fever of this Seaſon lurked under this Diſ- 
guiſe, in which the inflammatory Exhalations of the Blood 
were not, as is uſual, protruded to the habit of the Bo- 
dy, but put off inwardly by the Meſenterick Arteries, 
upon the Viſcera of the lower Belly, and ſometimes up- 
on the Stomach by the Branches ot the Czl:ack Arteries, 
which Exalations are wont to provoke vomiting, eſpe- 
cially preſently after raking Drink, or any more ſolid 
Nouriſhmenr. . Yer tho this Fever lurked under the form 
of the foreſaid Symptoms, yet it was to be cured by the 
genuine Merhod, we delivered above, in rhe ſame man- 


co — — — - 
I — - _ — — — 
—— — 4 898 2 bY — —_ 
a * 
I A : - 
- — 2 * 
5 — 1 ＋ % 
N — 12 * = + 
— — 5 £ — "A — — + — — — F 
* as 4 — T — 
P — 


2223 


— —_— 


4 = 
— 
— 
— 22 


_— 
—_ —— — 
* 
— — 
— — — 


— — 
- - _ ED W 
— ———— 
* — Ss = + * — — _ 
— — 


= 
—+- 


2 


= _ — — — 
— — —— 
- 
KL = - — 


- _ — 
RY «4 
* 222 = 
— 2 


1 —— 
— - \ 


} 
* 

=o 
4 
bd) oo 


426 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 


ner as if it had appeared in its own colours, viz, by bleed. 
ing and repeated Purges ; only it is to be obſerved, that 
wen the Fever does ſo much moleſt rhe Stomach, that ir 
cannot retain a Potion, then the Pill of Coch. Major (of 
which rwo Scruples preſcribed do always paſs through 
the Body) may be ſubſtituted in the room of a gentle 
purging Potion ; but the Pills muſt be taken ar four in 
the Morning. that the Patient may fleep after them, and 
then an A-cdyne in a large Doſe is to be allowed, viz, a 
Grain and an half of ſolid London Laudanum, with the like 
quantity of Maſtick made into two Pills, to be taken the 
ſame Night; or eighteen or twenty drops of Liquid Lau- 
danum, in an Ounce of Cinnamon- water hordeated, or any 
other generous Vehicle, by which means the Stomach 
being both ſtrengthened, and not irritated by the (mall 
quantity, may not caſt up the Remedy: But if the pur. 
ging Portion, and Diac dium can poſſibly be retained in 
the Stomach, they are wholly ro be preferred before the 
above-mentioned Pills, and Laudanum, for they perform 
- buſineſs without heating the Body ſo much as the 
ills. 

But ſeeing J have mentioned the Gripes, I will admoniſh 
my Acquaintance with how much danger, as I have fre- 
quently obſerved, Mineral Water, are wont to be preſcrib- 
ed in any Gripes whatever, or Looſneſs, or Vomiting, or 
any other Diſeaſe whatever, that takes its riſe from a Fe- 
ver; for as much as ſo ſubtil and ſpiritual kind of Diſeaſe, 
as tis evident a Fever is, Mineral Remedies do ſo confound 
all things, that inſtead of the Symptoms which were wont 
to accompany a Fever, they introduce Accidents altoge- 
ther irregular, yet in the mean time do not at all aſſiſt to- 
wards eradicating of the Fever, which I have long and of- 
ten obſerved. 

But this muſt be carefully minded, for as much as it 
may ſerve to deliver many from the Jaws of Death, vix. 
that notwithſtanding what we have ſaid before, when 
the above mentioned Gripes riſe to be a confirmed Dy- 
ſentery, in which beſides the Gripes, ſome Mucous Matter 
rogether with Blood is voided by Stool ; it is manifeſt- 
ly very dangerous to treat the Diſeaſe with that tedi- 
ous Method, which orders Evacuations firſt, and after- 
wards thoſe things that attemperate the ſharp Humours 


(to 


POT ure oY Par as ⁰ ⁰•-nmnm Www ix RB 7. 


e Eh Ho. 


the Year 1675, to the Tear 1680, 427 


{ro ſay nothing of aſtringent Medicines of various kinds 
and forms taken inwardly, and Gliſters ſometimes a- 
ſtringent, ſometimes conſolidating, now and then in- 
jected) for I have found by experience, that a Dyſen- 
tery is moſt certainly and moſt ſpeedily cured, if with- 
out any more ado, the Flux be preſently ſtopt by Lau- 
danum ; for this Dileaſe is ſo very violent and fierce, 
that if you go on in purging, when the Dyſentery is con- 
firmed, there is great danger, leſt ir being heightned by 
this means, ſhould by reaſon of its incredible Fermenr, 
rorment the Patient longer, do afterwards what you can, 
or perhaps kill him. Therefore being called, I preſenr- 
ly give him about twenty two Drops of Liquid Lauda- 
num in Epidemich Water, or in Aqua Mirabilis, or the like 
to be repeated twice in the ſpace of twenty four Hours, 
or oftner at ſet times, if the Doſe preſcribed to be uſed, 
only Morning and Evening, be not ſufficient to quell the 
Gripes and the Bloody Stools. The Excrement being a 
little rhickened, or of a better Conſiſtence (which is the 
firſt ſign of recovery) and the Symproms being vanquiſh- 
ed, I ſuppoſe it is ſafeſt for the Patient ro continue for 
ſometime in rhe ule of the aforeſaid Medicine, Morning 
and Evening, taking ſome drops daily, till there be no 
further occaſion. Bur it is to be obſerved, that I order 
the Sick to keep his Bed longer after the uſe of the Ano- 
dyne, for any erect Poſture ſoon diſturbs the Head, un- 
leſs the Patient ſleep long enough after it. As to Diet, if 
the Sick has been accuſtomed before ro Wine, I allow 
him Canary, but well dilured with Water, in which a 
Cruſt of Bread has been boiled, which I order ro be 
kepr cold for this uſe in a ſtone Bortle, that ir may be 
in readineſs when the Wine is to be attemperated. Alſo 
the white Decoction of burnt Harrſhorn in Fountain-wa- 
ter, drank freely, is profitable; Barly, or Chicken-broth, 
or a poached Egg, or any thing elſe of eaſie Digeſtion, 
may ſuffice for Food on the firſt Days: Bur afterwards 
we muſt riſe by degrees to more generous Liquors, and to 
a more plentiful and ſolid Nouriſhmenr, leſt roo great a 
Vacuiry ſhould produce again the ſame Diſeaſe, the Pa- 
tient recovered of, or ſome other Symptoms that are 
produced by Emptineſs. But we mutt obſerve this, that 
tho Laudanum alone did ſubjugate Dyſenteries of this 
| N 


— 0 9 


Leak. 


it 

4 
> 
2 
12 


22 * — 

* — — ws 

„ — 
. = 
— = 


" X 2 bo A 1 
=> — —. — = 
- 2 — — — 
2 2 <3. i — 2 3 * * 3 


—— 
- 


" ane aan 


— ＋. 
PER — 
— * 


— — Ct. 
— — - _—— 

— — — 

- _— — i. — 


N - — 
— 


— — 


428 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 


Conſtitution, yet in thoſe years in which they are Epide- 
mick, and exceed other Diſeaſes, it will not be improper 
to uſe thoſe Evacuations firſt, which were heretofore de. 
ſcribed in the Chapter of a Dyſentery, 

And as in that confirmed Dyſertery now ſpoke of, ſo 
in this Caſe that follows, it cannot be, that the Cure 
ſhould be preſently expedited by that Method, which is 

roper for the Fever, from whence it firſt took its riſe, 
or inſtance, ſometimes ir is ſo, that the Sick being ſei. 
zed with Horror and Rigor, (Heat and Cold ſucceeding 
one another by rurns, which are the certain Signs of an 
imminent Fever) is of a ſudden miſerably afflicted with 
the Gripes, by reaſon the Febrile Matter ruſhes in upon 
the Guts: And whereas he ought to be purged and blood- 
ed, as is above mentioned, preſently he berakes him- 
ſelf ro hot Medicines taken inwardly, and outwardly 
applyed, to the intent he may expel the Wind, which 
he ſuppoles to be the Cauſe of his Miſery, till at length 
the Pain increaſing, and being as it were impacted into 
his Bowels by long continuance, the Periſta/tick Motion 
(by which according to the Law of Nature all things 
ſhould be conveyed downwards) begins ro be inverted, 
and all things tend upwards, and the Patient is grievouſly 
tormented and provoked to vomir, the Diſeaſe now 
ending in an 1/iack Paſſion. In this Caſe the Phyſician, 
can proceed no further in the Method of Cure ; which 
the Fever the antecedent Cauſe of this Symptom, re- 
quired, than to order bleeding in the Arm for once : For 
how many, and whatſoever Catharticks you preſcribe, 
will preſently become Emetick, and ſo the more pro- 
mote the inverted Motion of the Bowels ; for as much 
as the ſtrongeſt purging Medicines, or indeed the leaſt 
part of them, can ſcarce pals the Guts, and cauſe a 
Stool. In this Caſe I think it is moſt ad viſeable firſt to 
bleed in the Arm, and an Hour or two after, to inject a 
ſtrong Gliſter. I reckon the ſmoak of Tobacco, ſtrong- 
ly blown up through a large Bladder into the Inteſtines 
by a Pipe inverted, to be the beit, and moſt effectual 
Gliſter I know, which may be repeated a little while 
after, unleſs the former by giving a Stool, open the Paſ- 
ſage downwards. But this Symptom being not totally 
conquered by this Remedy, it is neceſſary, that a Ca- 
; thartick 


thy 
it 


5D 


the Tear 1675, to the Tear 1680. 429 


thartick ſome what ſtronger, be uſed, how difficult ſoever 
it be ro make way. 


Take of the Pill Ex duobus thirty five Grains, Mercurius 
dulcis one Scruple, make four Pills with a ſufficient 
quantity of the Balſam of Peru, take them in a Spoon- 
ful of Syrup of Violets, 


Drink no Liquor upon them, left they ſhould nor be 


retained ; but if the Sick ſhould vomit this Remedy, we 


muſt proceed in this manner: Let him take preſently 
rwenty five Drops of Liquid Laudanum in half an Ounce 
of ſtrong Cinnamon- water, and after a few hours let it be 
repeated; but when the vomitting and Pain of the Belly 
are abated by the uſe of theſe, then the foreſaid Purge 
may be repeated again; for at this time it will be retained 
under the Protection of the Laudanum, and will at length 
perform its buſineſs; but if the Vomiting and Pain ſnould 
return again, by reaſon the Virtue of the Anodyne is 
wholly decayed, and the Purge ſhould ſtop in the Body, 
in this Caſe, all Hopes from Stools being at preſent laid 
alide, we muſt return to the uſe of the Anodyne be fore de- 
ſcribed, which muſt be repeated every fourth or ſixth 
hour, till the Guts be wholly quiet, and the natural Mo- 
tion downwards be reſtored, at which time the Purge 
which has been hitherto ſtopt in the Body, by reaſon of 
the contrary Motion of the Guts, will now operate by 
Stool ; tho becauſe of the Narcotick fo often repeated, a 
quite contrary effect may ſeem to follow, which I have 
juſt now experienced in a Gentleman, tormented with 
a very ſevere Iliac Paſſion, who had afterwards Aphthe by 
reaſon of too long retention of the Humours, that occaſio- 
ned the Diſeaſe, and of ſharp Purges ; but they were eafi- 
ly cured by the uſe of the Peruvian Bark above deſcribed, 
and by waſhing the Mouth ofren with the following Gar- 
gariſm, 


Take of Verjuice half a Pint, of Syrup of Rajberries one 
Ounce ; make a Gargariſm. 


Bur when theſe Paſſages are open again, as much as 
they ſhould be, the Patient may forbear purging for ſome 


days, 


—_— — — — 
* 8 — K 2 

— _ * 4% — 
* - - — x ry * 
— — 2 ws * a 2 

— r > 
— 

” — 


=: 


J 'F 
I. 4 
N 
1 00 
7 4 Y 
of? 
C in 
". - 
- 3; 4 
* . 
— 
. * 


_ 


* — - . 
—_ — WE. 1 — . * 
— — — — 


— — 
— —— 


430 Of Epidemie Diſeaſes from 


days, till the Tumult raifed of late in the Bowels be 
wholly ceaſed, which ſpace of time may conveniently 
enough be allowed for diluting, and attemperating the 
Heat and Acrimony of the Humours, which being per- 
formed, he muſt purge every other day as before, if the 
leaſt Footſteps of the Fever remain; but of this e- 
nough. | 

If a Child has this Fever, two Leeches muſt be applyed 
behind each Ear, and a Bliſter to the Neck, and it muſt be 
purged with Beer, wherein Rhubarb has been infuſed ; if 
after purging the Fever ſeems to remit, then the Julep muſt 
be given of the Jeſuits- Bark, ſer down for Infants in the 
Chapter of an intermitting Fever. 

Moreover it is to be obſerved, that tho Children are 
equally ſubject to this ſort of Fever with the adult, and 
that therefore they are to be cured by the ſame Method, 
yet the quantity of Blood taken away, ought to be 
leſſened, with reſpect to their Age, and purging ought 
to be accommodated to it, and perhaps not ſo often to 
be uſed; for the Diſeaſes of Infants and young People 
will be often tamed by the firſt or ſecond Purge: But 
we mult ſeriouſly conſider, whether the Fever treated after 
this manner, certainly belong to this Conſtitution, or to a- 
nother kind, which ought ſeriouſly to be minded in thoſe 
Fevers that ſeize Infants in all Conſtitutions of Vears; for 
it is commonly known, that Children are frequently ſei- 
zed with Fevers, arifing from their breeding Teeth, which 
are not eaſily diſtinguiſhed from Fevers of another kind, 
I have been in great doubt a long while about the Cure of 
theſe, neither could I be certainly perſwaded bur of late, 
that any commitred ro my Care, were recovered ſo much 


by Art as by Chance; till at length being often admoniſhed 


of the happy ſucceſs of a Remedy, that is not very famous, 
yea indeed very contemptible, upon the account of the 
common ule ot it; I had alſo preſcribed it, which anſwer- 
ed my Defire better than any I know ; it is three or four 
Drops of Spirit of Hartſhorn according to the Age, given 
in a Spoonful or two of Black-Cherry-Water, or of any 
_ proper Julep, four or fix times, once every fourth 
our, 
There is another Symprom that very much troubles 


Infants, which is very different from the Fevers, of va- 


rious 


. 


my 


EL d f , o6 * , 6 at 0 dl 


the Tear 1675, to the Tear 1680. 43 


-ious Conſtitutions of the Years, and from that laſt men- 
tioned : It is a ſort of Hectick that afflicts a long time, 
and thoſe that are troubled with it languiſh without any 
conſiderable Heat, with a loſs of Appetite and a waſting 
every where, both of the Members and Trunk of the Bo- 
dy. Iuſe this ſimple Method following: 


Take of choice Rhubarb ſhred two Drams, let it be put in- 
to a Glaſs Bottle, containing a Quart of Small Beer, 
well ſtopt, or any other Liquor the Child uſually drinks 

of, which medicated Beer T order to be taken both in the 
Day and Night, and at Meals, which being drank up, 
T order a Quart more to be put upon the ſame Rhubarb, 
which alſo being drank off, a Quart more is to be put 
upon it as before; after which the Rhubarb commonly 
loſes its Vertue, and the Child recovers ; But leſt the 
Beer firſt put on, ſhould be too much impregnated with 
the purging quality of the Rhubarb, and ſo purge too 
much, it will better to add another Pint preſently after 
the firſt is drunk up; but afterwards freſh Beer is not 
to be added, till the whole Bottle be drunk, 


But to return to the Fever we now treat of, viz. of 
the preſent Conſtitution, we muſt diligently obſerve, 
that in this kind of Fever (as in a Rheumatiſm, and ma- 
ny other Diſeaſes, whole Cure is performed only by E- 
vacuations) if we obſtinately inſiſt on the above named 
Evacuations, till the Symptoms wholly ceaſe, the Sick 
will often be deſtroyed; for it is not very unuſual that 
ſome light Symptoms, as it were the Kelicts of the fee- 
ble Fever, remain a while after the Diſeaſe is gone off, 
yet a Relapſe is not to be feared from thence, they reti- 
ring gradually, as Health returns; for theſe Symptoms 
are commonly nothing elle, but the true Progeny of theſe 
Evacuations, by which the Phyſician endeavoured to cure 
the Diſeaſe: If this at leaſt be added, as partly the 
Cauſe, viz. the Emptineſs, that the Abſtinence of the 
Patient from his wonted Meais, and Drink, has occa- 
ſioned: All which, when they fall upon Bodies wea- 
kened, and almoſt worn out by the Dileaſe, raiſe Va- 
pour's as they ſay, as in Women; and for the ſame rea- 
fon, on the account of the weakned, dejected, and broken 


Syſtem 


432 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 
Syſtem of the Animal Spirits: Wherefore having made 
thoſe Evacuations, that are ſufficient for taking off the 
Diſeaſe, it is the Duty of a prudent Phyſician to forbear 
the unſeaſonable adminiſtration of them, and to wait a 
while on time, often the beſt and moſt ſucceſsful Phyſici- 
an, for the tak ing off rhoſe light Symptoms, which truly, 
as I have often obſerved, go off at the latter end of ſuch a 
Diſeaſe, without any more ado, by an Anodyne taken ar 
Bed time for two or three Nights. 

The Method now delivered much exceeds all I haye 
tryed in the Cure of this Fever; and if at any time it 
does not take it off, yet it forces it to intermit, and then 
it is always cured by the Jeſuits-bark: But whereas 
purging ordered for the Cure of this Fever, may perchance 
ſeem hurtful to ſome, I aſſert, that upon Tryal, nothing 
ſo certainly, and ſo powerfully cools the Patient, as pur- 
ging preſcribed after bleeding; which muſt be always 
uſed. Firſt, for tho a Purge does for the preſent raiſe a 
greater Tumult in the Blood, and other Humours on the 
Day it is taken, and in the Operation, than was before, 
yet that Injury will be ſufficiently made up by the advan- 
tage that preſently follows; for it is found by Experience, 
that purging after bleeding quells a Fever ſooner and bet- 
ter than any other Remedy whatever, both as it expels 
that filthy Humour from the Body, by which, as the an- 
tecedent Cauſe, the Fever was occaſioned; and if they 
were not peccant before, yet at length being heated, con- 
cocted and thickened by the Fever, do much to render it 
more laſting: And alſo, as it makes way for a Parego- 
7ick, which performs its buſineſs ſafer, and much ſooner, 
than if the peccant Humours, which mighr otherwiſe hin- 
der the force of the Anodyne, were nor eliminated by pur- 

ing. 
6 Bur on the contrary, as that Method which is buſied in 
eliminating the Febrile Matter through the Pores of the 
Skin is leſs certain, ſo it is more troubleſome and tedi- 
ous ; for by it the Diſeale is very often protracted ma- 
ny Weeks, and the Sick is brought by this means to the 
brink of the Grave; and if he chance at length to elcape 
Death, he is plagued with a crowd of Remedies all the 
long courſe of the Diſeaſe, ro rake off theſe Symproms, 


which the ill Management of the Diſeaſe brought — 
when 


66 oo» © Þ GU CY Gy TP 


R HE IH WE ME MM.Þ} 23a Fe E,,..E., 


G- BY 


1 
e 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1 
b 
1 


the Teat 1675, tb the Year 1680. 433 

when the Cure of it is indeavoured by the hotteſt me- 
thod and Remedies which according to its own Genius 
wholly requires the cooleſt of both; and ſo while Brain: 
ſick Men inſlave themſelves to Rules of Art, falſly ſo 
called, and deſpiſe the Judgment of their very Senſes, 
informing them better, they learnedly convert a Diſeaſe, 
of its own Nature ſhort. and eaſie, into a laſting and dif- 
ficult one, confounding all things through Tumult and 
Fear, and raiſing as they ſay, waves in a Cup; upon 
which account there is no more need ot them, than for 
a Pilate, who when he may ſail in the open Sea, ſteers 
the Ship among Rocks and Shelves; from whence; 
tho he may gain an opportunity of acquiring Fame by 
his great Skill, in preſerving the Ship in ſo great danger; 
yet certainly he will be reckoned an imprudent Man. 
And for theſe Reaſons I can, I truſt, aſſert upon good 


Grounds, that the above-mentioned method of Cure by 


Bleeding and Purging, is more powerful than any other, 
for the ſubduing Fevers of moſt kinds; for tho Swear- 
ing, to ſpeak properly, is natures own method by which 
ſhe caſts out the Febrile Matter, and is more Genuine and 
Commodious than the reſt, when Nature is left to it 
ſelf, ir firſt digeſts the aforeſaid Matter, aud then when it 
is well Congyed, gently expels ir through the habit of 
the Body; which happy event of Nature, in curing Fe- 
vers by . Sweating, When practical Phyſicians had often 
abſerved, rhe Dogmatical took occaſion from thence of 
making this Rule, Thar all Fevers may and ought to 
be cured by this method alone, and no other: But if we 
ſhould grant this, yet Art, how much ſoever it may 
ſeem ro imitare Nature, cannot arrogate to ir (elf this 
Privilege, that it is able to cure Fevers certainly by 
Swearing. For firſt Axt knows not by what means the 
peccant Matter ſhould be fitly prepared to undergo Ex- 
pulſion, and if it ſhould know this, yer it has no cer- 
rain Signs by which it may be admoniſhed of the due 
Preparation of it: So that allo it is unavoidably igno- 
rant of the fir time of provoking Sweat, . And I ſup- 
poſe no one, if he be not very obſtinate, will deny that it 
is very dangerous to provoke Sweat raſhly, before a due 
Concoction, for by forcing the crude Marter upon the 
Braip, it adde Oyl ts zhe flame, and as I have kind 
| in 


432 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 


Syſtem of the Animal Spirits: Wherefore having made 
thoſe Evacuations, that are ſufficient for taking off the 
Diſeaſe, it is the Duty of a prudent Phyſician to forbear 
the unſcaſonable adminiſtration of them, and to wait a 
while on time, often the beſt and moſt ſucceſsful Phyſici. 
an, for the taking off thoſe light Symptoms, which truly, 
as I have often obſerved, go off at the latter end of ſuch a 
Diſeaſe, without any more ado, by an Anodyne taken ar 
Bed rime for two or three Nights. 

The Method now delivered much exceeds all I have 
tryed in the Cure of this Fever; and if at any time it 
does not take it off, yet it forces it to intermit, and then 
it is always cured by the Jeſuits-bark : But whereas 
purging ordered for the Cure of this Fever, may perchance 
ſeem hurtful ro ſome, I aſſert, that upon Tryal, nothing 
ſo certainly, and ſo powerfully cools the Patient, as pur- 
ging preſcribed after bleeding; which muſt be always 
uſed, Firſt, for tho' a Purge does for the preſent raiſe a 
greater Tumulr in the Blood, and other Humours on the 
Day it is taken, and in the Operation, than was before, 
yet that Injury will be ſufficiently made up by the advan- 
rage that preſently follows; for it is found by Experience, 
that purging after bleeding quells a Fever ſooner and bet- 
ter than any other Remedy whatever, both as it expels 
that filthy Humour from the Body, by which, as the an- 
recedent Cauſe, the Fever was occaſioned ; and if they 
were not peccant before, yet at length being heated, con- 
cocted and thickened by the Fever, do much to render it 
more laſting : And alſo, as it makes way for a Parego- 
rick, which performs its buſineſs ſafer, and much ſooner, 
than if the peccant Humours, which might otherwiſe hin- 
der the force of the Anodyne, were not eliminated by pur- 

ing. 

: Bur on the contrary, as that Method which is buſied in 
eliminating the Febrile Matter through the Pores of the 
Skin is leſs certain, ſo it is more troubleſome and tedi- 
ous ; for by it the Diſeale is very often protracted ma- 
ny Weeks, and the dick is brought by this means to the 
brink of the Grave; and if he chance at length to eſcape 
Death, he is plagued with a crowd of Remedies ail the 
Jong courſe of the Diſeaſe, to take off theſe Symptoms, 
which the ill Management of the Diſeaſe brought ww 

when 


when the Cure of it is indeavoured by the hotteſt me- 
thod and Remedies which according to its own Genius 
wholly requires the cooleſt of both; and ſo while Brain- 
ſick Men inſlave themſelves ro Rules of Arr, falſly ſo 
called, and deſpiſe the Judgment of their very Senſes, 
intorming them better, they learnedly convert a Diſeaſe, 
of irs own Nature ſhort and eaſie, into a laſting and dif- 
ficult one, confounding all things through Tumult and 
Fear, and railing as they ſay, waves in a Cup; upon 
which account there is no more need of them, than for 
a Pilate, who when he may fail in the open Sea, ſteers 
the Ship among Rocks and Shelves; from whence, 
tho he may gain an opportunity of acquiring Fame by 
his great Skill, in preſerving the Ship in ſo great danger, 
yet certainly he will be reckoned an imprudent Man. 
And for theſe Reaſons I can, I truſt, aſſert upon good 
Grounds, that the above-mentioned merhod of Cure.by 
Bleeding and Purging, is more powerful than any other, 
for the ſubduing Fevers of moſt kinds; for tho Sweat- 
ing, to {peak properly, is natures own method by which 
the caſts out the Febrile Matter, and is more Genuine and 
Commodious than the reſt, when Nature is left to it 
ſelf, it firſt digeſts the aforeſaid Matter, aud then when it 
is well Conccted, gently expels it through the habit of 
the Body; Which happy event of Nature, in curing Fe- 
vers by Swearing, when practical Phyſicians had often 
obſerved, the Dogmarical took occaſion from rhence of 
making this Rule, Thar all Fevers may and ought ro 
be cured by this merhod alone, and no other : Bur if we 
ſhould grant this, yet Art, how much ſoever it may 
ſeem ro imitate Nature, cannot arrogate to ir ſelf this 
Privilege, that it is able to cure Fevers certainly by 
Sweating. For firſt Art knows not by what means the 
peccant Matter ſhould be fitly prepared ro undergo Ex- 
pulſion, and if it ſhould know this, yer it has no cer- 
rain Signs by which it may be admoniſhed of the due 
Preparation of ir: So that allo it is unavoidably igno- 
rant of the fit time of provoking Sweat, And I ſup- 
pole no one, if he be not very obſtinate, will deny that it 
is very dangerous to provoke Sweat raſhly, before a due 
Concoction, for by forcing the crude Matter upon the 
Brain, it adds Oyl to the 12 and as I have hinted 
, in 


the Tear 1675, to he Tear 1680. 433 | 


434 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 
in another place, the wholſome Advice of Hippocra. 
tes ( viz. that things Concocted, not crude, are to be 
medicated ) does not ſeem to reſpect ſo much Purging, 
as Sweat forced by Art. For no ane that is but indifle. 
rently acquainted with the Practice of Phyſick can be 
ignorant, how many are dangeroufly hurt by old Wo. 
men and Quacks, by this prepoſterous ule of Sudorificks ; 
for its Cuſtomary with theſe, if any one complains of 
ſhivering, and a pain of the Head and Bones, which 
are molt commonly the Fore-runners of a Fever, preſent- 
ly to put them to Bed, and to do all they can to force 
them to Swear. By which unſeaſonable endeavours, 
they are ſo far from preventing the Fever, which per- 
chance would go off of its own accord, or by letting ſome 
Blood; that on the contrary it is the more heightned, 
and becomes a confirmed and radicated Diſeaſe. This 
is moreover to be obſerved, to ſay no more of old Wo- 
men, that as thoſe Sweats that come at the beginning of 
the Fever are altogether Symptomatical, not critical, ſo 
thoſe that are forced at the beginning of the Fever by 
Diaphoretichs, moſt commonly conduce no more to the 
cure of it, than the other Symptomatical Sweats that 
flow ſo early of their own accord are wont to do, that 
is, moſt commonly not at all: And then as Art is ignorant 
of the due time for promoting Sweat, ſo likewiſe knows 
not how long ir ſhould perſevere in forcing them : For if 
Sweats are continued beyond the due time, by which 
the Matter occaſioning the Diſeaſe is wholly expelled, 
a Conſumprion of theſe humid Parricles, with which the 
Blood ſhould be diluted and attemperated, will mike the 
Fever continue longer and heighten it. It is evident 
therefore, how uncertain this method is, whereas on the 
contrary, it is in the Phyſicians power to moderate the 
other as he pleaſes, in which the Febrile Matter is Eli- 
minated by bleeding and purging. Moreover, this is to 
be preferred before the other on this account; viz. that 
if the Phyſician ſhould mils his Aim in curing the Pa- 
tient, yet he will not hurt him, which is otherwiſe in the 
ule of Dzaphoreticks, unleſs he recover; for the hear of 
one that is kept continually in Bed, to which he has ad- 
dicted himſelf for ſome time, contrary to his Cuſtom (to 
fay nothing of Cordials, which are always uſed in this 

. way 


the Year 1675, to the Tear 1680, 435 


way of Cure) confounds the Oeconomy of Nature, and 
cauſes Convulſions of the Members, and other irregular 
Symptoms, which cannot therefore be deſcribed, becauſe 
they do not belong to the Hiſtory of this [Diſeaſe (which 
is common in many Symptoms, reſpecting all Diſeaſes) 
but take their riſe from the Confuſion and Tumult that 
are unneceſſarily occaſioned; by which Nature is often 
oppreſſed when we carry on the Cure of this Diſeaſe 
by this method; all which are wont to be imputed com- 
monly to I know not what Malignity. | 
The invention of which Opinion concerning Malignity 
either as to the Name, or Notion of ir, has been much 
more deſtructive ro mankind, than even that of Gun- 
powder; for as much as thoſe Fevers are chiefly ſaid 
to be Malignant, in which the Inflammation is higher 
than in others; and for that reaſon Phyſicians have 
berook themſelves ro Cordials, and Alexipharmicks, to 
theend they may expel through the Pores of the Skin, 
the Poyſon they dream of (for ſo it muſt be called, un- 
leſs they had rather trifle about words, than propoſe ſe- 
riouſly, that which may be underſtood ) upon which ac- 
count they have preſcribed the hotteſt Remedies, and 
method for thoſe Diſeaſes, which required above others 
the coldeſt Remedies and Regimen, which indeed is evi- 
dent enough both in the Small-pox (which is one of the 
kotteſt Diſeaſes in Nature) and in the Cure of other Fe- 
vers: Into which Error perchance they were led, by ſee- 
ing the Petechiæ, and purple Spots, and other Phenomena 
of the ſame kind, all which owe their riſe in moſt Sub- 
jects to an Inflammation ſuper- induced upon the Blood of 
the Sick, roo much fired by the Fever already: For as 
much as they rarely happen, except at the beginning of 
the Plague, and of thoſe Flux Small-pox that participate 
of the higheſt Inflammation: For in this kind of Diſ- 
eaſe, the livid Spots appear in various parts of the Body, 
together with the Puſtles, when they firſt come out, and 
the Sick will be troubled with an Excretion of Blood, 


eicher by the Urinary paſſages, or by the Lungs with a 


Congh, when the Blood rages with ſuch a violent Mo- 
tion and Fury, cauſed by the Inflammation, that having 
broke through all, it ruſhes into the Cavities of the Body. 
And tho' rhe purple Spots 114 Fever do not take * 

2 rile 


— — —— 
— — — 2 1 


KS 


—ͥ ͤ—é— 


bl 

N 1 
6 0 
4 
. 


436 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 


riſe from ſuch an intenſe heat of the Blood, as that which 
cauſes ſuck H.emorrhages, yet notwithſtanding they are pro- 
duced by the ſame Inflammation, tho in a lets degree, and 
when there is not that Excretion of Blood, they are eaſily 
taken off by a cooling R-gimen, Bur if they Conjecture 
there is a Malignity in the Caſe, not only from the purple 
Spots, bur alſo becauſe they have obſerved, that the Symp. 
toms of the Fever have been ſometimes milder than may 
ſeem to agree with the Nature of it, and yet that the Pa- 
tient was more weakened than could be expected in the 
time he has been ill: I aniwer, that all theſe things pro- 
ceed only from hence, viz. For that Nature being as it 
were oppreſſed, and vanquiſhed by the firſt aſſault of the 
Diſeaſe, is not able to raiſe regular Symptoms, and ſuch 
as are agreeable to the Greatneſs of the Diſeaſe, but all 
the Phenomena are wholly irregular ; for the Animal 
Oeconomy being diſturbed, and as it were dejected, the 
Fever on that account is depreſſed, which according to 
the genuine Courſe of Nature uſed to be high · Of which, 
I remember, | ſaw a notable Experiment many years 
ago, in a young Man to whom I was called; for tho' he 
ſeemed almoſt dying, yet the heat in the external parts 
of the Body felt ſo temperate upon touching, that the 
Standers-by would not believe me, when I affirmed, he 
had a Fever, which by reaſon of the Oppreſſion of the 
Blood (by whoſe bulk it was kept in, and as it were 
choaked, could not extricate and ſhew it ſelf openly : 
Bur that if they ler him Blood they ſhould preſently per- 
ceive the Fever high cnough; a Vein being opened, and 
2 pretty deal of Blood taken away, the Fever broke our, 
which was as violent as any I ever ſaw, and did not go 
off till Bleeding had been uled three or four times. 

But if the Arguments I have produced are not fo con- 
ſiderable, as to prove the thing certainly to be, as I ſay, yet 
if I find by Experience, that this Fever does not go off ea- 
ſily by Evacuations, made by Sweats, I have what I ſeek 
for; for no Man can tell by arguing, but by experience, 
whar kind of Fever can and ought to be cured by Sweats, 
and what by other Evacuations. And truly no wiſe Man, 
who has ſufficiently confidered the Nature of Men and 
things, can implicitly believe the Opinion of any Man, how 
great ſoever he be, concerning thoſe things that are er 

pee 


IEG EE 6s ⁵¾ʃ;T“. or. a MESS 


the Year 1675, to the Vear 1680. 427 


Speculations, and cannot be determined by any certain Ex- 


periment; for he ought to conſider, that the moments of 


reaſon are ſo very various and ſubtle, that when any one 


has propoſed a Speculation, ſo eſtabliſned by firm Reaſons, 
that he forces the Aſſent of all that are near him; preſently 


another ſucceeds him, endowed perchance with better 


parts, who conſiders that Opinion which was ſo fairly ſet- 


led, and clearly proves by a ſtronger force of Argument, 
that that was nothing but a Fiction of the Brain, for as 
much as not the leaſt Footſteps of it are to be found in Na- 
ture; and in the room of it Subſtitutes a certain new H- 
potheſis more probable than the former, and more neatly con- 
trived, yet this latter Fiction undergoes the ſame fate with 
the former, when ſome third Perſon oppoſes, who as much 
exceeds the ſecond in Ingenuity as he did the firſt; and ſo 
there will be no end, till at length we come to him, who is 
arrived at the top of humane Ingenuity; and how hard it 
is to find this Man, and to know him from others, any one 
will preſently perceive, who is not ſo very mad as to ar- 
rogate this Praiſe ro himſelf. For as we may conjecture, 
that there are almoſt infinite Natures in the illuſtrious Orbs, 
here and there ſcattered through the Firmament of the 
Univerle, endowed with far more excellent Underſtand- 
ings than weak Man; ſo we do not certainly know whe- 
ther mankinds Brain, the Shop of the Thoughts, be nor ſo 
formed by Nature, that they cannot find fo well what is ab- 
ſolutely true, as v hat is moſt convenient and ſuitable ro 
their Natures. And ſo much may be ſufficient to be ſpoken 
to thoſe, who in Phyſick truſt more to vain Speculations 
than to Experience. built upon the Teſtimony of rhe Senſes. 
Bur if any one ſhould here object, and ſay, Do not we 
ſee De facto, that this Fever is very often cured by a me- 
thod quite contrary to this you deliver? J anſwer, That 
the Cure of the Dileale which only the recovery of a 
Patient now and then witneſſes for, wholly differs from 
the cure of the ſame, by that method of Practice, which 
is confirmed by more Recoveries of the Sick, and all o- 
ther practical Phenomena, that happen in the Cure of it. 
For inſtance, in the Small-pox, many who have been 
tormented with the cruel uſe of a hot Regimen and Re- 
medies, have yet recovered; and on the contrary, they 
have done very well, whoſe 7 has been . 
t 3 Y 


F 
«> 


> 


- 
- Eg * 


41 


LO 


* 


— — — 


— - = 4 4 — —4 — 
— 6 _- 2 K o 1 2 - * 
Fed 28 = . "4 
* — * # . o 5 34 
— 
7 - - —_ — 
=_ — 


— 


M4 


a _ *, - =D 
pit Fagan. = 
— * 
—— — — 
„ — " * = 
by „ = * — . — 


. 


— — — — 
— — —_ 


—— — 


438 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 
by a method quite contrary. Now how ſnall we end 
this ſtrife, which method is to be preferred ? Why tru- 
Iy, by this means we ſhall certainly judge: Nan if 
I have found in the former method, that the more 1 have 
heated the Sick, the more I have raiſed and promoted 
the Fever, Reſtlefſneſs, the Delirium, and other Symp- 
roms : And on the contrary, if it appears, that when he 
has been moderately cooled, his Temperament is ſo 
much the more Sedate, and he is leſs vexed with the 
Fever, and other Symptoms: Moreover that by keep- 
ing the due Temper of the Muſcular parts, which beſt 
ſuits with the increaſe, and Maturation of the Puſtles, 
they are bigger and more filled, than if rhe Patient were 
ſuffocated with roo great a heat. -The Caſe being thus 
ſtared, I ſuppoſe it is evident enough, which method of 
Practice we ought rather to follow. In like manner, if 
I find in the Fever I now treat of, that rhe more the Sick 
is heated, the more he is inclined, not only to a Frenbe, 
purple Spots, Petechiæ, and the like; but that it is more- 
over on that account, encompaſſed with irregular and 
enormous 5% mproms of all ſorts; and on the other hand. 
if I obſerve another Patient treated by the method we 
now propole, wholly freed, from theſe Symproms, Rea- 
ſon dictates that the latter method of Practice, is much 
to be preferred before the other, tho both Patients re- 
cover by ſuch different means: But if more elcape 
Deach by this way than the other, the Intricacy of the 
Controverſie is ſo much the eaſier found out: But I muſt 
not judge of this, leſt I ſhould favour my own Opinion 
100 much, | 

And ſo much for this kind of Fever; how long it will 
continue I know not; I am apt to believe, that it is ſome 
ſpirituous and ſubtle beginning of that Depurarory Fever 
which is now antiquated, and which rhe dreadful Plague 
followed. There are indeed ſome Phenomena, which 
{omewhat induce me to believe this; for not only intermit- 
ding Fevers properly ſo called, eſpecially Quartans, till 
remain here and there, but allo ſome of theſe continual 
Fevers turned to Agues ſometimes, eſpecially this Au- 
cumn, to ſay nothing of the Exacerbations in this Fever 
mentioned above, that reſemble in ſome manner the Fits 
of Agues, Moreover, for that thoſe that have this wn 
* | | eaicy 


the Year 1675, to the Tear 1680. 439 


eale, are very inclinable to Vomiting, yer I do not pre- 
tend to any certainty in this matter, becauſe I do not 
know after what manner the Depuratory Fever began, 
as I ſaid in my Book of acute Diſeaſes, Set. 1/t. Chap. 3d. 
in thele words. But how long the foreſaid continual 
Fever has prevailed, I cannot tell; for it has been e- 
nough for me hitherto ro attend on the general Symp- 
roms of Fevers; becaule I do not as yet underſtand how 
to diſtinguiſn them according to the various Diſpoſitions 
of years, or the various Seaſons of the ſame year. 


— 


— 


— 


Of the Putrid Fever coming upon the Flux-Pox. 


Qeeing my old and declining Age, and the Diſeaſes 
with which Thave ſo long conflicted, may not per- 
chance afford hereafter an opportunity to publiſh ſome 
late Obſervarions, that I have made (tho' roo late in my 
Life) concerning the Secundary Fever, that comes upon 
the Flux- pox, I ſuppoſe it will not be amiſs to add them 
bere, though they no whit relate to the Diſeaſe I have 
now been treating of. 

I have long ago ſhewn in another place, how great 
the difference is between the diſtinct and confluent 
Small-pox; to wit, in this, that he that has the diſtinct 
kind, ſcarce wants the help of Phyſick, and grows well 
of his own accord, by the aſſiſtance of Nature, unleſs 
he chance to indulge Sweat continually in Bed, from the 
beginning: For as I have noted elſewhere hererofore, he 
that has the diſtinct Small-pox promiſes much ro him- 
ſelf, when he ſwears freely; for he hopes that by this 
means the Venom of the Diſeaſe will be expelled thro 


the Pores of the Skin, and therefore thinks it highly 


realonable ro promore the Swear, as much as poſſibly he 
can by Cordials, and a hot Regimen: And he is the 
more encouraged ro proceed in this method, becauſe ar 
firſt he fanſies ſome relief by it, and befides it is agreca- 
ble ro the erroneous Opinion of the Standers- by; bur at 
length thoſe Particles being Eliminared by Sweat, which 
ſhould have ſerved to elevare the Puſtles, and to (well 
the Face, on the Eighth day, the Face which ovght 


"4 * 


_ ww, 


— 2 a - 7 


— — . ie Ws) 
= X 3 PAID... — "INOS * 5 
— - —= — — 


— 


440 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 


to have been ſwelled, and inflamed between the Puſtles, 
on the contrary appears flaccid, and white: Vet the 
Puſtles continue reg and elevated, even when the Pa- 
tient is dead; and the Sweat which flowed freely to this 
day, now ceaſes on a ſudden of its own accord, neither 
can it be raiſed again by the hotteſt Cordials. T he Sick 
is taken Light-headed of a ſudden; with Anxiety, vio- 
lent Sicknels, and Reſtleſſneſs: he makes water often, 
bur a little at a time, and in the ſpace of a very few 
hours, fruſtrates rhe Expectation of his Friends, and re- 
pairs ro his long home. Whereas this very Perſon 
had recovered without any danger of Life, if he had 
only committed the Matter to Nature, without putting 
himſelf under any other Regimen. 

Bur in the Flux-pox the Cale is very different: For 
tho' theſe (unleſs Eruption of Blood, through the Lungs, 
or Urinary-paſſages, happen at the beginning) neither 
terrifie the By-ſtanders, nor bring the Sick into any dan- 
ger of Life, for the firſt days of the Diſeaſe; yet after 
wards in thoſe days towards the end of the Diſeaſe, in 
which I have beretofore warned you, that the Patient 
was in the greateſt danger, he is ſuddenly reduced to 
ſuch Streights, that it is equally uncertain, whether he 
will live or die. | E 

In the number of theſe J reckon the Eleventh (if you 
compute from the firſt approach of the Diſeaſe) ro wit, 
in the leaſt crude, but moſt common ſort of Flux-pox ; 
the Fourteenth in the cruder; bnr the Seventeenth in the 
crudeſt ſort, which are every where obvious, tho' ſome- 
times, but rarely, the Patient does not die before the 
Twenty firſt day; the Puſtles being ſo dry and cruſted 
to that time, and as it were ſo impacted into the fleſh, 
eſpecially in the Face, that they by no means can 
be brought to Separation. But on the Eleventh day. 
the Patient moſt commonly ſeems firſt to be endangered, 
a violent Fever, Reſtleſneſs, and other Symproms in- 
vading together; which betoken that Death is near at 
hand, by which the Patient is moſt commonly conquered, 


if he be not ſuccoured by Art: But if he be not van- 


quiihed by the Diſeaſe on this day, the two latter which 
we have mentiened, are yet to be feared : For all the 
time between the Eleventh day, and the Seventeenth, he 


the Year 1675, to the Year 1680. 441 


is daily vexed with a tireſom Fit of Reſtleſſneſs to- 
wards Evening; and Death is egged on, Vi & Arms, 
Moreover I have ſhewn, that this is the cauſe of the 
greater or leſſer impending danger, in theſe kind of 
Small-pox ; ro wit, for that in the diſtinct fort, the 
Phlegmons or Tumcurs, with Inflammation (of which 
ſort are Puſtles, when they are firſt elevated (are fewer, 
and by conſequence but a {mall quantity of Pas is con- 
veyed into the Blood, in its circular Motion, when they 
begin to ripen; and ſo there is no fear upon this ac- 
count, that the Fever ſnould riſe too high, for Nature is ea- 
fily able to reſtrain the impreſſions made upon the Blood 
by ſo ſmall a quantity of Matter: But when in the Flux 
ſort the whole Body is covered with Phleg menus, which 
afterwards turn into ſo many Abſceſſes, ſo great a quan- 
tity of Matter, in the days before mentioned (in which 
the Puſtles by the guidance of Nature, for the moſt part 
obtain their height, or juſt Maturity) is btought by the 
Veins into the Blood; and alſo ſo great a quantity of 
putrid Vapours creeps into it, from the whole Superfi- 
cies of the Body, now, as it were, ſuppurated every 
where; ſo that the Fever occaſioned by this means, 
wholly oppreſſes the ſtrength of Nature, and ſo at length 
the Patient is deſtroyed: Partly by the Fever, and part- 
ly by the Venom which infects rhe Maſs of Blood. 
Wherefore, ſeeing the ſafety of the Patient depends ſo 
much on the Paucity of the Small-pox, and danger on 
the contrary, from the fulneſs of them, Reaſon dictates, 
and alſo Senſe which is common to all; that therefore 
it is the Duty of a skilful Phyſician, not violently to drive 
out the variolous Matter, at the beginning of the Diſ- 
eaſe by hot Cordigls, and a hot Regimen, by which 
means there would%ﬀ too great an Aiſimulation of the 
Mor bi fick Matter contained in the Blood, and the whole 
Subſtance of the Body would be turned, as it were, to 
a Fomes of the Diſeaſe; but he ſhould rather ule his ut- 
moſt Endeavours in ſuppreſſing ſo enormous and ſubtile 
an Inflammation: To wit, above all by taking Blood from 
the Arm, if there be the leaſt Suſpicion (either becauſe 
the Patient is in the flower of his Age, or becauſe the 
Blood has been inflamed by ſtrong Liquors, or upon ac- 
edunt of violent Pains of ſome part of the Body; or 
„„ ' Laſtly 


<. — - 
4-4 a> 3 * . 
— - 
_—- — 
— - * 2 = 
. _— — 


= as SF; 
— 


— . . — 3 
— — * 


= SR X .- 
= - 


442 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 

Laftly, from vehement Vomitting) that the Small-pox 
juſt a coming out, will Flux; and afterwards a Vomit 
is proper for the ſame. And ſeeing nothing heats the 
Patient ſo much, and for that cauſe ſo much promotes 
too copious an Aiſimulation of the various Matter, as 
the Patients lying continually in Bed, I alway keep him 
from it a days, till the Sixth day from the firſt Invaſion, 
or the fourth from the Eruption of the Puſtles; at which 
time the whole Troop of them are come out. After- 
wards I commit him to Bed, till the end of the Diſeaſe; 
bur 1 do not allow he ſhould have more or thicker 
Cloaths on, or Fire in his Chamber, than he uſed to 
have when he was well: In the mean while I permir 
him the free uſe of Small-beer, and other cooling Li. 
cuors, which are moſt grateful to the Patient. But for 
as much as notwithſtanding, even in the moſt tempe- 


rate Regimen, the Patient will frequently fall into hears; 


Deliriums, and Reſtleſſneſs, I preſcribe an Anodyne every 
Nighr, bur a little earlier than is uſual, becauſe in this 
Dileaſe there is, as it were, a certain Paroxiſm, or Exa- 
cerbation of Hear and Reſtleſſneſs, almoſt daily about 
Evening. This merhod now delivered, is moſt commo- 
dious, both to prevent a great number of Small-pox, 
(from whefiee the Patient is in greateſt danger, as I have 
mentioned above and alſo to further their increaſe, now 
they are all come out, and [afterwards their due Matu- 
ration | 

But (which is truly to be lamented, for as much as 
they who are in the flower of their Age, chiefly die of 
chis Diſeaſe) the Patient is very often ſeized with a vio- 
lent Fever, together with Suffocation and great Reſtleſ- 
neſs, on the Eleventh day, as is uk! or {ome other of 
thoſe days, which 1 have reckone@ moſt fatal in va» 
rious kinds of Flux-pox (tho' till then he may be in no 
great danger) and contrary to Expectarion, dies ſud- 
denly ; borh thele aids which we have mentioned be. 
fore, and all others, which the medical Art has hither- 
to found out, ſignifying nothing, his Friends being won- 
derfully aſtoniſhed, who juſt before had great hopes of 
his Recovery. The Phytician will labour earneſtly to 


vanquith- this ſudden impetus of the Diſeaſe, when be- 


ore he had done all he could ro prevent it; in order to 
| which 


f 


pat FF o& wy py Bras on 


& © -p, of My, = mr 


the Year 1675, to the Tear 1680. 443 


which it muſt ſeriouſly be conſidered, that the adventi- 
tious Fever, which on the Eleventh day leizes thoſe that 
have the Flux-pox, is a Diſeaſe quite different from the 


Small-pox, and that Fever which either preceded the 


Eruption of them, or is ſometimes occafioned by the In- 
flammation of the Phlegmons, on the furſt days: For ir 
is no other than a putrid Fever properly fo called, ta- 
king its riſe from putrefying Particles, and poyſonous 


Puſtles, now come to Maturity, and, as I ſaid, ſucked 


again into the Blood; by whoſe noxious, and inimical 
quality ro Nature, the Patient is at the ſame time poy- 
ſoned, and moleſted with the worſt of Fevers. Where- 
fore every prudent Man will ſuppoſe, that only thoſe 
things are proper Remedies in this Caſe, which are moſt 
powerful in ſubduing this Secundary Fever, which I call 
putrid ; but nothing does this bufineſs -more effectually 
than large Bleeding, by which means the vicious Parti- 


cles that are the Fomes of the Diſeale, are baniſhed from 


the Blood. Neither does the Small-pox, if 1 am able 
to judge, conſidering the State they are now in, any whit 
oppoſe this Practice; for the Puſtles cannot be ſtruck in 
by any means: For if the Patient ſnould die at this time 
of the Diſeaſe, and the Body laid in the cold Earth ; 
yer the Puſtles being cruſted ſo hard, could neither re- 
treat within the Skin, nor be leſſened in bulk; and tru- 
ly, we have not now to do with the Small pox, but 
wholly with anorher Diſeaſe, viz. a purrid Fever. And 
for theſe Reaſons I have uſed ſucceſsfully the followin 

merhod, which I have found fince I publiſhed my latt 
Obſervations of the Small-pox ; and truly except this I 
know no other, neither can I imagine by what means 


che Patient can be ſo certainly relieved : Therefore when 


he is reduced to uch Streighrs that by reaſon of the 
unuſual violence of the Symptoms, he ſeems juſt about 
to expire, unleſs he be preſently relieved in this Caſe I 
ſay, whether ir be the Eleventh day, or ſome other after 
it, ten or twelve Ounces of Blood is preſently to be ta- 
ken away from that Arm, in which the Puſtles being 
feweſt, the Vein is moſt commodiouſly opened: For 
tho' Paregorichs, and keeping from Bed a-dayt, may ſuf- 
fice without Letting blood, at the beginning of the Dil- 
eaſe, to quell the Fury and Paroxiſm, which moſt com- 
Co >" 22 1 | monly 


OE Gr — — — 


: 
1 


- * - 
- 5 — "Ss 
. 
— — 1 4 * 


— 


3 „„ — — ew ie 4 - ou 
— c as, , Ss 
P = — — — — 


444 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 


monly invades in the Evening, yet in theſe days of the 
Secondary Fever, we cannot lafely truſt in any thing 
elle bur large Bleeding, by which alone the Fury, ar 
this time raging, may be ſafely quieted; at Evening an 
Anodyne is to be taken, as before, in a large Dole (to 
which we now fly as to a Sanctuary) and lo afterwards 
Morning and Evening, and ſometimes oftner : For we 
mult diligently obſerve, that in ſome the Fury is ſo 
heightned above meaſure, that even a very large Doſe 
of the Anodyne cannot tame, nor indeed ſtop its violence, 
before the ſpace of twelve hours; in which Caſe it is 
abſolutely neceſſary, that the ſaid Dole be repeated eve- 
ry Eighth or Sixth hour. | ; 
And whereas it often happens at the latter end of the 
Diteafe, partly from the Nature of it, and partly from 
the great force of the Anodyne, whole help the method 
of Cure plainly required, that the Patients Body is ſo 
bound, that then he is almoſt ſuffocated, and the Fever 
io heightned, that he is in a deſperate Condition; in 
this difficulty we muſt uſe a ſuitable Remedy: And the 
Caſe ftanding thus, there is much leſs danger to the Pa- 
tient in taking a Lenitive Purge, than from the Fevef, 
much heightned by the Retention of the Excrements. 
J have preſcribed very ſucceſsfully one Ounce and an half 
of Lenitive Electuary, diflolved in four Qunces of ſome 
{mall diitilled water; for inſtance, of Cichory, or Aqua 
Latls Alexit, Which draught, tho' it may not operare ſo 
oon as it is wont, by realon the Belly is uſually bound 
in this Diſeaſe, as alfo upon the account of the long uſe 
of Hypnotichs, yer if it be given in the Morning, it mott 
commoniy works before Night; but if it does not, yet 
the Paregerich is to be given in the Evening; and indeed 
ſooner, notwithſtznding the Purge, if great Inquietude, 
or ſome conliderable dickneſs threateſſs danger, leſt the 
Patient, being deſtitute of this help, die while we wait 
tor the working of the Medicine. Neither will the Pa- 
tient receive any damage from fo gentle a Purge, if it 
do not work at all. If therefore it do not anſwer your 
Defires the firit day, let it be repeated the day follow- 
ing, which alliſt ing the former Dole ſeldom fails rhe 
Phyſician. But if he ſuppoſe that it has purged away 
10 muchot tac filth on the firſt day, as is ſufficient for 


the 


= My gp my © mas — 2 


MY hg MA oo © 


ey 


the Tear 1675, to the Tear 1680. 445 


the preſent, and the Patient begins to be better after- 
wards, the other Doſe may be deferred to another time. 
And after this manner, both bleeding and purging may 
be repeated by Intervals, as the Condition of the Fever, 
and the Reſtlefineſs of the Patient ſeem to. require. them, 
till at length he is out of danger: But as to purging I de- 
fire it may be ſeriouſly minded (leſt the mentioning of ir 
ſhould do much more hurt than good) that the Patient 
is not to be purged, till the latter end of the Diſeaſe, viz. 
till the thirteenth day, or after; nor then unleſs the 
Blood were diminiſhed, at the rime when the Seconda- 
ry Fever invaded, 

But that I may uſe my utmoſt endeavour to finiſh 
Practice in this Diſeaſe ; I will propoſe ſome few things 
concerning ſpitting of Blood, and ot bloody Urine com- 
ing upon the Small-pox, both thele Hemorrhages, as I have 
noted heretofore come at the beginning of the Diſeaſe, 
before the Puſtles break our, or if they ſhew themlelves 
in ſome places; yet in moſt other places they lie thick 
under the Skin, and are of that kind, which would Flux 
moſt, unleſs the ſaid Symptom put an end to the Diſeaſe 
by the Death of the Patient, the Purple Spots in the 
mean while, beſiege the 1 of the Body, and 
threaten a dreadful Event. But iho' thele Spots may be 
taken away by attemperating duly the Blood, yet both 
the Bloody Urine, and the violent Eruption of Blood 
from the Lungs, were certainly wont to forerun Death. 
But this dreadful difficulty may be allo overcome, and 
the Sick may be pur our of danger. For this Symprom 
ariſing from a violent Inflammation of the Blood, and 
the Tenuity of it, thoſe Remedies which attemperate 
the Blood and allo render it leſs fluent, by their 
Aſtringent, and thickening Virtue, ſtop theſe Hemor- 
rhages excellently well; wherefore after bleeding freely 
once, let a Paregorick be given: As, 


Take Erratich Popy-water two Ounces, of Liquid Lau- 
danum ſixteen Drops, of diſtilled Vinegar three 
Drams, of Diacodium half an Ounce, Mingle them 
and make a Draught. 


Afﬀrer- 


2— 


— 


— - 2 -,- "S a* — — 


2 


- 

- - 

— - I.» * of — — a” — 
a a — —— —— ns dnl - . . 
— oy — — - 4 FI — — 


446 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 
Afterwards the following, or the like muſt be pre. 
ſcribed. | . 


Take of the Trochies of Lemnian Earth, and of Bole- 
armenick, each one Dram, of ſealed Earth, Blood. 
ſtone, Dragons-blood, and Red. coral prepared, eas 
half a Dram, of Maſtick, and Gum Arabick, each 
one Scruple, Minple them* and make a fine Powder; 
let him take half a Dram every third hour, in one ſpoon- 
Jul of Syrup of Comfrey, drinking upon it four or five 
fpoonfuls of the following Fulep. 


Take of the Waters of Plantain, and Oak-buds, each three 
Ounces, of Cinnamon water hordeated two Ounces, of 
Syrup of dryed Roſes one Ounce, of Spirit of Vitriol 4 
ſufficient quantity, to make it a little Acid, 


In the mean time, give the Paregorick above deſcribed 
every Night. 

Emulſions alſo of the four greater Cold-ſeeds, with 
Seeds of white Poppies do a great deal of good, 

Bur when the Hemorrhage ceaſes, all the reſt muſt be 
managed through the Courſe of this Diſeaſe, as is pro- 
poſed in the Chapter of the Small- pox. 

Before I conclude, I will add this, vx. as often as I 
preſcribe ſome Drops of Liquid Laudanum, I mean that 
Laudanum of my own Deſcription, the Preparation of 
which is to be had in my Book of acute Diſeaſes, in the 
Chapter of a Dyſentery; and I would have that Diacodium 
which 1s made of fourteen Ounces of the Heads of white 
Poppies well dryed, and (after Maceration for twenty 
four hours, in eight Pints of Fountain-watef) ſufficient- 
ly boyled, then very ſtrongly expreſſed, and ro the 
ſtrained Liquor, are added twenty four Qunces of Su- 
gar; and afterwards 'tis boyled to a Syrup : For I judge 
theſe two Preparations to be the beſt of their kind, eſpe- 
cially the Dzacodium, whereof one Ounce is more Effi- 
cacious than rwo of the other; in which the Poppy- 
Heads are uſed green; the Liquor is nor ſo ftrongly 

preſſed our, and the black Heads of Erratick Poppies, 
which have little Virtue in them, make up fo great a 


Part, 
There- 


— 
3 


1 Hs > 


„„ 9” ' 


the Tear 1675, to the Tear 1680. 447 


Therefore when I am nor ſatisfied concetning the 
ſtrength of either of theſe Paregoricks, inſtead of them 1 
am wont to preſcribe a Grain and a half, or two Grains ob 
ſolid London Landanum , diflolved in ſome proper water, 


by which means I ſecure my ſelf from any miſtake, aud 
provide for the welfare of the Patient. 


— — 


— 


— 


Of a Bloody-Orine from a Stone is the Kidneys. 


TH, it may ſeem raſli and imprudent to publiſh an 
Obſervation whereof I have had only Experience in 


my ſelf, yer I ſuppoſe no juſt Perſon will be angry with 
me (who have been ſo much, and ſo long troubled with 
a Bloody-Urine occaſioned by the Stone in the Kidneys) 
ſor Commiſerating thoſe that are afflicted with the ſame 
Diſeaſe, and for diſcovering thoſe Medicines that have 
caſed me, tho they are vulgar and of little eſteem. 

In the Year 1660. the Gout ſeized me more violertly, 
and continued longer than ever before, and when upon 
this account I lay continually for rwo Months in the 
Summer time, either in or upon a ſoft Bed; towards 
the latter end of the Fir I began to feel a dull and hea- 
vy Pain, eſpecially in my left Kidney, and ſometimes, 
tho rarely, in my right, aud when I recovered from the 
Gout, the Pain in the Kidneys remain'd, 'which made me 
fear the Stone, rho the Pain was not at all acute, but to- 
lerable enough ; for I had nor yer had a Nephritick Fit ; 
which is accompanied with violent Pain, ſtretching it (elf 
through the paſlage of the Ureters, towards the Bladder, 
and with violent Vomitting. Bur tho' theſe Signs of rhe 
Stone in the Kidneys did not appear, yet I had good rea- 
jon to believe, that I had a large Stone in the Kidneys, 
which did oecaſion the foreſaid Symptoms, becauſe 
it was too large to pals into the paſſage of the Ureters, 
aud many years after I found I was not miſtaken ; for 
when in the Winter 1676, preſently after the breaking 
of a violent Froſt, I had walked much and a long time, 
immediately made water mixed with Blood, and fol 
did, as often as I walked much, or rode in a Coach in 
paved Streets, tho the Horſes went gently : Bur this did 
not befall me, how far ſoever I travelled in great Roads, 

| har 


448 Of Epidemich Diſeaſes from 
that are not paved, the Urine that I voided then, tho 
it looked terrible, as I rendr:d it, almoſt like pure Blood, 
yer ſoon after it was limpid, and like it ſelf at the top, 
the Blood clodding by it ſelf at the bottom. For the 
cure of this Diſeaſe, I bled largely at the Arm, and af- 
ter general Purges I uied cooling, and incraſſating Me. 
dicines of various kinds, and a Diet agreeable to theſe 
things, and carefully avoided Acid, Acrid, and atrenua- 
ting Liquors , Bur theſe and many other things, which it 
would be tedi us to mention, doing no good, and fearing 
to provoke the Stone forward, which I ſuſpected was too 
big to be expelled by Steel-warers ; at length I left off 
all hopes of doing any good by them, and eſpecially, be- 
cauſe I had found that ſome old Men of my Acquain- 
tance had haſtened their end by attempting in vain, to 
cure this Diſeaſe by ſuch Remedies ; wherefore I reſolved 
ro try no further, only to prevent this Diſeaſe by avoid- 
ing as much as I could the Motion of the Body : Bur con- 
ſidering ar length how wonderfully ſome praiſe the Lithon- 
t1a3ptick Virtue of the Seed of the Aſh tree, I imagined 
that if the Seed of it had fo much Virtue, it was ve- 
ry probable, that the Manna of the Aſh ſhould have much 
more, that as the excellent Botaniſt, Mr. Ray, and many 
other Writers ſay, not being Airy Honey, or Heavenly 
Dew, but rather a Liquor ſweating our of the Leaves, 
the Trunk and the Branches of the Alh-ttees in Ca- 
{abria, the Truth whereof was confirmed ro Mr. Ray 
when he travelled in Italy, by a Learned Phyfician, who 
often gathered Manna from the Branches and Leaves, 
when they were exactly covered with Linen Cloaths. 
See Ray's Catalogue of Engliſh Plants. Therefore being 
about to make the Experiment, I drank two Ounces and 
an half of Manna diſſolved in a quart of Whey; ſwal- 
lowing now and then a little of rhe juice of Limons, 
while I was Purging, to quicken it, which uſually works 
lowly, and ro make it more pleaſant ro the Stomach ; 
it can ſcarce be imagined how much eale I received, 
abour the Region of the Reins, by rhe uſe of this Reme- 
dy; for tho' before they did not always ake, yet they 
were affected with a heavy and troubleſome Pain, and 
| becaule the Succeſs was ſo good, I took the ſame Purge 
on a {er day once a Week, for ſome Months, and after 
every 


inen 


the Year 1675, to the Tear 1680. 449 


every Purge I plainly found my ſelf better, and could 
bear the ſhaking of a Coach, when it went faſt, and was 
indeed quite freed from this Symprom rill the laſt Spring, 
at the approach whereof, having been miſerably afflicted 
with the Gour, all the foregoing Winter, and having liv- 


ed withour Exerciſe more than I uſed to do, by reaſon of 


my unfirneſs for Motion, the Bloody Urine returned a- 
gain, and now I doubred whether 1 ſhould betake my 
{elf again ro Purging, becauſe of late years, the whole 
Subſtance of my Body being turned as it were into the 
Fomes of the Gour, the gentleſt Purge did moſt certain- 
ly occaſion a Fit of the Gour. Ar length I confidered, that 
if I gave an Anodyne every Night after purging ro quell 
the Tumult the Purge had raiſed, I might ſafely reſume 
my old method of raking Manna once a Week; rhere- 
fore in the Morning I rook two Ounces and an half of 
Manna in a quart of Whey, and in the Evening ſixteen 
Drops of Liquid Laudanum, in Small-beer, repeating the 
Manna and Laudanum, in the ſame manner, twice a Week, 
for three Weeks; afterwards I uſed the Manna only once 
a Week, the filth of the Humours being ſo plenrifully 
diſcharged by the Purge, that the Gout was not much 


to be feared, and my reaſon telling me, that if the Man- 


na was indued with any Faculty, that is diſſolving, or 
any other way Lithontriptick, to be ſure, the Virtue and 
Efficacy of the Remedy, I rruſted in, wou'd be ſomewhar 
lefſened, by ſuch an Aſtrigent Medicine as Laudanum 
1s ; and therefore I thought it beſt ro omir rhe Anodyne, 
teeing I purged only once a week. I continued this me- 
thod for ſome Months, always purging on the fame day 
of the Week, nor would I break this Cuſtom upon any 
account whatever, tho' the Pain of the. Back abated 
afrer rhe firſt Doſe of this Remedy, as formerly ; yer 
{o0n after repeated Purges made the Gout appear, threat- 
ning War ſometimes in the Limbs, and ſometimes in 


the Bowels ; but Laudanum ſtrongly repreſſed theſe Mo- 


tions of the Diſeaſe, and this method ſucceeding well hi- 
therto, I thought I ought ro continue it, both ro prevent 
rhe return of the bloody Urine, and to leſſen fomewhar 
vt the Matter that occaſions the Stone, which anſwered 
according to my Deſire. This bleeding vaniſhing from 
the time I fic publiſhed this Treatiſe, and cherefore I 


2 Ouite 


450 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 

quite left off the Manna; therefore as to purging, if there 
is a bloody Urine, and if Manna be only uſed according 
to the method above delivered, I muſt retract my Opi. 
nion, which I publiſhed concerning the Gour, vi. that it 
is no way fit, that People ſubject to the Gour ſhould be 
purged, either at the Beginning, Declination, ot the In. 
tervals of the Fits. 


— Nec ji Miſerum fortuna Sinonem 
Finxit, vanum etiam Mendacemque improba finget. 


For then it did not come into my mind, that the Fit oc- 
cafioned by the Purge could be reſtrained by giving an 
Anodyne at Night; yer with reſpect only to the Gout, all 
Evacuations do much hurt, and therefore are not to be 
admitted, unleſs the foreſaid Symptom requires the uſe 
of them. 

I will add theſe things concerning the Regimen, and 
manner of Diet, which ſeem proper for thoſe that are 
troubled with either of theſe Diſeaſes ; for I would 
by no means paſs by any thing, that may be of uſe ro ſuch 
as are afflicted with rhe ſame Diſeaſe as I am. In the 
Morning when I rife I drink a Diſh or rwo of Tea, and 
then ride in my Coach rill Noon ; when I rerurn home, 
I moderately refeſh my ſelf with any ſort of Meat of 
eafic Digeſtion that I like; (for moderation is neceſ- 
ſary above all things.) I drink ſomewhat more than a 
quarter of a Pint of Canary-wine, preſently afrer Dip- 
ner every day, to promote the Concoction of the Meat 
in my Stomach, and to drive the Gour from my Bowels. 
When I have dined, I berake my ſelf to my Coach a- 
gain, and when buſineſs will permit, I ride intothe Coun- 
try two or three Miles for good Air. A draught of Small- 
beer is to me inſtead of a Supper, and I rake another 
draughr when Tam in Bed, and about to compoſe my 
felf ro ſleep, that by this Julep I may cool and dilute 
rhe hor and acrid juices lodged in the Kidneys, where- 
by the Stone is occaſioned; and I prefer at this time, and 
ar Dinner-time, Small beer that has Hops in ir, before 
char which has none; for tho that which is not hopp'd is 
ſmoother and ſofter, and ſo fitter to carry off che Stone 


from the Kidneys, jet that which is hopp d, upon the ac- 
count 


the Year 1675, to the Year 1680. 451 


count of the Hiptick Quality, which the Hops impart ro 
ir, is not ſo apt to occaſion ſandy and ſtony Matter as 
that which is not hopp'd, the Subſtance whereof is more 
viſcous and ſlimy. I rake care to go to Bed early, eſpe- 
cially in the Winter, than which nothing 1s better ro per- 
fect Concoction, and to preſerve the Form and Order 
which duly belongs to Nature; whereas on the contrary, 
Night-works leſſen all the Concoction of old Men, that 
are afflicted with any Chronical Diſeaſe, and dangerouſly 
wound their vital Principle; and to prevent a bloody 
Urine, by reaſon of the Stone, I take great care, thar 
as often as I am to ride a long way upon the Stones, (for 
if I travel never ſo far in a Coach in the common Roads, 
I receive no danger) to drink a large draught of Small- 
beer before I go into the Coach, and allo before my re- 
turn, if I have been abroad a pretty while, whereby I 
ſecure my lelf very well from the bloody Urine, Bur 
as to the Gout, I will add this one thing, of late years, 
by reaſon of ſome Errours about the five Non-naturals, 
the Gouty· matter ſomerimes ſtrikes in, the Signs where- 
of are violent Sickneſs with Vomitring, and ſome Pain of 
the Belly, bur the Limbs are ſuddenly freed from Pain, 
and more fit for Motion, than is uſual ; in this Caſe I drink 
a Gallon of Poſfer-drink, and as ſoon as it is all caſt up, 
I drink a ſmall draughr of Canary-wine, with eighteen 
Drops of Liquid Laudanum in it, to compoſe me to Reſt, 
and by this means I have ſeveral times reſcued my ſelf 
from imminent Death. 

Tho' perchance it may ſeem ridiculous (eſpecially 
for one, whoſe being well or dead is ſcarce worth mind- 
ing) to make ſuch frequent mention of himſelf, yer theſe 
things are ſaid, to the intent others may be benefired 
thereby, whoſe Lives or Health are of greater moment, 
or value. | 

Laſtly, it is ro be nored, into what great danger ſome 
that are afflicted with the Gour, and Stone, caſt them- 
ſelves, by taking unadviſedly Manna diflolved in purg- 
ing Mineral- water; for tho', when it is taken this way, 
it works quicker, and is not ſo nauſeous; yet the ſmall 
Conveniences cannot equal an Injury occaſioned by the 
Waters, on another account; for if the Stone in the Kid- 
neys 1s ſo large, that it cannot paſs through the paſſage 
Gg 2 | 0 


452 Of Epidemick Diſeaſes from 
of the Vreters into the Bladder, theſe Waters moſt com- 
monly occation a Fir, which to the great hazard of the 
Patients Life, continues ſtill the Stone returns into the 
Pelvs, nor can the Sick lately venture upon Steel-waters, 
unleſs he can firſt certainly know. that the Stone is not 
ſo large, but that it may either find, or make a way 
thro the Uxeters, which ſo far as I underſtand, can be 
known only certainly this way, viz, if before he having 
been ſeized with a Nephritich, Fir, (with violent Pain in 
either of the Reins, ſtretching it ſelf through the paſſa- 
ges of the Ureters, with violent Vomitting) he has found, 
that there is not ſo properly a large ſtone in the Pel vis 
as a heap of ſmall Stones, whereof one will now and then 
tall into the Ureter, and ſo cauſe a Fir, which generally 
does not go off till the Stone is thruſt down into the Blad- 
der. When the Caſe is ſo, no Remedy is more effectual, 
either to prevent the increaſe of {mall Stones, or to drive 
them from the Reins, as drinking freely of Steel-waters 
a long while every Summer. 

But becauſe it frequently happens, that one is ſeized 
with a Nephritick Fir, where theſe Mineral- waters are 
not to be procured, or when the Seaſon of the Year 1s 
not favourable for drinking of them; in this Caſe. you 
muſt proceed in this ſhort merhod, withour any greater 
Apparatus of Medicines: If the Sick is of a Sanguine 
Conſtitution, and nor ancient, ten Ounces of Blood muſt 
be firſt taken from the Arm ot the ſame fide, with the 
affected Kidney ; afterwards, a Gallon of Poſſe-drink 
muſt be prelently raken, wherein rwo Ounces of the 
Roots of Marſh-mallows has been boyled, and the follow- 
ing Glifter muſt be injected. | V 


Take of the Roots of Marſh-mallows, and Lilies, each one 
Ounce, of the Leaves of Mallows, Pellitory of the Wall, 
and Bears-breech, and of the Flowers of Camomile, 
each one handful, of the Seeds of Flax, and Fenugreel, 
each half an Ounce, Boyl them in 4 ſufficient quan- 
tity of Water, to a Pint and an half. In the ſtrained 
Liquor, diſſolve of brown Sugar, and Syrup of Marſh- 
ons each two Ounces ; mingle them, make a Gli- 
er. | FP 


0 


Wh en 


the Year 1675, to the Year 1680. 453 
When the Patient has rendred all by 11 and when 


the Gliſter has done working, a large Dole of Liquid Lau- 
danum muſt be given, vid. twenty five Drops, or fifteen 
or ſixteen Grains of Matthews's Pill. 

But old Men worn out by ſome Chronical Diſeaſe, 
and old Women inclined to Vapours, (eſpecially if at the 
beginning they void a black and ſandy Urine) muſt not 
bleed: But as ro other things they muſt proceed wholly 
according to the Method now delivered. 

But to return to the Stone when it is large, the buſi- 
nels in hand; if the Nephritick Perſon was never ſeized 
with a Fir of the Stone, that being too large to fall out 
of the Pelvn, Chalybeat waters cannot be uſed, for Rea- 
ſons above-mentioned, without preſent danger; nor is 
the uſe of Mineral-warers better in Gouty-People, if they 
are old, as they are moſt commonly, and of a weak 
and Phlegmatick habit of Body; for in theſe the ſtrength 
of Nature is ſo much leſſened, that it is much to be fear- 
ed, thar ſuch a quantiry of Water may quite overwhelm 
it: But whether this is the Cauſe of the injury, that 
falls upon Men of ſuch a habit of Body, or Conſtitution, 
or nor, I am ſure many, whoſe Bodies have been much 
broken by this Diſeaſe, have been killed by theſe Warers. 

And this iS in manner the Sum of all, which I have 
kirherro known concerning the Cure of Diſeaſes, viz. to 
the 29th of September, 1686. | 


. I NDS a 


a 


Hyperchatharfi:, 


| | 372 
A Sue Page 35, 233 Hypcchonariacal Be 2 
£4 Appetite depraved, 2 1 Hyſterick ad ot 265 
281 . 
B. Jaundice, 150 
Bleeding at Noſe, 212 Liack Paſſion, 33, 428 
Bloody Flux, 116, 427 Itch, 208 
Blood: ſpitting, 212 NMI. 
Burns, 199 Maaneſs, 4 55 
; Meaſles, 131, 164 
Child-bed Purgations, 332 Miſcarnage, 328 
Cholera Morbus, 114, 219 | | 
Cholick Bilious, 142 Peripneumony Baſtard, 19 
Cholick Hyſterick, 147, 331 Plague, 58 
Chorea Sancti Viti, 422 Pleuriſie, 190 
Coma, 160, 421 Pleurifie malignant, 173 
Conſumption, 327 Poyſon, 242 
Contuſtons, 383 
Cough, 173, 29 Quinſie, 209 
Cough Con vul ſive. 135 1 
Courſes immoderate, 336 Rleumatiſn, 200, 240 
Conrſes obſtruRed, 322 Rickets, 52, 318 
5. Running of the Reins, 251 
Deabetes, 230 5 8. 
Dropſie, 88 dcurvy, 20 
5 : Skin Diſeaſes, 2 on 
Eryſipe las, 260 Small. Pox regular, 78 
Small- Pox irregulay, 136 
Fever continual, 13, 104, 165, 268, 439 
127, 154 Stone in the Kidneys, 366 
Fever new, 413 | 380 
Fever I inter, 408 | . 
Fever Peſtilential, 58 Tendons prick d, 196 
Fever Scarlet, 189 Teneſmus, 126 
Fevers Intercurrent, 185 | 
Fever of Children, 430 Vapours, 336 
French-Pox, 257 Urine Bloody, 447 
Frenſie, 27 
G. Matchings, 27 
Green: ſickneſs, 322 Whites, 131 
Gout, 342 Yaomb falling, 338 
Griper, | 2.9 | 
; ONE TRE BOOKS 


U 


BOOKS Printed for, and Sold by R. Wel- 
lington, at the Dolphin and Crown the 
Weſt-end of St. Paul s Church-yard. 


"= Elements of Hiftory, from the Creation of the World, 
to the Reign of Conſtantine the Great. Containing the Hi- 
ſtory of the Monarchies in a new Order and Method, together 
with a View of the Contemporary Kingdoms and Common- 
wealths; anda Brief Account of their Magiſtracies and politick 
Conſtitutions. Done for the Uſe of Young Students. By Wil- 
liam Howel, LL. D. Tranſlated from the Latin. Price 5 s. 

The Hiſtory of Pohbiu the Megalobolitan; containing a Ge- 
neral Account of the TranſaRions of the whole World, but 
principally of the Roman People, during the Firſt and Second 
Punick Wars, Tranſlated by Sir Hehry Sheers, and Mr. Dryden, 
In Three Volumes: The Third Volume never before printed. 

An Italian Voyage, or a compleat Journey thro' Italy. In Two 
Parts. With the Character of the People, and Deſcriptions of 
the chief Towns, Churches, Monaſteries, Tombs, Libraries, 
Palaces, Villa's, Gardens, Pictures, Statues and Antiquities; as 
alſo, of the Intereſt, Government, Riches, Force, c. of all 
che Princes; with Inſtructions concerning Travel. By Richard 
Laſſel, Gent. The Second Edition. With large Additions, 
by a Modern Hand. 

Familiar Letters: Written by John late Earl of Rocheſter, to 
the honourable Henry Savile, Eſq;. and other Perſons of Quali- 
ty: Wich Love-Letters, written by the late Ingenious Mr, Tho. 
Otway, Sir Ceorge Etheridge, and the late Duke of Bucking « 
ham. Price 5s. | 

The Novels of the late Ingenious Monſicur Scarron, faich- 
fully Tranſlared. 

Mauger's French Grammar, the Twenty firſt Edition. 

Love-Letters, writ by a N-n to a Cavalier, with the Cava- 
lier's Anſwers, Price Is. 6d, 

Of Education, eſpecially of Young Gentlemen. In Two 
parts. By Obadiah Walker, D. D. The Sixth Edition, En- 
larged, Price 35. | 

A Brief and Eaſie Method to underſtand the Roman Hiſto. 
ry; with an Exact Chronology of the Reigns of the Emperours; 
and an Account of the moſt Eminent Authors, when they flou- 
riſned, and an Abridgement of the Roman Antiquities and 
Cuſtoms. By way of Dialogue. For the Uſe of the Duke of 
Burgundy, Tranſlated from the French. With large Additi- 
ons, By Mr. Tho. Brown. Price 2s; Gd. | { 

The Eflays of Michael Seigneur de Montaigne, in Three Vo- 
zumes in OFavo, faichfully Tranftated by Charles Cotton, Eſq; 


Love 


Books Printed for R. Wellington. | 
love given o'er; or, a Satyr againſt the Pride, Luſt, and 
Inconſtancy of Women. i bets 

Cocker's Decimal Arithmetick, the Second Edition very 
much enlarged. By John Hawkins, Schoolmaſter at St. George's 
Church in Southwark. 5 ? 

The Comical Hiſtory of Francion, Satyrically expoſing Folly 
and Vice, in variety of Humours and Adventures. Writ in 
French by the Sjeui de Parc: Tranſlated by ſeveral Hands, and 
Adapred to the Humours of the preſent Age. Price 65. 

The Theory and practice of Architecture; or /itruvizs and 
Vignola Abridg'd. The Firſt by the Famous Mr. Perault of the 
Royal Academy of Sciences in France, and carefully done into 
Engliſh, The other by Foſeph Moxan. The Fifth Edition. Pr, 5 s. 

Sir Tho. Pope Blunt's Eſſays on ſeveral Subjects. The 3d Im- 
preſſion, with very large Additions, beſides a new Eſſay of 
Religion, and an Alphabetical Index to the wiole, Price 35. 

Sis Tho. Pope Blunt's Natural Hiftory. Price 25s. 6d. 

Riverius Reformatis : or, the Modern Kiverius, containing 
the Modern Practice of Phyfick, fer down in a Method very 
near the ſame with that of Riverins, bur accommodared to the 
moft Receiv'd Principles among the moſt Modern Philoſophers 
as well as Phyſicians ; with Practical Obſervations annexed to 
each Head or Chapter, To which is added, a Treatiſe of Ve- 
nereal Diſeaſes, and the Secrets of Lazarus Riverius, Never 
Printed before, Tranſlated from the Third Edition of his 
Works in Latin by Dr. Mandeville, Price 66. | 

Dr. Charlton's Natural Hiſtory of the Patfions. Price 2 s. 64, 
The Compleat Hiſtory ot Sueden from its Origin to this 
Time, comprehending the Lives and Reigns of its Kings and 
Governours, the ſeveral Revolutions, Wars, Riches, Strength 
and Intereſt of that Nation in reſpect of the other Kingdoms 
of Europe, Writ by the famous Samue! Piffendorf, late Chan- 
cellor of State in that Kingdom. Price 6s, _ 

Rules of Civility; or, the Maxims of Genteel Behaviour, as 
they are practis'd and obſerv'd by Perſons of Quality. Pr. 2 5. 

The whole Works of Mrs. Behn in 3 Volumes. 1/t. Con- 
. tains the Rover, 2 Parts, The Dutch Lover, Abdelazor, the 
Young King, the Round-heads, the City Heireſs, the Town 
Fop. Vol, 2d. The Falie Count, the Lucky Chance, the 
Forc'd Marriage, Sir Patient Fancy, the Widow Ranter, the 
Feign'd Curtezan, the Emperour ot the Moon, the Amorous 
Prince. Vol, 34. The Hiſtory of Oroonoho, the Fair Jilt, Ag- 
nes de Caſtro, the Lover's Watch, the Lady's Looking-glaſs, 
the Lucky Miſtake. the King of Bantam, the Fair Nun, the 
Adventures of the Black Lady. Price 15. Note, The No- 
vels may be had ſingly, Where is Sold all ſorts of Plays. 
| 4 ADM * 
PA. ESQ 


wa. 
- 
5 $ * bl 
8 en — — 
. * -. - 
- bo 
- » 


— Yor „ „ | 
* | 


% * 
. i ö * 
, & + 4 " 4 T 4 av 
0 6 
. 1 ye” 
1 C% 24 — 7 . 
* - 
* — - 
1 0 = ** 4 
HH \ 


K 8 


U 


— — CO OG —L— . - —-—T¼ — — —— 


— — 


—— — — — , . — —————_———— ——
