The Online Library of Liberty
A Project Of Liberty Fund, Inc.
Joseph Priestley, Letters to the Right Honourable
Edmund Burke [1791]
The Online Library Of Liberty
This E-Book (PDF format) is published by Liberty Fund, Inc., a private,
non-profit, educational foundation established in 1960 to encourage study of the ideal
of a society of free and responsible individuals. 2010 was the 50th anniversary year of
the founding of Liberty Fund.
It is part of the Online Library of Liberty web sitehttp://oll.libertyfund.org, which
was established in 2004 in order to further the educational goals of Liberty Fund, Inc.
To find out more about the author or title, to use the site's powerful search engine, to
see other titles in other formats (HTML, facsimile PDF), or to make use of the
hundreds of essays, educational aids, and study guides, please visit the OLL web site.
This title is also part of the Portable Library of Liberty DVD which contains over
1,000 books and quotes about liberty and power, and is available free of charge upon
request.
The cuneiform inscription that appears in the logo and serves as a design element in
all Liberty Fund books and web sites is the earliest-known written appearance of the
word “freedom” (amagi), or “liberty.” It is taken from a clay document written about
2300 B.C. in the Sumerian city-state of Lagash, in present day Iraq.
To find out more about Liberty Fund, Inc., or the Online Library of Liberty Project,
please contact the Director atoll@libertyfund.org.
LIBERTY FUND, INC.
8335 Allison Pointe Trail, Suite 300
Indianapolis, Indiana 46250-1684

Online Library of Liberty: Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke
Edition Used:
Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke, occasioned by his Reflections on the
Revolution in France(Birmingham: Thomas Pearson, 1791).
Author:Joseph Priestley
About This Title:
Priestley supported the early phase of the French Revolution and saw it as an advance
in human liberty, thus objecting to Burke’s severe criticisms.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 2 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1790

Online Library of Liberty: Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke
About Liberty Fund:
Liberty Fund, Inc. is a private, educational foundation established to encourage the
study of the ideal of a society of free and responsible individuals.
Copyright Information:
The text is in the public domain.
Fair Use Statement:
This material is put online to further the educational goals of Liberty Fund, Inc.
Unless otherwise stated in the Copyright Information section above, this material may
be used freely for educational and academic purposes. It may not be used in any way
for profit.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 3 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1790

Online Library of Liberty: Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke
Table Of Contents
The Preface.
Errata.
Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke.
Letter I.: Of the General Principles of the French Revolution.
Letter II.: Of Some Particulars In the New Constitution of France, and Some
Circumstances Attending the Dissolution of the Old One.
Letter III.: Of the Nature of Government, and the Rights of Men and of Kings.
Letter IV.: Of the Revolution In England Compared With That In France.
Letter V.: Of the Revolution Society In England, and Mr. Burke’s Reflexions
On Dr. Price.
Letter V.: Of the Interference of the State In Matters of Religion In General.
Letter VI.: Of the Source of the Respect That Is Paid to Religion.
Letter VII.: Of a Civil Establishment Being Essential to Christianity.
Letter VIII.: Of the Uses of Civil Establishments of Religion.
Letter IX.: Of an Elective Clergy.
Letter X.: Of Monastic Institutions, and Mr. Burke’s General Maxim That
Existing Powers Are Not to Be Destroyed.
Letter XI.: Of the Sacredness of the Revenues of the Church.
Letter XII.: Of the Danger of the Church, and of the Test Laws.
Letter XIII.: Of the Prospect of the General Enlargement of Liberty, Civil and
Religious, Opened By the Revolution In France.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 4 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1790

Online Library of Liberty: Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke
[Back to Table of Contents]
THE PREFACE.
OF the numerous readers, and answerers, of Mr. Burke’s long expectedReflections on
the Revolution in France,the attention of the greater part will be chiefly drawn to
those passages which more immediately relate to thecivil constitutionof that
kingdom. These I have not neglected. But, what I have more particularly replied to, is
what he has advanced oncivil establishments of religion,which makes no small figure
in his performance, and which appears to be a subject not generally understood.
It is with very sensible regret that I find Mr. Burke and myself on the two opposite
sides of any important question, and especially that I must now no longer class him
among the friends of what I deem to bethe cause of liberty, civilor religious,after
having, in a pleasing occasional intercourse of many years, considered him in this
respectable light. In the course of his public life, he has been greatly befriended by the
Dissenters, many of whom were enthusiastically attached to him; and we always
imagined that he was one on whom we could depend, especially as he spoke in our
favour in the business of subscription, and he made a common cause with us in
zealously patronizing the liberty of America.
That an avowed friend of the American revolution should be an enemy to that of the
French, which arose from the same general principles, and in a great measure sprung
from it, is to me unaccountable. Nor is it much less difficult to conceive how any
person, who has had America in his eye so long as Mr. Burke must necessarily have
contemplated it, could be so impressed, as he appears to be, in favour ofecclesiastical
establishments.That country he sees to flourish as much as any other in the annals of
history, without any civil establishment of religion at all. There he must see the civil
government goes on very well without it. It neither stands in need of religion, nor
does religion stand in need of it. For America is so far from being a country of atheists
and unbelievers, that there is, I doubt not, a stronger general sense of religion there
than in any other part of the world.
In America also, and indeed in every other part of the known world, except the
southern part of this particular island, Mr. Burke sees all civil offices open to persons
of all religious persuasions without distinction, and without any inconvenience having
been known to arise from it; and yet here he joins with a bigotted clergy, in rigorously
confining them to the members of the established church. But eventhisis not so
extraordinary as his not scrupling to class all the enemies of establishments with
cheatsandhypocrites,as if our opinions were so palpably absurd, that no honest man
could possibly entertain them.
Some are disposed to ascribe this change in Mr. Burke’s views and politics, to his
resentment of the treatment of thecoalitionby the Dissenters. And certainly so
sudden an union of Mr. Burke and his friends with Lord North, with whom they had
been in a state of violent opposition during the whole of the American war, did fill the
Dissenters, but not the Dissenters only (for the shock affected the greater part of the
nation) with horror. In this it is possible they might have judged wrong, listening to no
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 5 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1790

Online Library of Liberty: Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke
reason against the effect of the first unfavourableimpression; but they certainly acted
from the best principles, an attachment to liberty, virtue, and consistency; and they
lamented the fall of Mr. Burke, as that of a friend and a brother.
However, the question before the reader, is not the propriety or impropriety of any
particular man’s conduct, but the wisdom of great measures of government; as
whether it be right, and wise, to connect the business ofreligionwith that of thestate,
in the manner in which it is done in this country, and whether the French nation is
justifiable in their attempts to change their arbitrary form of government for another
which they deem to be more favourable to their interests and natural rights.
The question also with respect tothem,is not whether they have taken the very best
methods possible to gain their end, but whether the thing itself was worth their aiming
at, and whether they have been thosevery great foolsthat Mr. Burke makes them to
be. After all, mankind in general will judge by the event. If they succeed in
establishing a free government, they will be applauded for theirjudgment,as well as
for thespiritthat they have shewn; and if they fail, they will be condemned for their
precipitancy and folly. Thus every successful revolt is termed a revolution, and every
unsuccessful one a rebellion.
If the principles that Mr. Burke now advances (though it is by no means with perfect
consistency) be admitted, mankind are always to be governed as they have been
governed, without any enquiry into thenature,or origin,of their governments. The
choice of the peopleis not to be considered, and though their happiness is aukwardly
enough made by him the end of government; yet, having no choice, they are not to be
the judges of what is for their good. On these principles, thechurch,or thestate,once
established, must for ever remain the same. This is evidently the real scope of Mr.
Burke’s pamphlet, the principles of it being, in fact, no other than those ofpassive
obedience and non-resistance,peculiar to the Tories and the friends of arbitrary
power, such as were echoed from the pulpits of all the high church party, in the reigns
of the Stuarts, and of Queen Anne. Let them, however, be produced again, and let us
see in what manner they will be treated by the good sense and spirit of Englishmen at
the present day.
After the first part of these letters relating more immediately to the French Revolution
were printed, I had an opportunity of seeing theMemoir of the Com te De Lally
Tollendal,of whose account of the transaction of the sixth of October, Mr. Burke has
availed himself so much, p. 109, &c. calling him “one of the most honest, intelligent,
and eloquent members of the National Assembly.” I have particularly compared his
account of this Assembly, with that of Mr. Burke, p. 24, where he says, “I consider
this Assembly as nothing else than a voluntary association of men who have availed
themselves of circumstances to seize upon the power of the state, and that they have
not the sanction, and authority, of the character under which they first met.”
Mr. Tollendal’s ideas were certainly very different from these of Mr. Burke. For,
speaking of his being chosen a member of the Assembly, he says, p. 5, “it was,
without doubt, a great occasion, and a great work, to concur in the regeneration of
France, in founding liberty there, and in creating laws and manners*!” What, then,
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 6 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1790

Online Library of Liberty: Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke
has the National Assembly done, or attempted to do, more than this, which Mr.
Tollendal clearly conceived to have been the design of their meeting? Though he
thought proper to leave this Assembly, yet he acknowledges, p. 45, that “the majority
of the persons who composed it, had the purest intentions†;” and he speaks in the
highest terms of approbation concerning thedeclaration of Rights,which was their
first Act. After making some objections respecting the form, more than the substance,
he says, p. 125, “it contains all the great principles which are the guards of societies,
which maintain the rights of man, and of his dignity, and which secure his tranquility
and happiness*.” And these are thoserights of menwhich Mr. Burke treats with so
much ridicule.
In order to form a judgment whether the National Assembly had actually exceeded
their commission, or had undertaken more than was required of them, I also looked
into the King of France’scircular letter for the convocation of the States at Versailles,
dated January 24, 1789, as it is contained in theNew Annual Register,for 1789, p.
111. According to it, this Assembly was convened “to establish a steady, constant,
and invariable order in every part of government, that interested the happiness of the
people, and the prosperity of the kingdom; that an effectual remedy might be applied
to the disorders of the state, and that abuses of every kind might be reformed and
prevented, by good and solid means, proper to insure a permanency of the public
happiness.” And lastly, it is said to be “for every thing that might concern the present
and future wants of the state.”
Again, in theKing’s letter to the President of the Assembly,dated May 28, 1789, he
says, “I cannot see without pain the National Assembly, which I have called together,
to be concerned with me in the new regulation of the kingdom, sunk into inaction;
which if continued, would cause all the hopes which I have formed for the happiness
of my people, and the benefit of the state to prove abortive.”
Certainly, therefore, in the opinion of the King, as well as that of the whole nation,
there was a want of a total reform in the constitution of the French government, and
this reform was expected from the National Assembly. This is the very thing which
they are endeavouring to effect, and in which they have made considerable progress.
What they have done gives the greatest pleasure to the friends of universal liberty,
though unfortunately it gives pain to Mr. Burke, and some others.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 7 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1790

Online Library of Liberty: Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke
[Back to Table of Contents]
ERRATA.
N. B. (b) signifies from the bottom.
Page 1, l. 7, forofreadin.
33, l. 5 (b) — term — terms.
41, l. 7 (b) — with — with the.
43, l. 4 (b) — the — a.
45, l. 2 (b) — all — of.
50, l. 5, —at — as.
61, l. 7, —at — up.
85, l. 6, —of — out of.
92, l. 6, —unstrained — unrestrained.
109, l. 7, —of the — of.
121, l. 8 (b) — being — been.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 8 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1790

Online Library of Liberty: Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke
[Back to Table of Contents]
LETTERS TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE EDMUND
BURKE.
LETTER I.
Of The General Principles Of The French Revolution.
Dear Sir,
I Do not wonder that the late revolution of the French government, has excitedyour
attention, and that of a great part of the nation. “It is,” as you justly say, p. 11, “all
circumstances taken together, the most astonishing that has hitherto happened in the
world.” It is, therefore, a most interesting object both to philosophical and practical
politicians. It behoves them to consider the principles on which it has been made, that
if the conduct of the leaders in the business has been right, and if the scheme promises
to be beneficial to the country, it may, as far as their situations are similar, be imitated
in other countries; and that, if their conduct has been wrong, and the result of it
unpromising, the example may serve to deter others from any attempt of the like kind.
But though there is nothing extraordinary in this revolution having excited so much of
your attention,I am surprised that you should be so muchalarmed anddisturbedat it.
You appear to me not to be sufficiently cool to enter into this serious discussion. Your
imagination is evidently heated, and your ideas confused. The objects before you do
not appear in their proper shapes and colours; and, without denying them, you lose
sight of the great and the leading principles, on which all just governments are
founded, principles which I imagined had been long settled, and universally assented
to, at least by all who are denominatedwhigs,the friends of our own revolution, and
of that which has lately taken place in America. To this class of politicians, you have
hitherto professed to belong, and traces of these principles may be perceived in this
work of yours.
Notwithstanding “the sacredness,” as you call it, p. 29, “of an hereditary principle of
succession,” in our government, you allow of “a power of change in its application in
cases of extreme emergency;” adding, however, that “the change should be confined
to thepeccant partonly.” Nor do you deny that the great end and object of all
government, that which makes it preferable to a state of anarchy, is the good of the
people. It isbetterfor them, and they arehappierin a state of government. For the
same reason, you must allow that that particular form of govermnent, which is best
adapted to promote the happiness of any people, is the best for that people.
If you admit thus much, you must also allow that, since every private person is
justified in bettering his condition, and indeed commended for it; a nation is not to be
condemned for endeavouring to better theirs. Consequently, if they find their form of
government to be a bad one, whether it was so originally, or became so through abuse
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 9 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1790

Online Library of Liberty: Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke
or accident, they will do very well to change it for a better. A partial change, no
doubt, will be preferable to a total one, if a partial change will be sufficient for the
purpose. But if it appear that all attempts to mend an old constitution would be in
vain, and the people prefer a new one, their neighbours have no more business to find
fault with them, than with any individual, who should think it more adviseable to pull
down an old and inconvenient house, and build another from the foundation, rather
than lay out his money in repairs. Nations, no doubt, as well as individuals, may judge
wrong. They may act precipitately, and they may suffer in consequence of it: but this
is only a reason for caution, and does not preclude a right of judging and acting for
themselves, in the best manner they can.
“The very idea,” you say, p. 44, “of the fabrication of a new government is enough to
fill us with disgust and horror.” It is, no doubt, far from being a thing desirable in
itself; but it may nevertheless be necessary; and for all the evils arising from the
change, you should blame not the framers of the new government, but the wretched
state of the old one, and those who brought it into that state. That some very material
change was wanting in the old government of France, you cannot deny, after
allowing, p. 195, that “in that country the unlimited power of the sovereign over the
persons of his subjects, was inconsistent with law and liberty.” On other occasions, I
believe you have expressed yourself in a stronger manner than this. Iflawandliberty
were wanting in the old constitution, the peccant part must have been the very
foundation of it; so that nothing effectual could have been done short of taking down
the whole.
If these incontrovertibleprinciplesandfactsbe admitted, I can see no reason for your
exclaiming so violently as you do against the late revolution in France. Besides,
whatever has been done, and in whatever manner it has been done, if the nation itself,
whom alone it concerns, do not complain, we have no business to complain for them,
any farther than the interest we take in the welfare of others, may lead us to feel for
the distresses which we apprehend their folly and precipitancy may bring upon them. I
shall, however, briefly consider the principal of your objections to this revolution.
You consider the present National Assembly of France as usurpers, assuming a power
that does not belong to them. “I can never,” you say, p. 242, “consider this assembly
as any thing else than a voluntary association of men, who have availed themselves of
circumstances to seize upon the power of the state. They have not the sanction and
authority of the character under which they first met. They have assumed another, of a
very different nature, and have completely altered and inverted all the relations in
which they originally stood. They do not hold the authority they exercise under any
constitutional law of the state. They have departed from the instructions of the people
by whom they were sent, which instructions, as the assembly did not act in virtue of
any ancient usuage or settled law, were the sole source of their authority.”
Now, Sir, even allowing this to be true; admitting this National Assembly to have had
no regular summons to meet, or to do any business at all; supposing them to have
been men who rose out of the earth, or who dropped down from the clouds, or that no
body could tell whence they came, and that, without any authority whatever, they took
upon themselves to frame a new constitution of government for the French nation; if
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 10 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1790

Online Library of Liberty: Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke
the nation really approve of it, acquiesce in it, and actually adopt it, it becomes from
that time their own act, and the Assembly can only be considered as the proposers and
advisers. It is the acquiescence of the people that gives any form of government its
proper sanction, and that legalizes it. Changes of government cannot be brought about
by established forms and rules, because there is no superior power to prescribe those
rules. There are no supreme courts comprehending these great objects. Also, the cases
occur so rarely, and they are so unlike to one another, that it would be to no purpose
to look for precedents.
Now, that the French revolution is justifiable on this plain principle, is evident from
the single circumstance of the National Assembly having continued their sittings
without molestation, and from their decrees having been actually obeyed, for
something more than a year at least. This Assembly does not consist, I believe, of
more than about one thousand persons, and at first they had no army at their
command; whereas at present the whole force of the state is in their hands. This force
could not have been transferred from the king to them, without the consent both of the
army, and of the nation which supports that army. As the nation does not complain of
this translation of power, it is evident they do not think themselves aggrieved, and that
the change has been made with their approbation. Here, then, we see all the marks of
alegal government,or a government that is really thechoice of the people.I do not
say what difficulties may hereafter arise (which if they do, they will probably be the
effect of their former government) to induce them to change their opinion. For neither
that nation, nor any other, is omniscient and infallible.
Without examining into the former system of government, or the administration of it,
we may take for granted, that it must have become extremely odious to the country in
general, from the almost universal, and the very hearty, concurrence with which the
revolution was brought about. A whole people is not apt to revolt, till oppression has
become extreme, and been long continued, so that they despair of any other remedy
than that desperate one. The strength of an established government, especially when it
is in few hands, and has a large standing army at its command, is almost infinite; so
that many nations quictly suffer every evil, and the country becomes in a manner
desolate, without their making any attempt to relieve themselves. This is the case in
all the Turkish dominions, and is said to be very nearly so in Spain and other
countries. Whenever, therefore, we see a whole nation, or a great majority of it, rising
as one man against an old government, and overturning it, we may safely conclude
that their provocation was great, and their cause good.
An oppressed people do not, however, in general see any thing more than what they
immediately feel. All they think of is to shake off the load which they can no longer
bear; and having thought of nothing but the particular evil that galled them, they are
very apt, in their future settlement, to guard against that only, without attending to the
whole of their new situation, and the greater evils that may possibly arise from it.
Whether the French have done so or not, time must discover. But if the people in
general are well informed, and well disposed, they may make many experiments of
new forms of government without much inconvenience; and though beginning with a
very imperfect one, they may adopt a very good one at the last.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 11 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1790

Online Library of Liberty: Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke
Was it not predicted that the Americans, on their breaking off from this country,
would run into universal confusion, and immediately fall to cutting one another’s
throats? But though that disruption was a violent one, and was effected by a war,
which drained all their resources, they never suffered for want of government. When
the war was over they bore very contentedly several imperfect and disjointed forms;
and now, having taken much time to deliberate on the subject, they have adopted a
more comprehensive one. But of this they only propose to make a trial, and if it
should not answer, they will, no doubt, endeavour to improve upon it.
Now, why may not this be the case with the French, especially as they have no
enemies to contend with, and interrupt their proceedings. I do not, I own, distinctly
perceive the wisdom of several parts of the frame of government, at present adopted
by the National Assembly, and many of the remarks that you have made upon it, may,
for any thing that I know, be very just; but not being a judge of their circumstances,
and consequently of all their reasons, I presume that they could not for the present do
any better. In future time, however, whatever it be that is now deficient may be
supplied. And considering the apparent strength of the ancient French government,
and the great numbers that depended upon it (far more, I should imagine, than upon
our court and ministry in this country) I wonder that the revolution was brought about
with so much ease, and so little bloodshed.
I Am, &C.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 12 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1790

Online Library of Liberty: Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke
[Back to Table of Contents]
LETTER II.
Of Some Particulars In The New Constitution Of France, And
Some Circumstances Attending The Dissolution Of The Old
One.
Dear Sir,
IT is very possible that the National Assembly, having entered upon the business of
reforming the whole state in a very unexpected manner, when nothing could have
been preconcerted, may have acted injudiciously in more respects than one; but
allowance should be made for their peculiar circumstances. The opportunity that was
given them to act was sudden, and such as they might in vain have waited for, if they
had done nothing till they had been prepared to make the most of it. They did right,
therefore, to do the best they could, as the occasion offered.
They might, for example, have divided themselves into two houses, and, as in this
country, have given each house a negative in all their transactions, and another to the
king. But this might have appeared too hazardous at that time; and indeed it is very
probable that, upon that plan, nothing effectual could have been done at all. But they
may adopt this method if they should hereafter see reason for it. Power is more easily
given than taken away.
That they have nothing of the nature of aSenate,as you complain, p. 287, I do not
see; while they still retain a king, and allow him to appoint certain ministers of state.
They may have left too little power in the hands of the crown; but kingly power is a
plant which, having once taken root, is very apt to grow too luxuriant; and this,
though lopped, may sprout again. As the French kings had gradually acquired, and
grossly abused, their power, it is not to be wondered at, if, in the first instance, the
Assembly should have reduced it too low.
You particularly complain, p. 296, of the king not having the power of peace and war.
But was ever any power more grossly abused than this has been? Infinite have been
the evils brought upon whole countries, by princes having it in their power to involve
them in war at their pleasure, from motives of personal resentment and ambition, or
the mere caprice of those about them; and in France generally that of their mistresses.
“There is no other way,” you say, p. 296, “of keeping other potentates from intriguing
distinctly and personally with the members of your assembly, from intermeddling in
all your concerns, and fomenting in the heart of your country the most pernicious of
all factions; factions in the interest, and under the direction, of foreign powers.” But
eventhisis nothing, compared with the evils that states have suffered from the power
of peace and war being in the hands of the prince, that is, of his ministers; and cannot
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 13 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1790

Online Library of Liberty: Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke
foreign powers intrigue withthemas well as with the leaders of a popular assembly?
Did not the court of France intrigue with the ministry of our Charles II. and is it not
always done, more or less, by all ambassadors and their agents in all foreign courts?
But if any people was fairly represented in a National Assembly, so that their real
interests should be better consulted, causes of war would seldom occur, and
consequently there would be but little temptation to foreigners to intermeddle in their
concerns. For it has been peace or war that has been the chief subject of the intrigues
that you complain of.
The most serious difficulty that appears to me to threaten the French government,
arises from theirdebts,a difficulty brought upon them by their former government,
and which indeed made it impossible to go on any farther with it. This, therefore, is a
difficulty that does not necessarily attend the formation of the new government, but
has been occasioned by the unwillingness of the present governors, that those who
have had confidence in the state, should suffer from the errors of their predecessors. It
is the case of an heir, who will put himself to great inconvenience to pay the debts of
a profligate ancestor.
You cavil, among other things, at the low rank of the members of the National
Assembly; saying, p. 61, “That the majority are of the inferior, unlearned, mechanical,
merely instrumental, members of the profession of the law,” that is, such as our
attornies. “From the moment,” you say, “I read the lift, I saw distinctly, and very
nearly as it has happened, all that was to follow. It was not to be expected,” you say,
p. 63, “that they would attend to the stability of property, whose existence had always
depended upon whatever rendered property questionable, ambiguous, and obscure.”
I shall not call in question your gift of prophecy. It may be your peculiar talent to see
all events, past, present, and to come, in their most concealed causes, nor shall I
question what you assert to be a fact. But of whomsoever the National Assembly of
France consists, there cannot well be a doubt of their being a truer representation of
the French nation than our House of Commons, because there cannot well be a worse,
being in the opinion of most people, I doubt not, as well as that of Dr. Price, a mere
mockery ofrepresentation,notwithstanding the influence of those causes which I
acknowledge to give it the effect of a much better representation.
It signifies very little out of what class of men the members of the National Assembly
were chosen, since they must have been persons in whom their constituents thought
they could best confide. But if your reasoning be good, that lawyers, “whose existence
depends upon rendering property questionable, ambiguous, and obscure,” will not
attend to the stability of property, where is our policy in raising such men to the rank
of judges? We do not think our property less safe in their hands, because they have
always lived by what has been called theglorious uncertainty of the law.The first
American Congress, I very well remember, was said to consist chiefly of lawyers; nor
is it to be wondered at that it should be so; lawyers, who have the talent and the habit
of speaking in public, being generally conspicuous characters in all places. The study
of the law, moreover, leads them to understand the constitution of the country, and
their profession gives them a knowledge of mankind, and the habits of business. If the
lawyers of France do as well as the lawyers of America, they will soon wipe away the
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 14 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1790

Online Library of Liberty: Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke
reproach they may now lie under, and become the object of respect, perhaps of dread,
to those who at present despise them.
It is amusing to compare the sentiments of different writers on the same subject, and
to observe in how different a light the same thing appears to different minds. I cannot
give a better illustration of this, than by quoting what Dr. Ramsay, in hisHistory of
the American Revolution,says of the first Congress, as a contrast to what you say of
the National Assembly of France.
“Of the whole number of deputies which formed the Continental Congress of 1774,
one half were lawyers; gentlemen of that profession had acquired the confidence of
the inhabitants by their exertions in the common cause. The previous measures in the
respective provinces, had been planned and carried into effect more by lawyers than
by any other order of men. Professionally taught the rights of the people, they were
among the foremost to descry every attack made on their liberties. Bred in the habits
of public speaking, they made a distinguished figure in the meetings of the people,
and were particularly able to explain to them the tendency of the late acts of
parliament. Exerting their abilities and influence in the cause of their country, they
were rewarded with its confidence,” vol. 1. p. 134.
The mistakes you have sallen into, with respect to the present government of France, I
am informed are gross, and your censures founded on them, of course, misplaced.
You particularly amuse yourself and your readers with the division of the country, p.
254, into squares, and a sub-division of squares within squares, which has no
existence but in your own imagination, the actual division of the country being no
more squares than our counties.
Taking it for granted, that the present members of the National Assembly are not
eligible into the next, you deduce many alarming consequences from such an ill-
judged measure. But the measure is your own, not theirs; the present members being
as eligible as any others, and, it is generally supposed, that a great majority of them
have given so much satisfaction to their constituents, that they will not fail to be re-
elected. As you took so much time in preparing your publication for the press, you
would have done well to have employed part of it in procuring better information.
However, your mistakes will be the means of our getting more correct accounts of the
real state of facts; and if any of your censures on the new constitution of France be
just, they may be an useful and seasonable lesson to the great actors in the scene; who,
I doubt not, will readily learn what they can, even from an enemy.
You make the most tragical representation of the degraded state of the present king of
France, calling it, p. 99, “the most horrid, atrocious, and afflicting spectacle, that
perhaps ever was exhibited to the pity and indignation of mankind,” considering him
as a person who received his crown, with all its powers, from his ancestors, and who
had himself done nothing to deserve the treatment that he met with. Admitting this, if
by a succession of incroachments, the power ofthe crown itselfhad long been
enormous, should that be continued, to the terror and distress of the country, for the
sake of the innocent head that happens to wear it. And, after all, what has this king
suffered? He is still the first in rank, wealth, and power of any person in France. If
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 15 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1790

Online Library of Liberty: Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke
you say that this power is only nominal, I answer that the power of the most arbitrary
princes is little more. They are, in general, only instruments in the hands of those who
are about them. As to doing what a man really wishes to do, the last king of France
had very little of it; and in general, the higher any man stands in the order of society,
the less power he has of doing what he really likes, and the more of his time he spends
in doing what he had rather wish not to do, than other men.
You make a still more lamentable description of the indignities offered to the queen of
France; and on this subject you give the most unbounded scope to your eloquence*,
as if you were herknight,pledged to defend her honour. Now, such is the natural
prepossession of mankind, at least in this part of the world (in which the French
nation has generally been considered as foremost) in favour of the female sex, and
especially in exalted stations, that I think it will not be easy to account for the fall of
this queen from the height of popularity, to the abhorrence and contempt into which,
you tell us, she is sunk, without supposing something very material to her prejudice,
though I do not pretend to say what that is. And if she was that intriguing woman, and
that enemy to their liberties, that the French nation in general imagine her to have
been, she may think herself fortunate, in such a revolution as this has been, to have
escaped with life. But, after all, is the liberty and happiness of a whole nation to be
sacrificed to female beauty and complaisance?
Objects appear in very different lights to different persons, according to their
respective situations, and the opportunities they have of observing them. To you, Sir,
seventeen years ago, the queen of France, then the Dauphiness, appeared in all her
splendour, like “the morning star,” p. 112, decorating the face of heaven. To the
French themselves, at that time, she probably appeared in the same light; but in the
course of so many years progress, she has appeared to them to be nothing better than
a comet,foreboding every disaster, and bringing desolation and ruin on their country.
You saw nothing but the fine features, and imagined them to belong to a Venus, a
Juno, or a Pallas. The French, it seems, have discovered thesnaky hair,and find her
to be a mere Medusa; and the ten thousand swords,” that you say were then ready “to
leap from their scabbards to avenge even a look that threatened her with insult,”
would now be drawn against any who would defend her conduct.
You will probably say that something, at least, should have beenprovedagainst the
queen of France, as well as against the king. But where, Sir, was the court of law, or
justice, in which such a suit could be instituted? When there are no ordinary means of
redressing grievances, people who feel them, and have no other remedy, will have
recourse to extraordinary ones; and if thirty millions find their interests incompatible
with that of a few, they, of course, being the judges, will not hesitate to decide for
themselves, and carry that decision into execution. In this they will, no doubt, proceed
irregularly.But you, Sir, should have been upon the spot, and have told them how to
proceed in thatgraveanddecorous manner, in which you now say they ought to have
acted on this great occasion; and at the same time have obtained effectual redress of
their grievances. For without this, they would have done worse than nothing.
Kings and ministers of state are alone responsible for all the confusion and bloodshed
which attend those revolutions which their abuse of power has rendered necessary.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 16 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1790

Online Library of Liberty: Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke
They choak up the ordinary channels of justice, and then complain that it overflows
its bounds, and that the country is deluged by it. They who first raise a storm are
answerable for all the devastation that it may make.
You lay to the charge of the National Assembly what, it is evident, they never
authorised, and what, I doubt not, they condemn and regret, even more than you do.
“Their cruelty, you say, p. 58, has not been even the base result of fear. It has been the
effect of their sense of perfect safety, in authorising treasons, robberies, rapes,
assassinations, slaughters, and burnings, throughout their harrassed land. But the
cause of all was plain from the beginning. This unforced choice, this fond election, of
evil, would appear perfectly unaccountable, if we did not consider the composition of
the National Assembly, &c.”
This, Sir, is charging upon the National Assembly every outrage committed by
Frenchmen (and more, I believe, than ever were committed by them) which were any
way connected with the revolution. But is this equitable? Should any thing be laid to
the charge of any man, or any body of men, to which they were no way accessary, by
their concurrence at the time, or their approbation afterwards? Was the execution of
persons particularly obnoxious to the populace, and effected by the populace, to be
ascribed to the National Assembly? Or were the insults which you have so
pathetically described, as offered to your adorable queen of France, done by the
orders of that body? You must know that they were as innocent of them as the
parliament of Great Britain, or as yourself. When any murder is committed, is the first
person that you chuse to lay hold of, the guilty person?
In the same rash and indiscriminate manner you describe Dr. Price as exulting in the
above-mentioned horrid outrages, which, I dare say, give him much more serious
concern than they do you, and for a very obvious reason. He wishes to recommend the
revolution, and therefore is sorry for every thing that disgraces it; whereas you wish to
discredit it, and are evidently not displeased with any circumstance that favours your
purpose. Dr. Price rejoices in thegood,and you most uncandidly represent him as
rejoicing in theevilthat has necessarily accompanied it.
I Am, Dear Sir, Yours, &C.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 17 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1790

Online Library of Liberty: Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke
[Back to Table of Contents]
LETTER III.
Of The Nature Of Government, And The Rights Of Men And
Of Kings.
Dear Sir,
CONSIDERING how much has been written on the subject of government since the
Revolution in this country, an event which more than any thing else contributed to
open the eyes of Englishmen, with respect to the true principles of it, it is not a little
extraordinary that any man of reading and reflexion, as you are, should depart from
them so much as you have done.
To vindicate this Revolution, Lord Somers, Bishop Hoadley, Mr. Locke, and many
others, have laid it down as a maxim, that all power in any state is derived from the
people, and that the great object of all government, is the public good. As a
consequence from these fundamental principles, they maintain that all magistrates,
being originally appointed by the people, are answerable to them for their conduct in
office, and removeable at their pleasure. The right of resisting an oppressive
government, that is, such as the people shall deem to be oppressive, they hold most
sacred.
You, Sir, do not directly, and in so many words, deny these great principles of all
government, or the general conclusion drawn from them. In fact, you admit them all,
when you allow, p. 87, that “civil society is made for the advantage of man.” But you
advance what is really inconsistent with these leading principles, and you would tie up
our hands from making any effectual use of them. You seem to have forgotten what
you must have formerly learned; but it is too late forus to go to school again, and
relearn the first elements of political science. What our predecessors took great pains
toprove,we now receive asaxioms, and without hesitation act upon them.
To make thepublic goodthe standard of right or wrong, in whatever relates to society
and government, besides being the most natural and rational of all rules, has the
farther recommendation of being the easiest of application. Either whatGod has
ordained,or whatantiquityauthorises, may be very difficult to ascertain; but what
regulation is most conducive to thepublic good,though not always without its
difficulties, yet in general it is much more easy to determine. But suppose a nation
should never have had a free government, or could not prove that they ever had one,
are they for that reason always to continue slaves? Would it be unlawful, or wrong, in
the Turks to do what the French nation has now done?
You treat with ridicule the idea of therights of men,and suppose that mankind, when
once they have entered into a state of society, necessarily abandon all their proper
natural rights,and thenceforth have only such as they derive from society. “As to the
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 18 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1790

Online Library of Liberty: Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke
share of power,” you say, p. 87, “authority and direction, which each individual ought
to have in the management of the state, that I must deny to be among the direct
original rights of man in civil society; for I have in my contemplation the civil, social
man, and no other. It is a thing to be settled by convention.”
But what does thisconventionrespect, beside the secure enjoyment of such
advantages,or rights,as have been usually termednatural,as life, liberty, and
property, which men hadfrom nature, without societies, or artificial combinations of
men? Men cannot, surely, be said togive uptheir natural rights by entering into a
compact for the bettersecuringof them? And if they make a wise compact, they will
never wholly exclude themselves from all share in the administration of their
government, or some control over it. For without this their stipulated rights would be
very insecure.
However, should any people be so unwise as to leave the whole administration of
their government, without any express right of control, in the hands of their
magistrates; if those magistrates do not give the people what they deem to be an
equivalent for what they gave up for the accommodation of others, they are certainly
at liberty to consider the original compact as broken. They then revert to a state of
nature, and may enter into a new state of society, and adopt a new form of
government, in which they may make better terms for themselves.
It is one of the most curious paradoxes in this work of yours, which abounds with
them, that the rights of men above-mentioned, called by you, p. 91, “the pretended
rights of the French theorists, are all extremes, and in proportion as they are
metaphysically true, they are morally and politically false.” Now bymetaphysically
true can only be meantstrictlyandproperlytrue, and how this can be in any sense
false,is to me incomprehensible. If the above-mentioned rights be thetrue,that is the
just,andreasonablerights of men, they ought to be provided for in all states, and all
forms of government; and if they be not, the people have just cause to complain, and
to look out for some mode of redress.
You strongly reprobate the doctrine ofkings being the choice of the people,a doctrine
advanced, but not first advanced, by Dr. Price, in his Revolution Sermon. “This
doctrine,” you say, p. 17, “as applied to the prince now on the British throne, is either
nonsense, and therefore neither true nor false, or it affirms a most unfounded,
dangerous, illegal, and unconstitutional position. According to this spiritual doctor of
politics, if his majesty does not owe his crown to the choice of his people, he is no
lawfulking, &c.”
On the same principle you equally reprobate the doctrine of the king being theservant
of the people,whereas the law, as you say, p. 41, calls himour sovereign lord the
king*. But since you allow, ibid. that “kings are in one sense, undoubtedly, the
servants of the people, because their power has no other rational end than that of the
general advantage,” it is evident that it is only Dr. Price’swords that you quarrel with.
Your ideasare, in fact, the very same with his, though you call his doctrine, p. 35, not
onlyunconstitutional,butseditious;adding, that “it is now publicly taught, avowed,
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 19 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1790

Online Library of Liberty: Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke
and printed,” whereas it was taught, avowed, and even printed, before either you or
Dr. Price were born.
Has not the chief magistrate in every country, as well as the chief officer in every
town, a certaindutyto perform, with certain emoluments, andprivileges,allowed him
in consideration of the proper discharge of that duty? And if the town officer, though
having chief authority in his district, yet, in consequence of being appointed and paid
for his services by the town, is never considered in any other light than that of the
servant of the town,is not the chief magistrate in any country, let him be called
sovereign, king,or what you please (for that is only a name) theservant of the people?
What real difference can there be in the two cases? They each discharge a certain
duty, and have a certain stipulated reward for it. The office beinghereditary,makes
no real difference. In our laws, and those of other nations, there are precedents enow
of men’s whole estates being confiscated for crimes; and this of course excludes the
heir.
If, as you expressly acknowledge, the only rational end of the “power of a king is the
general advantage,that is, thegood of the people,must not the people be, of course,
the judges, whether they derive advantage from him and his government or not, that
is, whether they be well or illservedby him? Though, there is no express, there is,
you must acknowledge a virtual,contract between the king and the people.This,
indeed, is particularly mentioned in the Act which implies the abdication of king
James, though you say, p. 38, it istoo guarded and too circumstantial;and what can
this contract be, but a stipulation for protection, &c. on the part of the king, and
allegiance on the part of the people? If, therefore, instead ofprotection,they find
oppression, certainly allegiance is no longer due. Hence, according to common sense,
and the principles of the Revolution, the right of a subject to resist a tyrant, and
dethrone him; and what is this, but in other words, shocking as they may sound to
your ears, dismissing, orcashiering a bad servant,as a person who had abused his
trust?
So fascinating is the situation in which our kings are placed, that it is of great
importance to remind them of the true relation they bear to the people, or, as they are
fond of calling them,their people.They are too apt to imagine that their rights are
independent of the will of the people, and consequently that they are not accountable
to them for any use they may make of their power; and their numerous dependents,
and especially the clergy, are too apt to administer this pleasing intoxicating poison.
This was the ruin of the Stuarts, and it is a danger that threatens every prince, and
every country, from the same quarter. Your whole book, Sir, is little else than a
vehicle for the same poison, inculcating, but inconsistently enough, a principle of
respect for princes,independent of their being originally the choice of the people, as
if they had some natural and indefeasible right to reign over us, they being born to
command, and we to obey; and then, whether the origin of this power be divine, or
have any other source independent of the people, it makes no difference to us.
With the superstitious respect for kings, and the spirit of chivalry, which nothing but
an age of extreme barbarism recommended, and which civilization has banished, you
seem to think that every thing great and dignified has left us, “Never, never more,”
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 20 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1790

Online Library of Liberty: Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke
you say, p. 113, “shall we behold that generous loyalty to rank and sex, that proud
submission, that dignified obedience, that subordination of the heart, that kept alive
even in servitude itself the spirit of an exalted freedom. The unbought grace of life,
the cheap defence of nations, the nurse of manly sentiment and heroic enterprize, is
gone. It is gone; that sensibility of principle, that chastity of honour, which felt a stain
like a wound, which inspired courage whilst it mitigated serocity, which enobled
whatever it touched, and under which vice itself lost half its evil, by losing all its
grossness.”
This is perhaps the most admired passage in your whole performance; but it appears
to me, that in a great pomp ofwords, it contains but fewideas,and some of them
inconsistent and absurd. So different also are men’s feelings, from the difference, no
doubt, of our educations, and the different sentiments we voluntarily cherish through
life, that a situation which gives you the idea ofpride,gives me that ofmeanness.
You are proud of what, in my opinion, you ought to be ashamed, the idolatry of a
fellow creature, and the abasement of yourself. It discovers a disposition from which
no “manly sentiment, or heroic enterprize” can be expected. I submit to a king, or to
any other civil magistrate, because the good order of society requires it, but I feel no
pridein thatsubmission; and the “subordination of my heart,” I reserve forcharacter
only, not forstation.As a citizen, the object of my respect isthe nation,andthe laws.
Themagistrates,by whatever name they are called, I respect only as the confidential
servants of the nation, and the administrators of the laws.
These sentiments, just in themselves, and savouring of no superstition, appear to me
to become men, whom nature has made equal, and whose great object, when formed
into societies, it should be to promote their common happiness. I am proud of feeling
myselfa man among men, and I leave it you, Sir, to be “proud of yourobedience,and
to keep alive,” as well as you can, “in servitude itself the spirit of an exalted
freedom.” I think it much easier, at least, to be preservedoutof a state of servitude
thaninit. You take much pains to gild your chains, but they are chains still.
If, Sir, you profess this “generous loyalty, this proud submission, this dignified
obedience, and this subordination of the heart,” both torank and sex,how
concentrated and exalted must be the sentiment, where rank and sex are united! What
anexalted freedomwould you have felt, had you had the happiness of being a subject
of the Empress of Russia; your sovereign, being then awoman? Fighting under her
auspices, you would no doubt, have been the most puissant of knights errant, and her
redoubted champion, against the whole Turkish empire, the sovereign of which is
only aman.
“It is to no purpose to say,” as you do, p. 19, “that the king of Great Britain reigns at
this day by a fixed rule of succession, according to the laws of his country, and that he
holds his crown in contempt of the choice of the Revolution society, which has not a
single vote for a king among them, either individually or collectively;” when you
acknowledge that “all the kingdoms of Europe were, at a remote period, elective,” and
that “the present king holds his rank no longer than while the legal conditions of the
compact of sovereignty are performed by him.” This, Sir, is granting all that we,
seditious as our doctrine is, contend for. Here is, according to yourself, a certain
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 21 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1790

Online Library of Liberty: Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke
conditionon which kings reign. If, therefore, that condition be not performed, the
obligation of allegiance is discharged.
Though we do not chuse any particular king, the nation originally chose to be
governed by kings,with such limitations, with respect to their duty and prerogatives,
as they then chose to prescribe. And whether the departure from the original and
proper duty of a king be made at once, or by degrees, which has generally been the
case; and though the people may have been restrained by their circumstances from
checking the incroachments of their kings, therightof doing it must ever remain
inherent in them. They must always have a power of resuming what themselves gave,
when the condition on which it was given is not performed. They can surely recal a
trust that has been abused, and reinstate themselves in their former situation, or in a
better, if they can find one.
If there be, what you allow, acompact of sovereignty,who are theparties,but the
peopleand theking;and if the compact be broken on his side, are not the rank and the
privileges, which he held upon the condition of observing the term of the compact,
forfeited? “The rule of succession,” you say, “is according to the laws of his country.”
But what, according to yourself, is the origin of both our common and statute law?
“Both these descriptions of law,” you say, p. 28, “are of the same force, and are
derived from an equal authority, emanating from the common agreement, and original
compact of the state(communi sponsione reipublicæ)and as such are equally binding
on king and people too, as long as the terms are observed, and they continue the the
same body politic.” Laws, then, not coming down from heaven, but being made by
men, may also be changed by them; and what is aconstitution of government,but the
greater lawsof the state? Kings, therefore, as well as the people, may violate these
laws, by which they are equally bound, and if other violators of law be punishable, by
degradation or otherwise, why should kings be excepted? Aretheirviolations of the
law or the constitution, less injurious to the commonwealth than those of other
transgressors? Let the punishment of kings be asgraveanddecorous, p. 23, as you
please, but let justice, substantial justice, be done.
I Am, Dear Sir,
Yours, &C.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 22 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1790

Online Library of Liberty: Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke
[Back to Table of Contents]
LETTER IV.
Of The Revolution In England Compared With That In
France.
Dear Sir,
IT is impossible to consider the late Revolution in France without having in our eye
that which took place in England in 1688. This has had so much of the cordial
approbation of all classes of people here, at least all those who are denominated
whigs,that you found yourself under the necessity of approving of it. But you wish to
distinguish between the principles on which the great actors in that memorable event
proceeded, and those of the National Assembly in France. The promoters of the
English Revolution, you would have us understand, were not guided by any view to
thenatural(or, as you affect to call them, thechimerical) rights of men,but were
influenced by a regard to rights sanctioned byancient possession,and consequently
that their example furnishes no authority for any people to chuse their own governors,
or to dismiss them for misconduct.
You appeal toLord Somers, p. 27, for the principles of the English Revolution. Let
his writings, then, explain his sentiments on the nature of government. Now the very
title page of a tract generally ascribed to him, entitled,the Judgment of whole
Kingdoms and Nations concerning the Rights, Power, and Prerogative of Kings, and
the Rights, Privileges, and Properties of the People,asserts, that “all magistrates and
governors proceed from the people.” This he proves at large in the course of the work,
in which he shows, as an inference from this great principle, that the people, when
oppressed, are justifiable in relieving themselves by a change of their governors, or of
their government; exploding, in a variety of lights, the slavish doctrine, to use his own
terms, ofpassive obedience and loyalty.
One of the most extraordinary of your assertions, with respect to the Revolution in
England, is the following, “So far,” you say, p. 27, “is it from being true, that we
acquired a right by the Revolution to elect our kings, that if we had possessed it
before, the English nation did at that time most solemnly renounce and abdicate it for
themselves, and for all their posterity, for ever.” But could they seriously mean to
bind their posterity from ever doing again what they themselves then did? Did they
not by changing the natural succession of the kings of this realm, actuallyexercisethe
right of chusing kings, declaring what description of persons should from that time
succeed to the crown? And what any one parliament did, a succeeding one might, no
doubt, undo.
But that no such thing as a renunciation of a right to do any thing of this kind, was
really meant by the legislature of that age, is evident from the Act of the sixth of
Queen Anne, pointed out to Dr. Price, by Lord Stanhope, from which it appears that
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 23 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1790

Online Library of Liberty: Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke
your assertion is even nothing less thanhigh treason.The words of the Act are as
follows, “If any person shall, by writing or printing, maintain, and affirm, that the
kings or queens of this realm, with and by the authority of Parliament, are not able to
make laws and statutes of sufficient validity, to limit the crown, and the descent,
inheritance, and government thereof, every such person shall be guilty of high
treason.”
Far am I from wishing to bring you into any serious inconvenience by representing
you as having offended against the laws of your country; but I wish it may serve as a
hint, to pay more attention to the great principles of our constitution, as well as to the
universal principles of government, and therights of men,offensive as the term may
be to you, for the future.
You say, p. 31. “The gentlemen of thesociety for revolutions” (as you
contemptuously call it) “see nothing of that in 1688, but the deviation from the
constitution; and they take the deviation from the principle, for the principle.” Let us
then consider the simplefact,that we may discover the trueprincipleof the
proceeding, and examine the justice of your complaint. A king had abused his trust,
and, in the construction of the remaining governing powers of the country, had
virtuallyabdicated the government.According to the established rule of succession,
his son should have succeeded him, but they apprehended the same evils from the son,
which they had experienced from the father, and likewise from all princes of the same
description with the father, that is, all who should profess the Roman Catholic
religion. They therefore, made a law to exclude all such princes, and fixed the
succession in the nearest Protestant line. But, in conjunction with the first of this line,
they chose a person entirely foreign to it, who had no legal pretensions to the crown at
all, being only the husband of Queen Mary, as Prince George of Denmark was of
Queen Anne.
Here, then, was achoicemade, both of a particular kingpro tempore, and also ofa
new line of successionfor future kings. Certainly, therefore, if the conduct of our
ancestors in that period be any precedent for future proceedings, it authorizes the
people of this country not only to make any change in the rule of succession to the
crown, but to do whatever they shall think necessary for the redress of their
grievances. This was unquestionably the properreason, motive, principle,or rule,of
their conduct; and to act upon it in any future time cannot with propriety be called
taking “the deviation from their principle for the principle.” To do any thing else that
shall be deemed necessary to remove any present evils, and to prevent the recurrence
of them, would be doing no more than they would have done in our circumstances.
Considering the reverence that is always paid to whatever isancient,it is certainly
wise in any nation to preserve old institutions as long as they are tolerable, because
the people will bear with them better than with new ones. This principle no doubt,
influenced our ancestors at the Revolution, and at other times. They contented
themselves with removing the pressing grievance, and kept as near to the ancient
system as they could. At the Revolution, there was no occasion for any thing more, at
least the country would not bear any thing more, than a deviation from the line of
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 24 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1790

Online Library of Liberty: Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke
succession to the crown, leaving the Popish, and adopting the Protestant line. But if
more had been wanted, they would certainly have done more.
You call the Revolution, p. 24, “an act of necessity.” But, what was it that made it
necessary? On whatpolitical principlewas the necessity founded? Was it not deemed
necessary because the people apprehended that their liberties, and consequently their
happiness, were endangered by the measures of the king; and therefore, though, as
you justly say, p. 44, “a revolution is the last resource of the thinking and the good,” it
was what they found themselves driven to. It was the less of two evils which they had
in prospect; and what they did they thought to be necessary for the removal, and
prevention, of the evil. And on the sameprinciplethat they changed the order of
succession, they would have changed the whole frame of the government. Had they
apprehendedgovernment by kingsin general to be as great a grievance as that by
Popish kings, they would have abolished kingly government altogether, and this
country would now have been a republic.
When ever circumstances have been favourable to greater changes, wise nations have
not failed to adopt them. When America was driven, as you will allow (for at that time
you were very active in the business, and many a time have I, with singular
satisfaction, heard you plead the cause of American liberty) by the oppression of this
country, to break entirely from it, the Americans, sensible of more evils attending
their former government, than our ancestors at the revolution, ventured to do a great
deal more, and set a glorious example to France, and to the world. They formed a
completely new government on the principles ofequal liberty,and therights of men,
“without nobles,” as Dr. Price said, “without bishops, and without a king,” which,
indeed, the Dutch, after their separation from the Spanish monarchy, did in a great
measure before them. If arbitrary princes tremble at these greatexamples(at the very
idea of which you yourself, as if you were a part of royalty, and appertaining to it,
tremble) it is time that they who so long have made others tremble, should, in their
turn, tremble themselves. But let thepeoplerejoice. It will either make their princes
keep within bounds, or encourage them to hope that the time of their deliverance is at
hand.
That all persons have not the same dread of revolutions which has seized on you, and
that the genuine principles of the Revolution are still preserved, and taught in this
country, will appear from the following extracts fromMr. Paley’s Principles of Moral
and political Philosophy,with which I shall close this letter.
“Government may be too secure.The greatest tyrants have been those, whose titles
were the most unquestioned. Whenever, therefore, the opinion of right becomes too
predominant and superstitious, it is abated bybreaking the custom.Thus the
Revolution broke thecustom of succession,and thereby moderated both in the prince
and people, those lofty notions of hereditary right, which in the one were become a
continual temptation to tyranny, and disposed the other to invite servitude, by undue
compliances and dangerous concessions.” p. 411, Quarto Edition.
“The true reason why mankind hold in detestation the memory of those who have sold
their liberty to a tyrant, is, that together with their own, they sold commonly, or
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 25 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1790

Online Library of Liberty: Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke
endangered, the liberty of others; which certainly they had no right to dispose of.” p.
77.
“No usage, law, or authority whatever, is so binding, that it need or ought to be
continued, when it may be changed with advantage to the community. The family of
the prince, the order of succession, the prerogative of the crown, the form and parts of
the legislature, together with respective powers, office, duration, and mutual
dependency of the several parts, are all only so manylaws,mutable like other laws,
whenever expediency requires, either by the ordinary act of the legislature, or if the
occasion deserve it, by the interposition of the people. These points are wont to be
approached with a kind of awe, they are represented to the mind as principles of the
constitution, settled by our ancestors, and being settled to be no more committed to
innovation or debate, as foundations never to be stirred; as the terms and conditions of
the social compact, to which every citizen of the state has engaged his fidelity, by
virtue of a promise, which he cannot now recal. Such reasons have no place in our
system: to us, if there be any good reason for treating these with more deference and
respect than other laws, it is either the advantage of the present constitution of
government which reason must be of different force in different countries) or because,
in all countries, it is of importance, that the form and usage of governing be
acknowledged and understood, as well by the governors as the governed, and because
the seldomer it is changed the more it will be respected by both sides.” p. 426.
I Am, Dear Sir,
Yours, &C.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 26 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1790

Online Library of Liberty: Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke
[Back to Table of Contents]
LETTER V.
Of The Revolution Society In England, And Mr. Burke’S
Reflexions On Dr. Price.
Dear Sir,
YOU are exceedingly offended at the conduct of the Revolution Society in England,
for sending congratulations to the National Assembly in France. “I should think it,”
you say, p. 6, “at least improper and irregular, to open a formal public correspondence
with the actual government of a foreign nation, without the express authority of the
government under which I live.” You think it was done “under an equivocal
description, which to many, unacquainted with our usages, might make the address
appear as the act of persons in some sort of a corporate body, acknowledged by the
laws of the kingdom, and authorised to speak the sense of some part of it. It is the
policy,” you say, p. 7, “that has very much the complexion of a fraud.”
But what occasion could there be to ask leave of the government of one country to
send an address to that of another, unless it had beenaffectedby the correspondence;
and inthiscase the English government had nothing more to do with the transaction
than any private individual in the country. Was any thing said by the Revolution
Society,in the nameof the government of this country, or was the latter at all pledged
to do one thing or another in the business?
As to such a respectable body of men as the National Assembly of France noticing the
address of those who compose the Revolution Society in England; it is nothing new or
uncommon, either for small bodies of men to address large ones, or for large societies
to notice such addresses; and what material difference is there, whether the persons
addressing, and those addressed, be of the same country, or of different countries?
The only question is, whether the address, or the notice, were proper or improper.
The National Assembly of France could not be so ignorant of the constitution of
England, as to suppose that theRevolution Societywas a body authorized by the state,
or that it had any connexion with the government of the country; so that there could
be nofraudor impositionin the case; and it may be easily supposed, that, being the
founders of a new system of government in France, which has hitherto been
considered as thenatural enemy ofEngland,they might think it wise to embrace the
first opportunity of shewing that they were disposed to be ourfriends,and that they
took it kindly, that any number of respectable individuals in this country should
approve of their proceedings. As far as the transaction went, it afforded a prospect of
future good neighbourhood.
The members of the French Assembly would judge of theextentof the friendly
disposition of this country towards them, by the names of the persons who promoted
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 27 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1790

Online Library of Liberty: Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke
the measure; and when they saw that ofDr. Price,so well known, and so favourably
known, for true patriotism, disinterested benevolence, and public spirit, both in France
and America, they would naturally, and justly, conclude, that, though no great part of
the English nation was present, those who were spoke the sentiments of great
numbers, and those the most respectable in the country. The good will of such men as
Dr. Price (in whatever part of the globe, or for whatever purpose assembled) even the
National Assembly of France might conceive to be no inconsiderable sanction to their
proceedings.
Where is the great impropriety of a nation receiving even advice, and much more
accepting congratulations, from single men of eminent wisdom and of virtue? And in
this light thousands regard Dr. Price, and notwithstanding the odium which you, in
vain, endeavour to throw upon him, and which only recoils upon yourself, his name
will be known, and respected, as long as respect for religion, for virtue, and for the
just rights of mankind, shall exist.
The discourse which gives you so much offence, was indeed delivered from apulpit,
and is commonly called asermon; but this is all the impropriety that belongs to it, and
therefore affects thetitleonly. It was delivered to a number of political friends, on a
week day, destined to a political purpose, and might perhaps as well have been
delivered in the room in which the company dined. No preacher, I will venture to say,
more scrupulously adapts his usual discourses to the real occasions of a christian
audience, than Dr. Price does; and had you, Sir, been one of his stated hearers (though
you may shudder at the idea of going into aConventicle) you would, I doubt not, have
been both a wiser and a better man than you now are, wise and good as you,
nevertheless, may be; for I do not judge of your usual temper and disposition from the
strain of this most intemperate publication. I know you, and I know it to be unworthy
of you.
Besides, the pulpit has not been thought profaned by all subjects of apolitical,if of a
generally useful,nature. If so, certainly the conduct of the clergy must be severely
censured for the usual strain of their preaching on the 30th of January. If they preach
in defence ofarbitrary power,which they generally have done on that day, why may
not we preach in defence of the great principle ofequal liberty,and the most
importantright of resistanceto such governments as they recommend?
You seem to take particular pleasure in comparingDr. PricetoHugh Peters,who
expressed himself in the same language with respect to the death of king Charles, that
Dr. Price has made use of with respect to the glorious prospect of things that has
opened upon us by the late Revolution in France. No doubt, a very handsome face
may have some features resembling those in a very ugly one, and therefore Dr. Price
may, without any reflexion upon him, resemble Hugh Peters in his abhorrence of
tyranny, though very different from him in other respects. Bishop Burnet calls Peters
“a sort of enthusiastic buffoon preacher, and a very vitious man,” and he represents
him as dying in the most cowardly manner*. But will this character apply to Dr.
Price, a man whom the President of the National Assembly of France has styled, and
justly styled, theApostle of Liberty,though you call him theDoctor of Politics,p. 17,
thePolitical Divine,p. 20, and load him with every other epithet of contempt that
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 28 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1790

Online Library of Liberty: Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke
your exuberant imagination, unrestrained by any regard to decency, can supply; at the
same time that you acknowledge, p. 13, that he has “the best intentions in the world,”
though as an enemy to civil establishments of religion, you deny him, p. 155, a place
amonghonest enthusiasts,and class him withcheats and deceivers.
According to you, this Hugh Peters rode in a kind of triumph on the bringing of king
Charles a prisoner to London, and he may have triumphed in an indecent and an
improper manner; but, in my opinion, there was sufficient cause for triumph. The
thirtieth of Januarywas (to use a phrase of Admiral Keppel’s) aproud day for
England, as well as thefourteenth of Julyfor France, and it will be remembered as
such by the latest posterity offreemen.Let all tyrants read the history of both, and
tremble. Good princes will read it without any unpleasant emotion.
I Am, Dear Sir,
Yours, &C.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 29 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1790

Online Library of Liberty: Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke
[Back to Table of Contents]
LETTER V.
Of The Interference Of The State In Matters Of Religion In
General.
Dear Sir,
IT was the devout wish of Job, who, with exemplary patience, had borne much
calumny, as well as sufferings of other kinds, that hisadversary had written a book.
The favour which this good man could not obtain, the despised and oppressed
Dissenters have at length been indulged with from you, at least so far as relates to the
cause of your strong attachment to the established church of this country, which, no
doubt, induced you to enter so warmly as you did into the opposition to our late
claims in the House of Commons. We are now happy in having an opportunity of
viewing, and examining, the true springs of your conduct, and are not obliged to
collect your arguments from uncertain report, or the mutilated, and, no doubt, very
often false, accounts in the newspapers. We have now the reasoning of the senator
from the senator himself.
I rather wonder, however, at this conduct inyou,when I find you lamenting, p. 136,
that “it has been our misfortune, and not, as these gentlemen think it” (meaning, no
doubt, myself as well at others) “the glory of this age, that every thing is to be
discussed.” For certainly such a publication as this of yours, you could not but think,
must lead to much discussion. If, therefore, you thought this to be a dangerous
process, with respect either toChurchor State,you certainly ought not to have
entered upon it, by publishing any thing on the subject; unless, indeed, you had
thought (which perhaps may have been the case) that your publication would
effectually deter all opponents; your reasoning being so forcible as to preclude, and be
an effectual bar to, all farther discussion on the subject; nor do I much wonder at your
entertaining this idea, from the exhibition you have given us of the state of your own
mind with respect to it.
“Our church establishment,” you say, p. 136, “is the first of our prejudices. It is,” you
say again, “the first, the last, and the midst in our minds,” that is, it occupies the
whole capacity of them, so that they cannot admit any thing else, at least any thing of
an opposite nature. Of course, the maxims on which you proceed must toyouappear
incontrovertible. You, therefore, very naturally add, “it is not a prejudice destitute of
reason, but involving in it profound and extensive wisdom.” For such is the opinion
that we all entertain of prejudices deeply rooted in our own minds; though it is no
uncommon thing for what appears to beprofound and extensive wisdomto one man,
to appear the extreme offollyto another; and unfortunately (owing perhaps to the
difference of our educations, and early habits) this is precisely the difference between
you and me. What you admire I despise, and what you think highly useful, I am
persuaded is very mischievous.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 30 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1790

Online Library of Liberty: Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke
However, notwithstanding the great difference in ourconclusions,we have, I
perceive, some great and leadingcommon principles;so that it may not be difficult to
discover which of us has departed the farthest from them. I shall endeavour to shew
our readers, that with these common principles, your conclusions are wholly
discordant; and I flatter myself that, differently as we think on a variety of subjects,
we have more common principles than you have given sufficient attention to, and
more than you really act upon. You cannot, for example, have that dislike to
discussionwhich you profess, because, in this and in other publications, as well as in
your speeches in the House of Commons, you have entered largely into many
discussions; and you must also agree with me in thinking, that the more important any
subject is, or the more interesting it is to men, either as individuals, or members of
society, the greater call there is for an accurate discussion of every thing relating to it;
because, in things of this nature, mistakes are the most dangerous, and you are far
from supposingreligionto be a matter of indifference, either to individuals, or to
society. And how can we guard against, or indeed be apprized of, any mistakes,
without due examination, or discussion?
That our readers may see at one view what it is that you maintain with respect to civil
establishments of religion, I shall, before I enter upon the discussion of them, give our
readers a summary view of all your positions. Confounding, as you evidently do, the
idea ofreligionitself, with that of thecivil establishmentof it, you say, “It is the basis
of civil society, and essential to every state,” insomuch that you even question
whether it belawfulto be without one. So far, you think, is the church from having
any dependence upon the state, that the state has not even “the property, or
dominion,” of any thing belonging to the church, being only the “guardian” of the
revenues of the church, and holding them in trust for its use. You, therefore, hold that
the property of the church is unalienable, and not to be touched in any emergency of
state whatever. Religion, you maintain, derives its estimation and effect, from the
riches and magnificence of its establishment; that such establishment is calculated for
the multitude, that it is peculiarly useful both to the poor and the rich, and, though
necessary to all states, is more proper for a democratical, than any other form of
government.
Now, Sir, strange as it may appear to you, my ideas, in all these respects, are the very
reverse of yours. Religion I consider as a thing that requires no civil establishment
whatever, and that its beneficial operation is injured by such establishment, and the
more in proportion to its riches. I am satisfied that such an establishment, instead of
being any advantage, is a great incumbrance to a state, and in general highly
unfavourable to its liberties. Civil establishments of christianity were altogether
unknown in the early ages, and gained ground by very slow degrees, as other
corruptions and abuses in the system did. I am clearly of opinion, that the state has a
right to dispose ofallproperty within itself; that of the church, as well as of every
thing else of a public nature, and that religion has naturally nothing at all to do with
any particular form of civil government; being useful indeed to all persons, the rich as
well as the poor, but only as individuals.
Let us now trace our very different ideas to their proper source, and compare them
with our common principles; and I am happy to find that we agree with respect to the
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 31 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1790

Online Library of Liberty: Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke
proper use and advantage of government in general, which is a very material
circumstance in our discussion. “Government, you say, p. 88, is a contrivance of
human wisdom, to provide for human wants, and men have a right that these wants be
provided for by this wisdom.”
You will not, however, say thatallhuman wants are to be provided for by
government; for it is manifestly onlysome of them that its great power can reach, and
therefore much must be left to the individuals themselves. This you allow, when you
say, p. 87, “whatever each man can separately do, without trespassing upon others, he
has a right to do for himself.” Since then I caneatanddrinkwhatever suits my
appetite, without trespassing upon any body, you will allow that the state has no
business to prescribe what I shall eat or drink, or when, or in what manner, I shall do
it. I imagine, also, you will allow that my neighbours have no right to complain of me,
if, when I am indisposed, I treat myself as I think proper, taking whatever advice, or
whatever medicines, I please. They may do the same, and I shall not complain of
them. Pray then, what right, on this plain and obvious principle, advanced by yourself,
has any man to complain of me if Iworship God in what manner I please, or if I do
not chuse to worship God at all? Does my conduct in this respect injure them? What,
then, has the state, or my neighbours, to do in this business, any more than with my
food or my medicine?
In this, and many other things, government has taken a great deal too much upon it;
and has by this means brought itself into great and needless embarrassments. In many
things besides the article of religion, men have busied themselves inlegislatingtoo
much, and when it would have been better if individuals had been left to think and act
for themselves.
This, you will say, amounts to nothing more than a plea fortolerationin matters of
religion, which you are ready to allow. As a foundation for acivil establishmentof
religion, you say that “man is by his constitution a religious animal;” for all that
follows in defence of establishments, is immediately connected withthis.Now,
admitting this, which however is not true (because we may easily conceive of a Being,
possessed of all the essential properties ofhuman nature, without any knowledge of
religion at all) government can have no more right to interfere with respect tothis
constitutional property of man, than any other constitutional, or essential property;
and with respect to many of these, you must allow that men should be left to
themselves. For example, man is constitutionally and necessarily aneatingand a
sleepinganimal; but does it therefore follow that civil government has any thing to do
with his eating or sleeping? And if not, neither has it any right to prescribe to him in
matters ofreligion,merely because he is by constitution areligious animal.Man is a
thinkingandreasoninganimal; but must all his thinking and reasoning be subject to
the control of the state? Man has also been defined to beanimal risibile,but must we
therefore never laugh but when our grave and wise governors shall give us leave? We
often indulge ourselves even in laughing at them.
As you do not deal much indefinitions,or axioms, I am obliged to collect your idea of
theprincipleon which church establishments are founded, from casual expressions,
and the general scope of your declamation. Systematical divines, in this country, have,
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 32 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1790

Online Library of Liberty: Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke
in different circumstances of their affairs, advanced two very different principles, as
the basis of civil establishments of religion. At first it was universally asserted that
christianity, and some particular form of it, ought to be established, maintained, and
protected, by the civil power, because it wastrue;that it became the civil magistrate,
as thevicegerent of God,to stand up for the honour of God, and of his truth; so that it
was of no consequence at all what was the religion of his subjects. It was his duty to
inforcetruth,and to bring them as soon as he could to the profession and due
maintenance of it.
But when it was urged that civil magistrates were not always the best judges of
religious truth, that they had often little leisure for the study of religion, and were apt
to be imposed upon by priests, and others whose interest it was to mislead them;
besides that, upon this plan, the religion of every country, would be liable to be
changed with every change of governors, as was the case in our own country, in
several successive reigns after that of Henry VIII. or rather Henry VII. this old ground
was shifted; and of late it has been maintained by our high church divines, and by
yourself, who must be classed with them, that the civil magistrate has nothing to do
with thetruthof religion, being obliged to provide for that which is professed by the
majorityof the subjects, though he himself should be of a different persuasion. Thus
they say the king of Great Britain, must maintain episcopacy in England, and
presbyterianism in Scotland, whether he be a presbyterian as king William, a Lutheran
as George I. or a true churchman as his present Majesty.
You, Sir, appear to defend church establishments on the latter of these principles.
“The christian statesman,” you say, p. 151, “must first provide for the multitude,
because it is the multitude, and is therefore, as such, the first object in the
ecclesiastical institution, and in all institutions.” But how does this apply to the case
of your country of Ireland. For the very same reason that episcopacy ought to be
established in England, and presbyterianism in Scotland, the Roman catholic ought to
be the established religion of Ireland, because, as I apprehend, it is unquestionably the
religion of a very great majority of the inhabitants. As to the great mass of the
oppressed Irish, if they be asked whether it betheirreligion, that which they really
approve, that they are obliged to maintain, they will say it is aforeignone, one that
they disbelieve and detest, and yet are compelled to support, whilst from genuine zeal,
they think it their duty to maintain their own. It is not supposed that more than one in
ten of the inhabitants of Ireland are of the church of England, and yet the iron hand of
power compels them to maintain it. Is this, think you, the way to recommend your
religion? Judge by the effect. What converts have been made to it in the last two
centuries? The zealous members of your church, in the reign of the two Charles’s of
blessed memory, imposed episcopacy also upon Scotland, when not more than one in
a hundred of the Scots would attend the service; but the generous spirit of that nation
at length threw off the oppressive yoke. The Irish also have the will, but, alas, not the
power.
If you will have an establishment, and act upon the principles that you profess, viz. to
provide for themultitude,or the great mass of the people, do you, of your own accord,
change the established religion of Ireland, to one more consonant to the genius and
wishes of the nation; and let it not be said that the church of England would have the
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 33 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1790

Online Library of Liberty: Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke
impudence, if it had the power, to collect its tithes from every country in christendom,
though every parish should be asinecure,and all their bishops be denominatedin
partibus.Let there be an appearance at least, which now there is not, of some regard
toreligionin the case, and not to mererevenue.Often as I have urged this subject,
and many as have been those who have animadverted upon my writings, hardly any
have touched uponthis.They feel it to be tender ground. They can, however, keep an
obstinate silence, they can shut their ears, and turn their eyes to other objects, when it
is not to their purpose to attend to this.
Admitting that religion must beestablished,or supported by civil power, in order to
its efficiency, willanyspecies of religion answer the purpose; the heathen, or the
Mahometan, as well as the christian, and one species of christianity as well as
another? Must we have nodiscussionconcerning the nature, and influence, of the
different kinds of religion, in order that, if we happen to have got a worse, we may
relieve ourselves by substituting a better in its place? Must every thing once
established be, for that reason only, ever maintained? This is said, indeed, to be your
maxim, openly avowed in the House of Commons, and, it is perfectly agreeable to
every thing advanced in this publication. For you condemn the French National
Assembly, for innovating intheirreligion, which is Catholic, as much as you could do
the English Parliament, for innovating inours, which is Protestant. You condemn
them for lowering the state of archbishops, bishops, and abbots, though they have
improved that of the lower orders of the clergy; and therefore you would, no doubt, be
equally offended at any diminution of the power of cardinals, or of the pope. We may
therefore presume, that had you lived in Turkey, you would have been a mahometan,
and in Tartary, a devout worshipper of the grand lama.
It is amusing to see with what confidence, and with what various expression, you
deliver your sentiments on the subject of these civil establishments of religion,
without distinguishing one from another. “This principle,” you say. p. 147, “runs
through the whole system of their” (the British) “policy. They do not consider their
church establishment as convenient, but as essential to their state, not as a thing
heterogeneous and separable, something added for accommodation, what they may
either keep at or lay aside, according to their temporary ideas of convenience. They
consider it as the foundation of their whole constitution, with which, and with every
part of which, it holds an indissoluble union.Churchandstateare ideas inseparable in
their minds, and scarcely is the one ever mentioned, without mentioning the other. It
is on such principles,” you say, “that the majority of the people of England, far from
thinking a religious national establishment unlawful, hardly think it lawful to be
without one. In France you are wholly mistaken if you do not believe us above all
other things attached to it, and above all other nations.”
Now you cannot be so little read in the history of England, as not to know that the
churchandstatewere as much connected before the Reformation as they have been
since, and while the establishment was presbyterian, as well as now that it is
episcopalian. You must know also that the inhabitants of this country, were at one
time as zealous papists as they now are protestants, and yet they were brought to make
a change in their established religion, and that this was done without making any
material change in the system of civil government. You must know that the
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 34 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1790

Online Library of Liberty: Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke
presbyterians in Scotland, and the episcopalians in England, have at this very time the
same king and the same parliament. But how do these facts agree with your favourite
idea of the inseparable union of church and state? What, then, is the foundation of the
dread you have entertained of anyfuturechange in the religion of our country, when
no harm, but, as all protestants think, much advantage, has been derived frompast
changes in it?
I Am, Dear Sir,
Yours, &C.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 35 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1790

Online Library of Liberty: Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke
[Back to Table of Contents]
LETTER VI.
Of The Source Of The Respect That Is Paid To Religion.
Dear Sir,
THAT you make no difference between christianity and the civil establishment of it,
is evident from many parts of your performance, and that you consider therespect
which it commands, as intirely derived from the circumstances of its establishment, is
equally evident. After representing the importance of christianity, as opposed to
infidelity, you say, in a peculiar strain of eloquence, p. 135, “If in the moment of riot,
and in a drunken delirium, from the hot spirit drawn out of the alembic of hell, which
in France is now so furiously boiling, we should uncover our nakedness, by throwing
off that christian religion, which has hitherto been our boast and comfort, and one
great source of civilization among us, and among many other nations, we are
apprehensive (being well aware that the mind will not endure a void) that some
uncouth, pernicious, and degrading superstition might take place of it. For that reason,
before we take from our establishment thenatural human means of estimation,and
give it up to contempt, as you have done (and in doing it have incurred the penalties
you well deserve to suffer) we desire that some other may be presented to us in the
place of it. We shall then form our judgment. On these ideas, instead of quarrelling
with establishments, as some do who have made a philosophy, and a religion, of their
hostility to such institutions, we cleave closely to them. We are resolved to keep an
established church, an established monarchy, an established aristocracy, and an
established democracy, each in the degree it exists, and in no greater.”
It is evident from this passage (the whole of which is so sublimely rhetorical, that I
could not help transcribing it, though not absolutely necessary to my purpose) that
you consider the christian religion as having norespectability,or effect,without being
established,and that thenatural human means of the estimationin which it is held, is
the splendour and riches of such an establishment; and this will be still more evident
from some passages that I shall have occasion to quote hereafter. Let us now consider
how this idea accords with theprinciplesof christianity, and the authenticrecords of
it, which you will allow to be contained in the books of the New Testament, and also
with its well known subsequenthistory.
Did our Saviour give his apostles any instructions about connecting his religion with
civil power, as if it would ever stand in need of such aid; or did the apostles, more
fully instructed after his death and ascension, give any intimation of this kind? On the
contrary, our Saviour declared thathis kingdom was not of this world,which must
mean that it did not resemble other kingdoms, in being supported by public taxes, and
having its laws guarded by civil penalties. The apostles, and all christian ministers, for
many centuries, lived on the voluntary contributions of their respective churches, and
they had no means of enforcing their censures besides exclusion from their societies;
and can you say that christianity wanted any properestimation,orrespectability,in
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 36 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1790

Online Library of Liberty: Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke
that period? Did it not abundantly recommend itself to every attentive candid
observer, and to every impartial inquirer; and did it not by this means continually gain
ground, notwithstanding it was opposed both by all the temporal powers of the world,
and by whatever was most splendid and fascinating in the established systems of
heathenism? It was thevirtue,it was the well known piety and extensive benevolence,
of the primitive christians, and not wealth or power, that procured respect to
themselves, and to their cause. Read only the letters of the Emperor Julian, and you
cannot but be sensible of this. To this, and to this alone,heascribed the respect that
was then paid to christianity, and the progress it had made in the world.
If you suppose, as you really seem to do, that christianity is now destitute of these
propermeans of estimation,you know little of its nature or power. Thetruthsand the
promises of the gospel are the same now that they ever were, nor is itsevidenceat all
diminished; andhuman nature, on which it operates, you will not doubt, is also the
same. And if you could look at any thing out of an establishment, you might see that
christianity even now produces as disinterested and heroic virtue as ever it did. It
forms men alike for the most active usefulness, or the most patient suffering. But
amusing yourself with theshadow you wholly neglect thesubstance.Looking at
religion,you see nothing but the civil establishments of it. Thus have I sometimes
seen an agedoakso completely covered with a luxuriantivy,that it required some
attention to discern any thing else.
That wealth and splendour have not the charms that you ascribe to them with the bulk
of mankind, is evident even from the history ofMonachism, one of the corruptions of
christianity. The first monks were not attracted by magnificent monasteries, and
highly ornamented churches, but were most numerous, when they had nothing but the
deserts to retire to. Then also were they the most respected; and they did not sink into
contempt till they had acquired what you call thenatural human means of estimation.
The same has been the case with the secular clergy, in all countries. They were
infinitely more respected, even by the rich and the great, while they were poor, than
they have ever been since they have got their present splendid establishments; nor is it
difficult to see the cause of this, and how it operates. Ease, affluence, and power,
attract persons who have no sense or knowledge of religion; and when meremen of
the worldget ecclesiastical preferment, they will, of course, disgrace their profession
by their vices. It was the unbounded luxury, profligacy, and arrogance, of the court of
Rome, possessed as you think of every natural human means of estimation, that was
one of the principal causes of the reformation.
According to your maxims, a rich establishment should make its clergy more
respected then a poor one. But does this appear to be the case, on the comparison of
the state of the clergy in Scotland, and those in this country? Dr. Adam Smith, who
well knew them both, was of a very different opinion; and the most superficial
observer must be sensible that he is in the right. Nay, so unfortunate is the situation of
the clergy in this country (for it cannot be any thing, but theirsituation, menbeing the
same in all countries) that, by the confession of many persons in the establishment
itself, there are no clergy in christendom more negligent of their proper duty, less
strict in their morals, and consequentlymore despised, than they are. Bishop Burnet,
who had been much abroad, and who was an attentive observer, was decidedly of this
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 37 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1790

Online Library of Liberty: Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke
opinion; and the character of the clergy in general, is little, if it all, improved since his
time.
The manner in which your imagination is struck with a splendid church establishment,
makes you even exceed yourself ineloquence;and, as I always admire you in this
field, though not in that of soberreasoning,I cannot forbear quoting a pretty long
paragraph to this purpose, as it is particularly excellent in its kind. “He,” you say, p.
146, “who gave our nature to be perfected by our virtue, willed also the necessary
means of its perfection. He willed therefore the state. He willed its connection with
the source and original archetype of all perfection” (meaning, no doubt,the church,
equally the archetype of all perfection in Indostan, in Turkey, in Italy, in England, and
even in Scotland) “They who are convinced of this his will, which is the law of laws,
and the sovereign of sovereigns, cannot think it reprehensible that this our corporate
fealty and homage, that this our recognition of a signiory paramount, I had almost said
this oblation of the state itself, as a worthy offering on the high altar of universal
praise, should be performed, as all public solemn acts are performed, in buildings, in
music, in decoration, in speech, in the dignity of persons, according to the customs of
mankind, taught by their nature; that is, with modest splendour, with unassuming
state, with mild majesty, and sober pomp. For those purposes they think some part of
the wealth of the country is as usefully employed as it can be in fomenting the luxury
of individuals. It is the public consolation. It nourishes the public hope. The poorest
man finds his own importance and dignity in it, whilst the wealth and pride of
individuals at every moment makes the man of humble rank and fortune sensible of
his inferiority, and degrades and vilifies his condition. It is for the man in humble life,
and to raise his nature, and to put him in mind of a state in which the privileges of
opulence will cease, when he will be equal by nature, and may be more than equal by
virtue, that this portion of the general wealth of his country is employed and
sanctified.”
Big with these ideas, you say, p. 153, “as the mass of any description of men are but
men, and their poverty” (namely that of the clergy) “cannot be voluntary, that
disrespect which attends upon all lay-poverty will not depart from the ecclesiastical.
Our constitution has therefore taken care, that those who are to instruct presumptuous
ignorance, those who are to be censors over insolent vice, should neither incur their
contempt, nor live upon their alms; nor will it tempt the rich to a neglect of the true
medicine of their minds. For these reasons, while we provide first for the poor, with a
parental solicitude, we have not relegated religion, like something we were ashamed
to shew, to obscure municipalities, or rustic villages. No; we will have her to exalt her
mitred front in courts and parliaments. We will have her mixed throughout the whole
mass of life, and blended with all the classes of society. The people of England will
shew to the haughty potentates of the world, and to their talking sophisters, that a free,
a generous, and informed nation, honours the high magistrates of its church, that it
will not suffer the insolence of wealth and titles, or any other species of proud
pretension, to look down with scorn upon what they look up to with reverence, nor
presume to trample on that acquired personal nobility which they intend always to be,
and which often is, the fruit, not the reward (for what can be the reward) of learning,
piety, and virtue. They can see without pain or grudging an archbishop precede a
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 38 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1790

Online Library of Liberty: Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke
duke. They can see a bishop of Durham, or a bishop of Winchester, in possession of
ten thousand pounds a year,” &c. &c. &c.
Pray, Sir, on what part of the New Testament is this a comment? Alas, it is the
wisdom of the world,whichis foolishness with God,and even with serious and
sensible men? The wealth of the clergy, of which you are so proud, and the temporal
power with which you have invested them, is the natural source of their corruption,
and what must ever sink them, and religion, into contempt. Has the splendour of the
ecclesiastical establishment in France, which is much superior to any thing of the kind
in this country, prevented the spread of the Reformation on the one hand, or of
infidelity on the other? By your own account, France is almost a nation of infidels, at
least their National Assembly, in your idea, consists chiefly of them. Have the
remains of this splendour, respectable still in your eyes, prevented the rejection of
christianity altogetherhere?If you know the world, and even what passes at home,
you must know the contrary. Infidelity has made considerable progress in this
country, and especially in the upper classes of life, persons to whom you imagine the
wealth of the clergy would naturally recommend their religion. But these men do not
frequent your churches, and they regard your establishment no farther than they can
avail themselves of its emoluments, as it is a means of providing for their younger
sons and brothers. If the Houses of Lords and Commons were fairly polled, after
voting according to theirreal opinion,whether, think you, would the majority be in
favour of christianity, or against it? Many, and those not inattentive observers, think
the latter.
If riches and power have the charms which you ascribe to them in the business of
religion, how came thereformationto take place? The power and splendour of the
church of Rome was at its height in the time of Luther and his followers; yet, without
any aid of this kind to oppose to it, in Germany, in this country, or in Scotland, it gave
way to the efforts of men who had no advantage but what they derived from reason
and piety. Surely, Sir, the bulk of mankind do not see with your eyes. If they did, how
can you account for the great number of Dissenters in this country, from the time of
Queen Elizabeth, who had the same ideas that you have on these subjects, down to the
present time; and what can be the cause of the amazing increase of methodism?
Neither their ministers nor ours are rich. We have not the style ofmy lord, nor have
we seats in parliament. But, destitute as we are of all these advantages, I will venture
to say, that our ministers, as a body, are much more respected by their congregations
than yours, possessed, in your idea, of all thenatural human means of estimation.
Judging of us by yourselves, you naturally suppose, that it is only throughenvyand
malignity,that we declaim against the wealth and the power of the clergy. “In
England, you say, p. 155, “most of us conceive that it is envy and malignity towards
those who are often the beginners of their own fortune, and not a love of the self-
denial and mortification of the ancient church, that makes some look askance at the
distinctions, and honours, and revenues, which, taken from no person, are set apart for
virtue. The ears of the people of England are distinguishing. They hear these men
speak broad. Their tongue betrays them. Their language is in thepatoisof fraud, in
the cant and gibberish of hypocrisy. The people of England must think so when these
praters affect to carry back the clergy to that primitive evangelic poverty, which, in
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 39 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1790

Online Library of Liberty: Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke
the spirit, ought always to exist inthem(and inus too, however, we may like it) but
the thing must be varied, when the the relation of that body to the state is altered,
when manners, when modes of life, when indeed the whole order of human affairs,
has undergone a total revolution. We shall believe these reformers to be thenhonest
enthusiasts,not, as now we think them,cheatsanddeceivers,when we see them
throwing their own goods into common, and submitting their own persons to the
austere discipline of the early church.”
This, Sir, is a paragraph of which it is to be hoped you will some time hence be
ashamed. You do not give us the alternative of being eitherknavesor fools.You will
not allow us any place in this more respectable, or rather less contemptible, class of
men. None of us who disapprove of establishments, Dr. Price, or myself, can have the
honour of being ranked withhonest enthusiasts.We are all absolutely, and without a
single exception,cheatsanddeceivers,who are saying one thing, and, at the same
time, meaning another. But we are happy in an appeal from your judgment, as you are
from ours; though, judging from myself, we are by no means disposed to censure you
with so much severity as you do us. I do not say that we are so mortified to the world,
as that the good things with which you tempt us, have no charms for us. We aremen,
and have the feelings of men, as well as yourselves. But if they struck our imagination
as forcibly as they do yours, and if we were theknavesandhypocritesthat you
suppose us to be, why do we not make greater efforts to obtain them? The market is
open, but we do not chuse to give the price. If these things be accessible tosome, they
are no doubt toothers,in proportion to their ability or interest, or whatever it be that
assists their preferment.
As to subscription to your articles, &c. if I be such a person as you have described,
why might not I declare myunfeigned assent and consentto them, as well as others?
Besides, if the advantages of an establishment were the things that we are aiming at,
why are we labouring at the subversion ofallestablishments, exposing their inutility,
and even their mischievous nature and tendency? If the tree be cut down, how are we
to live upon the fruit of it? And there are now, I believe, very few Dissenters, who, if
the present establishment was overturned, would wish to substitute any other in its
place.
Your idea of the state of things in the primitive church, is altogether founded on
mistake. It was not, from the first, materially different from what it is, or at least ought
to be, at this day, and therefore did not require any great difference in the condition of
its ordinary ministers. There never was any obligation on christians tothrow their
goods into common. Whatever was done of this kind, appears from the history of
Ananias and Sapphira, to have been perfectly voluntary, and could not have been
universal; and we read of no such thing in any of the Gentile churches. These, from
the first, consisted ofrichandpoor, and the rich among them made contributions to
relieve the poor christians at Jerusalem, which could not have been wanted, if all the
rich, even there, had given theirall.As to thedisciplineof the primitive church, it was
such as I should have no objection to, but have strongly recommended in myEssay on
Church Discipline;nor was it more strict than is actually exercised in several christian
churches, though not in that of England, at this day. But of these things you, Sir, seem
to speak altogether at random, without any particular knowledge of the subject.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 40 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1790

Online Library of Liberty: Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke
I Am, Dear Sir,
Yours, &C.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 41 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1790

Online Library of Liberty: Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke
[Back to Table of Contents]
LETTER VII.
Of A Civil Establishment Being Essential To Christianity.
Dear Sir,
IF a civil establishment be so essential as you represent it, to the estimation and effect
of christianity, you must, no doubt, imagine that it never existed without one, that it
has grown with its growth, and strengthened with its strength.Hence your
apprehension that, if any thing affect the one, it must in proportion affect the other,
and that they must both stand or fall together. Now, being yourself nothing more than
aLay divine(as you contemptuously characterise a person of eminence, who has
presumed tohintat some improvements in your favourite system, not calculated to
overturn, but to strengthen it) I, whom, together with Dr. Price, you will class, p. 13,
amongpolitical theologians,andtheological politicians,shall give you a little
information on the subject. Your talents, no doubt, are great; but what are talents, or
powers of reasoning, and combining particular facts into systems, if a man have no
facts to combine, no proper knowledge of his subject? In this case his greater
ingenuity will only serve to mislead him, and fix him in error. And it is very evident
that, whatever has been the compass of your studies,ecclesiastical historyhas not
been within its range; and facts, notorious facts, such as lye upon the very face and
surface of it, unfortunately overturn your whole system.
You have not been pleased to give us the definition of anestablished church,though
you enlarge so much in your encomiums upon it; but in this we cannot much disagree.
In its full extent, it is a church defended, and even regulated, by the state, which either
wholly proscribes, tolerates, or barely connives at, other religions. Now, what was the
situation of the christian church with respect to the State in the primitive times? You
must know that, so far from being supported by the civil powers (which were then
either Jewish or Heathen) it was srowned upon by them, and violently persecuted,
itself being at that time nothing more than asect,or aheresy,sometimes connived at,
but never openly tolerated; and yet in these circumstances it existed, and flourished,
gradually gaining ground by its own evidence, till it triumphed over all opposition,
and the Roman empire itself became christian.
What was it these christian emperors then did for their religion? They did little or
nothing towards itssupport, because they found it sufficiently supported by the
voluntary contributions and benefactions of its friends. They did, however,what they
ought not to have done;they influenced the decisions of councils, and enforced them
by temporal pains and penalties. The State also protected property given or
bequeathed to the church, as well as that which was appropriated to other uses; but
there was nothing like ataxlevied for the support of religion for many ages, nor is
there any such thing at this day in a very great part of the christian world. Tithes are
comparatively but a modern invention, the payment of them being first voluntary, and
afterwards obligatory; and the compulsory payment of tithes did not take place in the
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 42 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1790

Online Library of Liberty: Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke
whole of this country till the time of King John, ofglorious and immortal memory, on
that account. There are now no tithes paid in the ecclesiastical states of Italy, or in
Sicily, and though, as I have been lately informed, there is what is called tithes in
some parts of Lombardy, it does not in general exceed one thirtieth part of the
produce, and is never one tenth.
Another important article inour ecclesiastical establishment, is the right of our kings
to the nomination of bishops*. But it is well known, that the right of chusing the
bishops was originally, and for many centuries, in their respective churches, the
metropolitans shewing their approbation by joining in their ordination; and that even
the emperors themselves, after they became christians, never assumed any such
authority. It was first usurped by the popes, in the plenitude of their power, and by the
feudal princes of Europe, in consequence of their investing bishops with their
temporalities,and making themlords of territory.The National Assembly of France
have, to their immortal honour (though they should be dissolved to-morrow, and
never meet again) restored to all the christian churches in that country, their original
right of appointing their own pastors, both the ordinary clergy and the bishops.
As to the claim of our princes to be theheads of the church(which is an usurpation
from an usurper, the pope) and that of our parliament, to enact what shall be deemed
articles of faith,and to give a form and constitution to the whole church, it is a thing
not so much as pretended to by any other temporal power in the world, and a greater
absurdity and abuse than any thing subsisting in the system of popery, where at least
the judges in ecclesiastical affairs are ecclesiastical persons.
The whole system of the civil establishment of religion had its origin at a time when
neitherreligionnorcivil governmentwas much understood. It was the consequence of
the feudal states of Europe becoming christian in an age where we find little of
Christianity, besides thename; its genuinedoctrinesand itsspirithaving equally
disappeared.
Every article, therefore, within the compass of the civil establishment of christianity,
is evidently aninnovation;and as systems are reformed by reverting to their first
principles, christianity can never be restored to its pristine state, and recover its real
dignity and efficiency, till it be disengaged from all connexion with civil power. This
establishment, therefore, may be compared to afungus,or aparasitical plant,which
is so far from being coeval with the tree on which it has fastened itself, that it seized
upon it in its weak and languid state, and if it be not cut off in time, will exhaust all its
juices, and destroy it.
Writing to an orator, I naturally think of metaphors and comparisons, and therefore I
will give you two or three more. So far is a civil establishment from being friendly to
christianity, that it may be compared to the animal, called theSloth,which, when it
gets upon any tree, will not leave it till it has devoured even the leaves and the bark,
so that it presently perishes. Rather, it is the animal called aglutton,which falling
from a tree (in which it generally conceals itself) upon some noble animal,
immediately begins to tear it, and suck its blood; and if it be not soon shaken off
(which sometimes every effort fails to effect) it infallibly kills its prey.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 43 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1790

Online Library of Liberty: Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke
Now, when I see this fungusof an establishment upon the noble plant of christianity,
draining its best juices; when I see thisSlothupon its stately branches, gnawing it, and
stripping it bare; or, to change my comparison, when I see theGluttonupon the
shoulders of this noble animal, the blood flowing down, and its very vitals in danger;
if I wish to preserve the tree, or the animal, must I not, without delay, extirpate the
fungus, destroy the Sloth, and kill the Glutton. Indeed, Sir, say, or write, what you
please, such vermin deserve no mercy. You may stand by, and weep for the fate of
your favourite fungus, your Sloth, or your Glutton, but I shall not spare them.
In your idea, a civil establishment is the verybasis, or foundationof religion. But
when any structure is to be raised, the foundation is the first thing that is laid; whereas
this was evidently the very last. Instead, therefore, of its being thefoundation,or even
thebuttress,it may rather be said to resemble the heavystone roof,pressing with an
enormous weight upon the walls, which on that account require many buttresses to
support it, and after all proves to be so heavy, and is now become so ruinous, that it
will be found absolutely necessary to take it all down, if the building is to be
preserved. Nay, as in the late taking down of the stone roof of the cathedral, I think, of
Hereford, if the greatest care be not taken, the attempt to meddle with this cumbrous
roof will be hazardous, both to those who remove it, and those who stand near it.
I Am, Dear Sir,
Yours, &C.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 44 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1790

Online Library of Liberty: Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke
[Back to Table of Contents]
LETTER VIII.
Of The Uses Of Civil Establishments Of Religion.
Dear Sir,
YOU certainly magnify the benefits derived from religion itself too much, valuable as
I allow it to be, when you say, p. 134, “We know, and what is better, we feel, that
religion is the basis of civil society, and the source of all good and of all comfort.”
Here, surely, is more of therhetoricianthan of thereasoner, even supposing you not
to mean, what you evidently do, the civil establishment of religion, but religion itself.
Is there no good, or comfort, in any thing but religion, or what flows from it? Will
religion feed or cloath us; or is there no comfort in food or cloathing? Is it not
possible to make many wholesome laws to prevent men from injuring one another,
and is it not possible to execute those laws, so as to preserve thepeace of society,
which I conceive to be the proper end of civil government, without calling in the aid
of religion; or cannot religion operate in aid of good laws, without the help of the
magistrate?
Civil establishments of religion, must, however, be imagined to be ofsome use to
society, or it will be of little consequence to defend them at all. If the church, or the
king, have nothing butdivine rightto stand upon, the people, seeing their own interest
to be of the question, would not, at this day, shew much zeal in their support. They
must, if possible, be made to believe, that a system supported by their money, and the
sweat of their brows, is, in some way or other, directly or indirectly, for their
advantage. Accordingly, you, Sir, have found it necessary to urge theutilityof these
establishments, and according to you, this utility is threefold. They are of use to the
poor, and to the rich, and though they suit all governments, they are more particularly
necessary in democratical ones.
“The christian statesmen,” you say, p. 151, “of this land have been taught, that the
circumstance of the gospel’s being preached to the poor, was one of the great tests of
its true mission. They think, therefore, that those do not believe it who do not take
care it should be preached to the poor.”
Here, Sir, your argument, as far as there is any thing of argument in it, is, that since
the poor cannot afford to pay for religious instruction, the state should provide it for
them. A very pious and charitable design, no doubt; but at whose expence is this
provision made? If it were at the expence of the rich only, there would be something
of charity in it; but is not all property, that of the poor as well as that of the rich, taxed
alike for this purpose? Do not the clergy exact the payment ofsmall tithes,and often
with the utmost rigour, from their poorest parishioners? Do we not sometimes hear of
their being actually turned out of their little tenements, by a distress levied by their
spiritual instructors; and are not the poor Irish, some of the most destitute and
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 45 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1790

Online Library of Liberty: Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke
miserable of mankind, driven into almost annual rebellions, by oppression from the
exaction of tithes?
This, I am told, is the true cause of the rise of those who are calledWhite Boys,among
the poor catholics of Ireland; and nothing but the terror of military execution, can
compel them to pay for that instruction which you would give us to understand is so
charitably afforded them. Thus, to be compelled to pay for the instruction which they
detest, and receive no advantage from, and to be at the same time under another kind
of necessity of paying for the instruction which they really value, is, indeed, a hard
case. But this, according to you, ispreaching the gospel to the poor.
The gospel was, in its proper sense, preached to the poor by our Saviour, the apostles,
and other primitive christians, who were themselves poor. In those times, all the
contributions for the maintenance of public worship, were made by the rich, and they
were as ample as they were voluntary. Those who were less opulent gave as they
thought proper, and could afford, and the poor gave nothing; for small tithes were
then unknown. The same is the case with us Dissenters. All our places of public
worship are open to the poor, as well as to the rich; and not only are the poor
accommodatedgratis,but their wants are attended to as far as the funds of the
congregation (and in all of them there is one for this purpose) can go towards their
relief.
The instruction of the poor is more attended to by the Methodists than by any other
class of christians in this country. They not only make them welcome, but they seek
out, they invite, and press them to receive instruction; and if those of them, who are
comparatively poor, tax themselves for the maintenance of their preachers, and the
building of their places of worship, it is in such a manner as promotes industry, and
checks profligacy and extragance. By this means, becoming more sober, and more
frugal, they grow comparatively rich, and are better able to contribute their penny,
their two-pence, or their six-pence a week, to supply the wants of others. I honour
their wisdom and œconomy, and think most highly of those persons whose education
and habits dispose and enable them to adapt themselves to the instruction of the
lowest and poorest of the vulgar. They are civilizing and christianizing that part of the
community, which is below the notice of your dignified clergy, but whose souls, as
the common phrase is, are asprecious in the sight of God,as those who are called
their betters.Such men will have their reward in heaven. I only wish they had more
knowledge, and more charity along with their zeal; andthesealso will come in due
time.
You think it equally necessary, that public provision should be made for the
instruction of therich,and that, in order to engage their attention and respect, the civil
establishment of religion should be splendid. “Such sublime principles,” you say, p.
137, “ought to be infused into persons in exalted situations, and religious
establishments provided that may continually revive and enforce them. The people of
England,” you say, p. 152, “know how little influence the teachers of religion are
likely to have with the wealthy and powerful of long standing, and how much less
weight with the newly fortunate, if they appear no way assorted to those with whom
they must associate, and over whom they must even exercise in some cases something
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 46 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1790

Online Library of Liberty: Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke
like an authority. What must they think of that body of teachers, if they see it in no
part above the establishment of their domestic servants?”
On the effect of splendid establishments on the minds of men I have enlarged before,
and shall now only observe that, through gross inattention to the principles of human
nature, you have neither considered the effect of the situation in which you have
placed the clergy of this country on their own minds, or on those of the rich and the
great, to whom their ministry is adapted. Is it not a fact, that, so far from the former
being independent of the latter, in consequence of having great emolument in
continual prospect (which is the case of all the clergy, the bishops themselves not
excepted) that they must continually look up to them, and court them, in order to
advance themselves? Is not their attention to the great in general extremely servile and
debasing? Have you never heard of their conniving at, rather than reproving them for,
their vices and extravagancies, while they have the care of their education at home,
and abroad. Is not almost every clergyman, whose talents or connections encourage
him to aspire to a bishopric, or any other great preferment, ready to adopt the maxims,
and court the favour of the great, in whose power alone it is to aid their views? Is it
not notorious that the bishops in general fall in with the measures of the court,
whatever they are, evidently because they cannot rise higher, or provide for their
dependants, by any other means? For whenever the maxims and measures of the court
change, the conduct of the bishops almost universally, and even instantly, changes
with them.
When, after the Court was disposed to favour us, the dissenting ministers waited by
appointment upon an archbishop, in order to get his vote and interest for relief in the
matter of subscription, which was then under consideration in parliament, after both
himself and his brethren had voted against us upon a former occasion, he assured
them that, though their bench had concurred in rejecting their application before, it
was no measure oftheirs,but that they had beenput upon itby the king’s ministers.
This he evidently thought a sufficient apology for his own conduct, and that of his
brethren. So valid did this excuse appear to him, that he had no feeling of the
dishonour which such conduct reflected upon the whole bench, and what a despicable
idea he was giving of himself, and of his brethren to us Dissenters, who are used to
think and act for ourselves, and not as we areput uponby others. Can such conduct as
this, which the situation of your dignified clergy necessarily leads them into, inspire
persons of high rank, or of any rank, with sentiments ofrespect?I will venture to say
it is impossible. Pretend what you will, you must, and you do, hold them in contempt,
as much as we do ourselves. It is the feeling of indignant honour. It is the natural
sentiment of man towards his degraded fellow creature, which in some measure
reflects dishonour upon himself, as being of the same species.
You, who are alay divine,farther teach us, that civil establishments of religion are
peculiarly useful in free governments. “The consecration of the state,” you say, p.
137, “by a state religious establishment, is necessary also to operate with an
wholesome awe upon free citizens, because, in order to secure their freedom, they
must enjoy some determinate portion of power. To them, therefore, a religion
connected with the state, and with their duty towards it, becomes even more
necessary, than in such societies where the people, by the terms of their subjection,
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 47 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1790

Online Library of Liberty: Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke
are confined to private sentiments, and the management of their own family concerns.
All persons possessing any portion of power, ought to be strongly and awfully
impressed with an idea that they act in trust, and that they are to account for their
conduct in that trust to the one great master, author, and founder, of society. This
principle ought even to be more strongly impressed upon the minds of those who
compose the collective sovereignty, than upon those of single princes. Without
instruments, these princes can do nothing. Whoever uses instruments, in finding
helps, finds also impediments. Their power, therefore, is by no means complete, nor
are they safe in extreme abuse.—But where popular authority is absolute and
unstrained, the people have an infinitely greater, because a far better founded,
confidence in their own power.—It is therefore of infinite importance that they should
not be suffered to imagine that their will, any more than that of kings, is the standard
of right and wrong, &c. &c.”
In all this, Sir, you, as usual, confoundreligionwith thecivil establishmentof it, and
hence the manifest inconclusiveness of your whole argument. Religion, no doubt, is
useful to all men, of all ranks, in power, or subject to it, as it furnishes an additional
motive to good behaviour in every situation. But what has this to do with any civil
establishment of it, with its being maintained by the state, the officers of which state,
will, of course, have the sole power of ecclesiastical as well as civil preferment? How
will the members of a popular assembly be overawed by the admonitions of men
whose salaries are settled, and whose places are disposed of, by themselves, any more
than a single arbitrary sovereign? Will not the clergy always look up to that power,
which has preferment at its disposal, in whatever hands it be lodged? Are not the
established ministers in Holland advocates for their republican government, as much
as the English bishops of this day for the limited monarchy of England, and as the
bishops of Charles I. and II. were for absolute monarchy, passive obedience, and non-
resistance?
The clergy, or any other set of men, in the pay of a state, soon perceive what are the
maxims of the governing powers in that state, and readily adopt them. Are not the
aspiring clergy of the present reign, advocates for higher maxims of government in
church and state, than those of the two preceding reigns? The fact is evident, and the
difference is to be looked for in the different dispositions of the courts. The former
were liberal, and favourable to diffenters, and the present is less so. This alone
accounts for the whole. If the governors of any country in which religion is
established, have no motives to stand in awe of the ministers of religion, which they
evidently have not (as they always see the ministers of religion standing in awe of
them,and courting them) it is of no use to them that it is established at all. If it be of
any use, it is simply asreligion,as a principle operating upon conscience, and
influencing individuals, independently of any civil establishment of it.
Indeed, Sir, you see this whole business in a very wrong point of light. The civil
establishment of religion is so far from making it respectable, that it is the very thing
that makes it contemptible; because it naturally tends to debase the minds of those
who officiate in it, those to whom men will commonly look for examples of its proper
spirit and tendency, and by whose principles and conduct they are too apt to form
their opinion of it.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 48 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1790

Online Library of Liberty: Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke
I Am, Dear Sir,
Yours, &C.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 49 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1790

Online Library of Liberty: Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke
[Back to Table of Contents]
LETTER IX.
Of An Elective Clergy.
Dear Sir,
THE dread you express of the clergy of this country becomingelective,is extreme,
and the consequences which you imagine to flow from a regulation of this kind in the
constitution of the church, you exhibit in the most alarming light. I shall select the
following, as some of the strongest passages in your publication upon this subject, and
I shall then make a few remarks upon them.
“The present ruling power” (viz. of France) “has,” you say, p. 217, “made a
degrading, pensionary establishment, to which no man of liberal ideas, or liberal
condition, will destine his children. It must settle into the lowest classes of the people.
As with you, the inferior clergy are not numerous enough for their duty, as these
duties are beyond measure, minute, and toilsome; as you have left no middle classes
of clergy at their ease, in future nothing of science, or erudition, can exist in the
Gallican church. To complete the project, without the least attention to the rights of
patrons, the Assembly has provided in future an elective clergy; an arrangement
which will drive out of the clerical profession all men of sobriety, all who can pretend
to independence in their function or their conduct, and which will throw the whole
direction of the public mind into the hands of a set of licentious, bold, crafty, factious,
flattering wretches, of such condition, and such habits of life, as will make their
contemptible pensions (in comparison of which the stipend of an exciseman is
lucrative and honourable) an object of low and illiberal intrigue.”
“In short,” you say, p. 218, “it seems to me, that this new ecclesiastical establishment,
is intended only to be temporary, and preparatory to the utter abolition, under any of
its forms, of the christian religion, whenever the minds of men are prepared for this
last stroke against it, by the accomplishment of the plan for bringing its ministers into
universal contempt. I hope,” you add, p. 219, “their partizans in England, will succeed
neither in the pillage of the ecclesiastics, nor in the introduction of a principle of
popular election to our bishoprics and parochial cures. This, in the present condition
of the world, would be the last corruption of the church, the utter ruin of the clerical
character, the most dangerous shock that the state ever received through a
misunderstood arrangement of religion.”
Now, Sir, had you reflected ever so little on the nature of the case, had you read
ecclesiastical history, or had you opened your eyes to existing facts, such as almost
obtrude themselves upon the most careless observer every day, you must have
perceived that anelective clergymust have, always has had, and at this present time
actually has, effects the very reverse of those with which your imagination (for here
judgmentis totally out of the question) is haunted.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 50 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1790

Online Library of Liberty: Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke
Is it not true that, in all cases of acivilnature, every person, who receives a salary for
any duty whatever, will be more attentive to that duty, when the person who pays the
salary, and who is interested in the proper discharge of the duty, has the power of
appointing and dismissing him? The reason is obvious. It then becomes the interest
both of the person who performs the duty, and of the person who is benefited by it,
that it bewell done.And can it make any difference, whether the duty be of an
ecclesiastical, or a civil nature, when both are discharged bymen, beings of the same
passions, and subject to the same influences? Every man will do his duty best when he
has the eye of a master immediately upon him. Please, Sir, to make the trial. Let your
domestic servants, or your domestic chaplain, be appointed not by yourself, but some
other man, or body of men, and let it be as difficult and as slow a process, to obtain a
change of them, as it now is for a parish to get rid of a minister whose conduct
disgraces them, which is but too often the case. I do not believe that, upon this plan,
you would have much expectation of being well served.
You dread a scene offaction,and lowintrigueamong the clergy who should be
candidates for places in the church. But what was the fact for more than a thousand
years in the christian church in general, when all the bishops and clergy were elective,
when men were the same as they are now, and, when whatever you imagine of
peculiar zeal, and disinterestedness, in the primitive times of the church, was certainly
abated? Or what is now the case with the Diffenters in this country, and through all
the states of North America, where the officiating clergy of all denominations are
now, and ever have been, elective. In ancient times, where the emoluments were
great, as in the churches of Alexandria, Antioch, Constantinople, and Rome, the
election of bishops was sometimes attended with factions, and dangerous ones; but
even there cases of this kind were rare, and in the ordinary sees they seldom or never
happened. There are more than a thousand dissenting ministers in this kingdom, and
they are all elected by their respective congregations; but any great inconvenience
attending an election of this kind very seldom occurs. It is probable that you, though
living in the country, never heard of any such thing, any more than in America, or
among the dissenters in Ireland.
So far is there from being any cabal, or intrigue, to obtain places with us, that the
person chosen seldom hears of it, till his invitation is sent to him; and any thing like
canvassingwould be an effectual bar to his election. Indeed, it very seldom happens
that there is more than one candidate named at one time, and the members of any
congregation are considered as very imprudent if they admit of two.
You say, that no person liberally educated, or any other than those in the lowest
classes of life, will be candidates for church preferment. This, Sir, goes upon the idea
that no person will officiate in a christian church but for the sake of the temporal
emolument which he receives from it, which is a most unjust and ill-founded
reflection on christianity, and the ministers of it. It may be the case with a church, the
articles of which men of sense cannot subscribe, and the stated duty of which is
against their consciences. For such services asthesemen must bepaid,and very well
paid too; and in general it will be done for nothing but the pay. But this is not the case
withus, nor was it so in the early ages of the church. Though few of our salaries will
more than half maintain us, there are never wanting persons of independent fortune,
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 51 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1790

Online Library of Liberty: Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke
and the most liberal education, who voluntarily devote themselves to the work of our
ministry. From unbiassed choice they give their time, and their fortunes, to an
employment which they deem to be most honourable and important, in whatever light
it may appear toyou;and our situation is such, that few besides persons of some
ability and piety will think of the profession.
So respected is the character of a minister with us, though the case may be different
with you, that whatever was his original rank in life, it places him on a level with the
most opulent of his congregation; and it rarely happens but that, in all our
congregations, there are some persons of as good fortunes, and as polished manners,
as any others in the town or neighbourhood. On this account, as well as from a
principle of genuine piety and benevolence, the situation of a dissenting minister has
many attractions, especially to a person of a serious and studious turn of mind. We
think it greatly preferable to that of the generality of the established clergy, with all
their prospects of preferment, which often produce a cringing and servile disposition.
And I will venture to say, that, independent of the private fortunes which many of our
ministers have, their character and conduct render them as truly respectable, and
independent in mind, as any set of clergy in the world; far more so, I am confident,
than yours, with all the advantages you boast.
In consequence of the bishops in France becoming elective, you imagine that nothing
of science,or erudition,will henceforth exist in the Gallican church. But did nothing
of this kind exist in the christian church before the bishops ceased to be elective,
which was a change made of late years in comparison? History shews the very reverse
to have been the case. The dignified clergy, whom the court makes independent of the
people, are not those who, in any country, produce learned theological works, but
generally men in the lower orders, and who have no motive to chuse their profession
besides an attachment to the duties and studies peculiar to it, and who wish to
distinguish themselves in it. Very few of the bishops of your church have been
writers, at least after they were made bishops. The greatest works your church has to
boast of were the productions of obscure clergymen; and, despicable as our situation
may appear to you, who certainly know very little about us, an application to the
studies suited to our profession, appears, by the number of our writings, to be much
greater than among the clergy of the established church. The relation we stand in to
our congregations insures a respectable private character, and in a manner obliges us
to devote the leisure we have to literature, to science, and to professional studies. How
strangely, Sir, must you be blinded by your high church prejudices not to perceive that
this both is, and necessarilymust be the difference between the clergy of the
established church, and ministers with us; a difference greatly to our advantage; and it
arises wholly from our people having the choice of their ministers, and of course a
power of dismissing them when, on any account, they do not approve of them.
You insinuate that the scheme to render the clergy of France elective, is preparatory to
an intended abolition of christianity, as if christianity did not exist, and exist in
infinitely greater purity, before any of the clergy were otherwise than elective. On the
contrary, it is the system of church establishments that always has produced, and that
ever must produce, unbelievers. You make it a mere engine of state, a source of
wealthto some of the clergy, and ofpowerto those who have the nomination of them;
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 52 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1790

Online Library of Liberty: Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke
and in both cases the proper interests ofreligionare never thought of. In consequence
of this, it is notorious that the superior clergy in France and Italy, have long been
generally considered as unbelievers, as well as those who procure them their
preferment. That the church of England is not exempt from the same censure, I have
actually known myself; and it is highly probable that, from similar causes, it still
exists in a degree which I have now no opportunity of knowing. Yet though you
clearly see that a splendid church establishment, with bishops appointed by the court,
actually makes many of the clergy meremen of the world,so that they have nothing
of thechristian minister,besides the name, and the consequence of this has been the
disbelief and utter contempt of christianity in men of rank and fortune, you would
pretend that the abolishing of christianity would be the consequence of their
dissolution. Indeed, Sir, both the nature of the case, and facts, which are obvious to
the most careless eye, shew that christianity cannot be preserved along with them.
They are a disease that must be extirpated, or the subject will be destroyed.
I Am, Dear Sir,
Yours, &C.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 53 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1790

Online Library of Liberty: Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke
[Back to Table of Contents]
LETTER X.
Of Monastic Institutions, And Mr. Burke’S General Maxim
That Existing Powers Are Not To Be Destroyed.
Dear Sir,
YOU enlarge much, p. 234, &c. on the ill policy of the National Assembly of France,
in dissolving themonastic institutionsof that country, acknowledging, at the same
time, that “they savour of superstition. This,” you say, “ought not, however, to hinder
them from deriving from superstition itself any resources which from thence may be
furnished for the public advantage.” You do not say what uses, religious or political,
you would have made of the funds of these societies; but as you acknowledge that
“the body of all true religion consists in obedience to the will of the Sovereign of the
universe, in a confidence in his declarations, and in an imitation of his perfections,” it
is sufficient, I should think, for a state to provide forthis.If the state give thebody,let
the individuals themselves provide thecloathing,and to what better use can public
lands and funds be applied, than to liquidate the debts of a state?
Monastic institutions have, no doubt, had their uses, and very great uses, when there
was no other retreat for letters, or from the bustle of a barbarous age. But as literature
and piety do not now want that asylum, and every purpose of useful religion may be
gained as well, and even better, without it, what reason can there be for its
continuance? Why preserve an old and inconvenient road, when a better is actually
gained? Rather convert it into good arable or pasture land.
It is, besides, impossible to encourage superstition, but at the expence of true religion,
as the experience of every age demonstrates. The duties of superstition are better
defined than those of religion. Men know precisely when they have recited a certain
number of prayers, or when they have received a certain number of lashes; but the
great duties of benevolence (which, indeed, can only be discharged in society) are
indefinite, and withal require an attention to theinward temper of mind,which is far
more difficult than any of the injunctions of superstition. Will it not be natural, then,
for men to attach themselves to the one, and neglect the other, especially when they
are taught that the same end may be gained by either?
The veryprincipleupon which monachism is founded, is false and delusive. It is that
men, capable of performing the duties of life, may become fit for heaven by solitary
meditation and prayer, without mixing with the world at all. While monasteries are
kept up, this idea is encouraged. I cannot help thinking, therefore, that the National
Assembly acted very wisely, when, in order to relieve themselves from the difficulties
which the folly and extravagance of a former government had brought upon the
country, they adopted the measure of abolishing their monasteries, making however a
sufficient provision for the inhabitants of them.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 54 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1790

Online Library of Liberty: Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke
You will not pretend to say that monastic institutions are any necessary part of the
christian system, since no mention is made of any such thing in the New Testament,
since such establishments as you lament the fall of, are, in fact, but recent things, and
since christianity has not been found to suffer any thing by the demolition of them in
this, or any other protestant country.
But “in monastic institutions,” you say, p. 232, “in my opinion, was found a great
power for the mechanism of politic benevolence. There were revenues with a public
direction; there were men wholly set apart and educated to public purposes, without
any other than public ties, and public principles; men without a possibility of
converting the estate of the community into a private fortune; men denied to self
interest, whose avarice is for the community; men to whom personal poverty is
honour, and implicit obedience stands in the place of freedom. In vain shall a man
look to the possibility of making such things when he wants them. The winds blow as
they list. These institutions are the products of enthusiasm; they are the instruments of
wisdom. Wisdom cannot create materials, they are the gifts of nature, or chance; her
pride is in the use. To destroy any power,” you say, p. 233, “growing wild from the
rank productive force of the human mind, is almost tantamount in the moral world, to
the destruction of the apparently active properties of bodies in the material. Had you
no way of using the men, but by converting monks into pensioners?”
Upon this principle, of nopowerbeing to bedestroyed,but only to beregulated,the
greatest abuses may be perpetuated; because, in many cases, there is no preventing the
abuse, without destroying the power itself. Such, for example, is the claim of the
Popes to universal dominion over the christian church, and even over temporal
princes; in fact, the assumption ofall power in heaven and in earth.Such, also, is the
power of a priest to give absolution of sins. To you it signifies nothing to allege, that
these were altogether, and from the beginning,innovationsandabuses in the christian
system. You answer that they weregreat powers, which cannot be created at
pleasure,and therefore that a wise statesman would be an advocate for their
preservation, and not for their destruction.
To adopt your mode of reasoning, such deep rooted opinions, as formerly prevailed in
all the christian world, of an immense power lodged for the wisest purposes in one
visible head of the church, the sublime idea of onespiritual father of all christian
princes,who had no other bond of union, and who stood in great need of one, and the
confidence that all christians once had in the absolving power of their priests,
authorised to give advice and direction in all cases in whichconsciencewas
concerned; such opinions as these, you will say, cannot be produced at pleasure, they
were the slow growth of ages, and a foundation ofgreat powers,which, if once
destroyed, will never rise again. It was, therefore, nothing else than madness, you
would say, in the first reformers, to aim at the subversion of these powers, by refuting
the opinions on which they were founded. They should have contented themselves
with preserving these powers, sacred and inviolable, and have contrived how to make
a right use of them.
For the same reason, had you, in any country, as in Morocco, found the idea of the
absolute power in the prince, the sacredness of his person, and the happiness of dying
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 55 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1790

Online Library of Liberty: Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke
by his hand, you would have been careful not to destroy thatpower,which you might
not be able to re-produce; but, being happily in possession of it, would have made it
subservient to the good of the country.
I am glad, however, to find that, though all powers are to becontinued,you allow of
some improvement in theapplicationof them, which implies some change for the
better. This is also implied in what you say by way of apology for the old church
establishment of France, p. 206, that “it was an old one, and not frequently revised,”
as if somerevisal,at least, would have been proper. And if a revisal ofthis
establishment would have been proper, why not that ofours also? Has the church of
England acquired any prescriptive right, to stand in no need of any farther revision; or
are you, Sir, authorised to say to reformation,Hitherto shalt thou go, and no farther?
If not, why your sneers, p. 14, at a certainlay divine,who only proposed a revisal of
the English liturgy and articles, which, in the opinion of many serious and thinking
persons, though not in yours, very much want revision? Why, also, did you oppose the
petition of a number of conscientious clergymen, to be released from their present
obligation to subscribe to the thirty-nine articles, many of which you must yourself,
surely, think are not absolutely essential to christianity? Why, then, might not
clergymen, as well as others, have been at liberty to speculate freely, and think as they
saw reason to do, with respect to them?
On the same principles on which you opposed a revision of the church establishment
of thiscountry, you would, no doubt, have opposed a revision of that of France, of
Turkey, or of Indostan. However, the spirit of reformation, which is now gone forth,
isanother great power,as well as theexisting systemsto be reformed by it; and it is a
power which grows stronger as they grow weaker; so that there can be no doubt
which of them will finally prevail, notwithstanding the aid that your potent arm may
give them.
You boldly avow your attachment to old establishments, because they are old. “In this
enlightened age,” you say, p. 129, “I am bold enough to confess, that we are generally
men of untaught feelings, that, instead of casting away all our old prejudices, we
cherish them to a very considerable degree, and to take more shame to ourselves, we
cherish them because they are prejudices; and the longer they have lasted, and the
more generally they have prevailed, the more we cherish them.”
On this principle, Sir, had you been a Pagan at the time of the promulgation of
christianity, you would have continued one. You would also have opposed the
reformation. You would, no doubt, have cherished the long and deep rooted prejudice
of the earth being the center of our system, and every notion that wasold;the creed of
your nurse, and of your grandmother, in opposition to every thingnew.
Cherish them, then, Sir, as much as you please. Prejudice and error is only amist,
which the sun, which has now risen, will effectually disperse. Keep them about you as
tight as the countryman in the fable did his cloak; the same sun, without any more
violence than the warmth of his beams, will compel you to throw it aside, unless you
chuse to sweat under it, and bear the ridicule of all your cooler and less encumbered
companions. The spirit of free and rational enquiry is now abroad, and without any
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 56 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1790

Online Library of Liberty: Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke
aid from the powers of this world, will not fail to overturn all error and false religion,
wherever it is found, and neither the church of Rome, nor the church of England, will
be able to stand before it.
Instead of your chimerical idea ofdestroying no existing powers,but of converting
them to someuse, which may answer no better than an attempt to tame a lion, or a
tiger, adopt a plainer maxim, infinitely better adapted to the weak faculties of man,
viz. tofollow truth wherever it leads you,confident that the interests of truth will ever
be inseparable from those of virtue and happiness, and equally so to states, as to
individuals.
I Am, Dear Sir,
Yours, &C.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 57 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1790

Online Library of Liberty: Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke
[Back to Table of Contents]
LETTER XI.
Of The Sacredness Of The Revenues Of The Church.
Dear Sir,
YOUR opinion of thesacredness, andmajesty,of an established church, is most
conspicuous in what you say of itsrevenues.On this subject you appear to have
adopted maxims, which, I believe, were never before avowed by any Protestant, viz.
that the state has no power or authority over any thing, that has once been the property
of the church.
“From the united consideration of religion and constitutional policy,” you say, p. 150,
“from their opinion of a duty to make a sure provision for the consolation of the
feeble, and the instruction of the ignorant, they have incorporated and identified the
estate of the church with the mass of private property, of which the state is not the
proprietor,either foruse or dominion,but theguardianonly, and theregulator.They
have ordained that the provision of this establishment might be as stable as the earth
on which it stands, and should not fluctuate with the Euripus of funds and actions.”
If the state be not theproprietorof the church lands, they must be the absolute
unalienable propertyof thechurch,that is ofchurchmenonly, and without their
consent no alienation of them is lawful. Consequently, if all the members of the
House of Commons, the king, and all the temporal lords, should vote the alienation of
any part of them, it would be mererobbery without the consent of the bishops, or
perhaps that of the whole convocation assembled for the purpose; perhaps not even
then, the present clergy being onlytrustees,or having alife estatein a revenue which
belongs to their successors. But, surely, if I have any knowledge of the British
constitution, this doctrine is absolutely new to it, and certainly not deduced from the
actual conduct of parliament, which has disposed of a very great proportion of what
was once the property of the church. I even question whether the principle you here
avow, would at this day be acknowledged at St. Omers. The Catholics of France had
evidently no idea of the kind, and indeed it is for this that you reproach them.
The Dutch, and other protestant states, have confiscated all the old church property,
and pay their clergy from the same public treasury, out of which the officers of the
army and navy are paid; and they, no doubt, think themselves justified in so doing. A
great proportion of the tithes in this country, and, as I am informed, the whole of them
in Scotland, is now in the hands of lay proprietors, who, in your opinion, must all be
guilty ofsacrilege,though their conduct be sanctioned by the law of the land.
If the right of the church to its revenues is not to be affected by any act of a civil
legislature, if this right be not derived from anyordinance of man,it must come to
them from theordinance of God.But where, Sir, do you find any record of this?
There is no mention made of tithes, or of any permanent church property, in the New
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 58 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1790

Online Library of Liberty: Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke
Testament; and if it has been by the ordinance of God in any period subsequent to the
writing of those books, it is incumbent upon you, Sir, and other advocates for the
unalienable property of the church, to shew when the grant was made, and by what
miracle (for nothing else can answer the purpose) it was confirmed. But every thing
relative to the revenues of the church, is easily traced in history. We very well know
when,andwhence,every branch of it arose. It was altogether the ordinance ofmen,
and generally of weak, superstitious, and priest-ridden men. And surely the mischiefs
which have been found to arise from the folly of one age, ought to be removed by the
wisdom of a subsequent one. In one passage, indeed, you allow all that I contend for,
when you say, p. 154, “When once the common-wealth has established the estates of
the church as property;” for this implies that the estates of the church are the gift of
the common-wealth, or state; and what the state hasgiven,it may surelytake away.
This is one, among many inconsistencies, in your work.
Such, I flatter myself, is the light of the present day, that, confident as you are of your
maxim, and of the members of our legislature acting upon it, you will some time or
other find yourself mistaken. “The Commons of Great Britain,” you say, p. 156, “in a
national emergency, will never seek their resource from the confiscation of the estates
of the church and poor. Sacrilege and proscription are not among the ways and means
of our committee of supply. The Jews, in Change-alley, have not yet dared to hint
their hopes of a mortgage on the revenues belonging to the see of Canterbury. I am
not afraid that I shall be disavowed, when I assure you, that there is notonepublic
man in this kingdom whom you would wish to quote, no not one of any party or
description, who does not reprobate the dishonest, perfidious, and cruel confiscation
which the National Assembly has been compelled to make, of that property which it
was their first duty to protect.”
I am surprized, Sir, that you should not be sensible that this declaration is by no
means true in fact. It is in my own power to quote many persons in public life, who
greatly approve that conduct of the National Assembly of France which you so
strongly condemn. You forget thatSalus Reipublicæ est suprema lex;and if ever the
circumstances of this country should be such, as that either the interest of thechurch
or thestatemust be abandoned, I have no doubt but the former would be readily
sacrificed to the latter.
You have made the provision for thepoor as sacred as that for thechurch.But
certainly this was the institution ofman, or rather ofwoman; for it took its rise in the
time of queen Elizabeth, in this country, and is not known in any other. To many
persons, as well as to myself, our method of providing for the poor, is no proof of the
wisdom of our ancestors. It takes from man the necessity offoresight,and instead of
being the most provident, makes him the most improvident of all creatures. So far are
our poor laws from encouraging industry, that they encourage idleness, and of course
profligacy. Such is the state of this country, burthened with taxes to support the
church, and the poor, and to pay the interest (the principal is out of the question) of
debts contracted by the folly of our ancestors, that its ability to support itself under
them, is very problematical*.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 59 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1790

Online Library of Liberty: Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke
“It is,” you say, p. 149, “from our attachment to a church establishment, that the
English nation did not think it wise to intrust that great fundamental interest of the
whole, to what they trust no part of their civil or military public service, that is, to the
unsteady and precarious contribution of individuals. They go farther. They certainly
never have suffered, and never will suffer, the fixed estate of the church to be
converted into a pension, to depend on the Treasury, &c. The people of England think
that they have constitutional motives, as well as religious, against any project of
turning their independent clergy into ecclesiastical pensioners of state. They tremble
for their liberty, from the influence of a clergy dependent on the crown; they tremble
for the public tranquility, from the disorders of a factious clergy, if it were made to
depend upon any other than the crown. They therefore made their church, like their
king, and their nobility, independent.”
There are several positions in this paragraph, that appear to me rather extraordinary.
The clergy, to be as independent as the crown, or the nobility, should have a negative
in all proceedings in parliament. But the clergy are, in fact, dependent upon the
crown, and must necessarily be so, while the crown has the disposal of all bishoprics,
and other great preferments; and the effect of this is seen by their voting with the
crown. It is also no compliment to the general disposition of the clergy, that you
should tremble for the effects of theirfactions,if they were to depend upon any other
than the crown. I should think, however, that, if they be so dangerous a body of men,
you might make yourself rather easier if they were made to depend on thewhole
legislature,and not upon the crown only, to which they now give a dangerous
accession of power.
But, Sir, only take away the emoluments of the clergy, and leave them to subsist, as
we dissenting ministers do, and as the apostles and bishops in primitive times did, on
the voluntary contributions of those who are benefited by their ministry, and you will
effectually remove all cause of trembling on their account. Let them be naturally as
quarrelsome as dogs, they will be as quiet as lambs, if no bone of contention be
thrown among them. What danger arises fromour divisions, or those of the many
discordant sects which have ever existed in North America? Be they ever so great, we
never trouble the state with them, and we are unanimous and hearty in every common
cause, respecting either christianity or public liberty.
I Am, Dear Sir,
Yours, &C.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 60 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1790

Online Library of Liberty: Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke
[Back to Table of Contents]
LETTER XII.
Of The Danger Of The Church, And Of The Test Laws.
Dear Sir,
THE cry of thechurch being in danger,is almost as old as the church itself, and has
been kept up by its friends, and physicians, whenever it has suited their purpose, from
the earliest times to the present day. This has served as an excuse for every outrage
upon others; as if nothing was ever meant by them, but to secure itself. And thus the
most bloody andoffensivewars are often made under the cover of being merely
defensiveones, which are always held to be lawful. Now, had this church of yours,
whose fears and cries have always been the signal of alarm to all its neighbours, being
made of proper materials, and constructed in a proper manner, it would never have
had any thing to fear. Thechurch of Christis built upon a rock, and we are assured
thatthe gates of hell shall not prevail against it.Had your church been built upon this
rock of truth, it would have had nothing to fear. Its own evidence and excellence
would have supported it. Should thestateitself be overturned, the people would, of
themselves, and from predilection, reinstate their favouritechurchin all its former
rights and privileges. But you are sensible it has not this hold on the minds of the
people, and you justly suspect that, if any misfortune should happen to it, they would
never rebuild it, but, if left to their own free choice, would adopt some other plan,
more useful and commodious.
Time was when your church pretended tofear where no fear was,and being then
vigorous, her cries were heard as the roaring of a lion. Of late she has been so feeble,
that we only amuse ourselves with them; and now the danger is really transferred
from us to herself.
As you, Sir, are so tremblingly alive all over,for the fate of this dear church of yours,
I will tell you two real causes of apprehension with respect to it, the one from without,
and the other from within.
I. Be afraid of war, or any thing that shall add to the public burdens. For whenever the
time shall come that the interest of the national debt cannot be paid (and that time
certainly approaches) sacred as the property of the church might be in your pious
hands, in whose mind, as you say, p. 147, “a continued and general approbation of the
church establishment is so worked, that you are not able to distinguish what you have
learned from others from the result of your own meditations;” other persons, having
had a different education, may be able to make this distinction, and without any dread
of divine judgments, may, while you stand aghast with horror, and expiring with
dismay, apply the hallowed treasure to some unhallowed use. Had our present
minister actually entered into the war that some suppose he did not do wisely to
provoke, and the consequence had been, as it probably would, the addition of another
hundred millions to our debt, thoughyoumight not tremble for what you consider as
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 61 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1790

Online Library of Liberty: Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke
theark of Godin this country, other persons, whose faith was not so strong, certainly
would.
You, Sir, appear not to be insensible of the new and critical situation into which
immense public debts have brought most European nations, our own not excepted.
The apparent stability of these governments has encouraged them to venture upon a
system, which, by calling forth the powers of future generations in aid of the present,
has enabled them to make extraordinary exertions on particular occasions. Had there
been wisdom in these exertions, posterity, being benefited by them, would have
reason to thank their ancestors. But exertions of this kind exceeding the natural
powers of the state, have resembled those convulsive motions of the muscles which
exhaust their force, and debilitate them with respect to future exertions. And if this
system be pursued, as in all probability it will, the time must come when even these
extraordinary resources will fail, and we shall then find ourselves in the very same
difficulties in which the French are involved at present.
In this case (which it behoves us to be looking forward to, that we may collect all our
wisdom in order to lessen the danger with which it threatens us) do you imagine, Sir,
that we shall be able to preserve our present government in all its forms, civil and
ecclesiastical, any more than the French have been able to preserve theirs? Do not
flatter yourself so much. That great crisis will be the touchstone to our government, as
well as to that of France. Whatever shall be then thought to beunsound in the
constitution, and to have contributed, directly or indirectly, to bring us into our
difficulties, will be marked for excision, and if we must, as it were,begin again,as
the French have found themselves under a necessity of doing, we shall, no doubt,
endeavour to begin upon a better plan, and retain as few as possible of the
imperfections of which we now complain, and shall then complain of more.
Is it not our immense public debt, that has in various ways contributed to the
encreasedpower of the crown(of which you, Sir, among others, not long ago
complained) and is it possible, then, thatthisshould continue the same, when this
debt, which now supports it, can no longer be supported? Is not our present
shamefullyunequal representationanother circumstance connected with the power of
the crown, giving it a decided majority in the House of Commons? Can this,
therefore, be continued, when the power of the crown is diminished; and will not
these great changes in the civil constitution be followed by many others?
In this necessary reformation of thecivilgovernment, will it be possible, think you, to
prevent all enquiry intoecclesiasticalmatters, which are now so closely connected
with things of a civil nature? In this case, is it a certainty thatanychurch
establishment will be continued; or if there be, will it be precisely that which now
subsists? Will the bishops retain their seats in Parliament? Will the spiritual courts be
continued? Will the clergy be maintained by tithes? Will the doctrines of the church
undergo no change? Will the subscription to all the thirty-nine articles be still
enforced? Will the universities remain shut to the Dissenters, who cannot subscribe to
them? Will the test laws remain in force, to exclude us from all civil offices, &c. &c.
&c.? If this be your opinion,great,indeed, Sir,is your faith,greater, I imagine, than
that of many an archbishop. Though however, it should be equal to theremovingof
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 62 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1790

Online Library of Liberty: Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke
all thesemountains,you will, I doubt not, imagine this favourite church of yours to be
rather safer in times ofpeace,and without any farther encrease of our national debt,
than with awar that might double it.
II. This danger fromwithoutis uncertain, and may be warded off; but not so that from
within.I mean the growing light of the age, in consequence of which we are more and
more sensible of the absurdity of the doctrines, the insufficiency of the discipline, and
the oppression of the revenues, of your church. The people of this country will at
length discover that what they have paid so dearly for, as abenefit,is really a
nuisance,that it is hostile to the clearest truth, and subversive of rational liberty, that
very liberty for which you, Sir, profess to be a warm advocate.
Dissenters of one denomination or other, are very much increased of late years, and
many of them are avowedly hostile to every establishment. The methodists are by no
means attached to it. Few of them ever trouble your churches, and frequently in great
bodies become dissenters; and the far greater part of the nominal churchmen only
hold to the church from form and custom; the more serious and intelligent of them
earnestly wishing for a change, but desirous of promoting it without noise or risk. Few
persons of rank attend your worship, or any worship, and are only attached to the
church for secular purposes. But this and every thing else, short of a real approbation
and predilection, are uncertain and poor props for so old and decayed a building as
yours is.
The increase of dissenters is a fact that you and your clergy are either wholly ignorant
of, or are strangely inattentive to. I shall mention only one instance. I have resided in
Birmingham only ten years, and there are now building the eighth, ninth, and tenth,
new places of dissenting or methodist worship, besides another building converted
into a place of worship, in this town, all within this short period, nine of them for new
congregations, and the others for increased ones. Another is talked of, and many have
been built in the neighbourhood; and in this time there has not been one additional
church, or chapel, for the members of the church of England. The increase of the
dissenters and methodists in Sheffield, in Leeds, and, I have no doubt, in other
manufacturing towns, has been nearly in the same proportion.
Every controversy in which churchmen have meddled has been to their disadvantage.
The heads of the church therefore now wisely discourage all controversy, but even
this policy will not avail them long. Every clergyman is not wise, andfools,as they
say, will be meddling;and every meddling is to their hurt, and that of their cause.
Let thinking people, then, judge what must be the fate of a church, whose
fundamental doctrines are disbelieved by men of sense and inquiry, whose articles are
well known not to be subscribedbonâ fideby those who officiate in it, while the truly
enlightened and serious either keep out of the church, or relinquish their preferment in
it. And this is very much the case with the church of England at present.
The alliance of any state with so weak and tottering a church as yours must either be
dissolved, or both must fall together. And, astonished as you are at “the steady eye
with which” you say, p. 85, “we are prepared to view the greatest calamity that can
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 63 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1790

Online Library of Liberty: Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke
befal this country,” the dissolution of this fatal alliance is still the object of our most
ardent wishes. By the calmest representations, and the most earnest remonstrances, we
are endeavouring to bring about a peaceable separation, attended with no calamity.
We have therefore nothing to blame ourselves for, if that calamity, which we foresee,
and deplore, but which the obstinacy of others may put it out of our power to prevent,
should come. Happy is such a country as America, where no such alliance as that of
church and state was ever formed, where no such unnatural mixture of ecclesiastical
and civil polity was ever made. They see our errors, and wisely avoid them. We also
may see them, but when it will be too late.
You, Sir, who with many others have lately joined in the cry of the church being in
danger, have thought to guard it bylaws and tests,excluding Dissenters from all
places of trust and profit. Paying our full share to the public taxes, and having always
distinguished ourselves by our industry, in manufactures and commerce (all our
trading towns abounding with Dissenters) we thought it not unreasonable to request a
right of admission, at the will of the crown, or the election of our fellow subjects, to
such advantages as arise from that flourishing state of the country to which, it is not
denied that, we have eminently contributed. Thrice we have made the application, and
twice you, Sir, made no opposition to us. We therefore flattered ourselves that, having
been in other respects a friend toequal liberty,especially in America and Ireland, and
Scotland also, where no such tests are known, you would have been a friend tous. But
it seems that, after deeply ruminating on the subject, and having, no doubt, prayed for,
and as you thought obtained, more light than you had before, you most unexpectedly,
and with peculiar warmth and fierceness, opposed us*.
As you have given some attention to the case of the dissenters, and, in your speech in
our favour, complained of the hardship of our being obliged to subscribe to the
articles of the church, from which we derive no emolument, I wonder that you do not
likewise see the unreasonableness of our being subjected to any other hardship on the
same principle. As we derive noadvantagefrom the established church, we ought not
to suffer any unnecessarydisadvantagefrom our nonconformity to it. But we
certainly do so, if we be excluded from all civil offices and emoluments on that
account. Must the members of this favourite church of yours, engross all the good
things ofthis lifeas well as those ofanother,and must we unfortunate Dissenters
partake of neither?
That there is danger threatening your church, I clearly see. But the method you have
adopted has no tendency to lessen, but only to increase that danger. The old adage,
which you had forgotten isdivide et impera;but by holding us all out as equally
objects of exclusion from places of trust and power, you give us a common interest,
and abond of union,which we hardly thought of before. Far from being discouraged
by our repulses, we shall not fail to renew our application with more confidence than
ever, seeing nothing but justice on our side, and jealous bigotry on yours.
Had you admitted us to an equal participation of civil rights, we might have thought
less of our religious ones. Indeed, persons who are candidates forcivil officesare not
apt to be zealous in matters ofreligion;or if they were, the Dissenters in office being
greatly out-numbered by the members of the established church, in the same or
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 64 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1790

Online Library of Liberty: Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke
similar offices, and divided among themselves, their power of hurting the state would
have been nothing. A child in politics might have seen this, but you, Sir, did not.
You also did not see that, what we most of all wish, and what you have the greatest
reason to dread, is not any temporal power, or influence, that we have any chance of
acquiring. This we think little about, butdiscussion,the free discussion of every thing
relating to religion. For, distant as they may appear in idea, all religious subjects have
a relation to each other, the doctrine of the test and that of the trinity, the power of a
justice of peace and that of a bishop or archbishop. Touch but any extremity of the
web, and the vibration will be felt to the center, and to every other extremity.
Your clergy themselves force this upon us. For they cannot rail at us as Dissenters,
but they must needs glance at ouropinions,and especially such as they imagine will
render us most obnoxious, never forgettingunitarianism.Consequently, when we
defend ourselves, not being apt to entertain doubts of the goodness of our cause, we
pursue our antagonists through the whole field of their argument. We boldly assert the
unity of God,and the purity and simplicity of his worship. We exclaim against all
usurpation of the rights of our only law-giver Jesus Christ, by priests or kings, by
councils or parliaments. On these topics we are always ready tocry aloud and not
spare. In this manner, Sir, you raise a storm the force of which you and your church
will not be able to stand.
It is amusing to observe how very differently the same things strike different persons,
according to their previous educations and habits of thinking. Dr. Price advises those
who object to the religion prescribed by public authority, and who yet cannot
altogether approve of any other, that is openly professed in their country, to set up a
separate worship for themselves. To me nothing appears more reasonable than this
conduct; and yet you, Sir, endeavour, p. 15, to turn it into ridicule; no doubt, because
to you it really appears in a ridiculous light. Butridicule is not the test of truth,and if
reason and common sense is to be heard, it must surely appear even to yourself, if you
reflect a moment on the subject, that upon any other principle than that of Dr. Price,
no reformation can be justified. Because, upon the very same principle, whatever it
be, that any person is authorised to dissent from a mode of worship set up by the state,
he is authorised to dissent from any that may be set up by private persons; and if he
think the public profession of religion in the form ofpublic worshipto be a duty, he is
obliged in conscience to set up one of his own, whether more or fewer persons, or any
besides his own family, will join him in it. And where, Sir, would be the great
inconvenience of masters of families, of whatever rank, beingpriestsas well askings
in their own houshold? What is there in the duty of a teacher of christianity, that you,
Sir, are not qualified to discharge? And this age furnishes abundant helps for those
who are not qualified. If any thing else be an obstruction to this scheme, it must arise
from the influence of mere fashion, or superstition.
You, Sir, seem to dread anumber of sectsamong christians. But what serious
inconvenience would arise from their being increased even ten fold? It would be
much better for the state, than if there were only two. Religious bigotry would also be
diminished by this means, and the members of these sects would sooner learn to
exercise charity for each other, distinguishing the great things in which all christians
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 65 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1790

Online Library of Liberty: Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke
agree, from the comparatively smaller things in which any of them differ. In this way,
also, they would sooner arrive at arational uniformity;the points of difference being
freely canvassed, and truth prevailing, and establishing itself, as, no doubt, it will in
the end.
I am now, Sir, about to relieve your attention, and that of our readers, to the subject of
theconnexion,or, as it is called, thealliance,between the church and the state, but I
cannot wholly conclude without expressing my earnest wish that it may be thoroughly
considered in every point of view.
It certainly opens a field of very important discussion for philosophers, politicians,
and divines; and it is not to be treated in an authoritative dogmatical way. That
christian ministers should be paid by the state, rather than by those who chuse to be
instructed by them; that they ought to have temporal courts, with the power of
inflicting civil penalties; that princes should have the nomination of them; that some
of them should be equal in rank and power to temporal peers; and that articles of faith
should have the sanction of a temporal legislature, are by no meansaxioms,or self
evident truths, in a system of civil policy. There must, therefore, be moresimple
principles,from which, if they be proper expedients in government, their necessity, or
expedience, may be deduced. Let us then see what those principles are, and in what
manner the deduction is made.
It cannot be said, that the necessity, or expedience, of this mixture of civil and
ecclesiastical power is to be taken for granted; these things having never been found
asunder; because, for many centuries, as I have shewn, all the particulars mentioned
above were unknown in the christian world, and some of them are comparatively of
very late date. Let us then examine their real origin, and consider the circumstances in
which they arose; and let us see whether our present circumstances reallyrequireany
such institutions.
It is time, however, to draw the attention of politicians to the subject, and to compare
all the consequences which either actually have attended, or which may probably
attend, each of the two schemes.
Infinite, as every person acquainted with history must acknowledge, have been the
evils that have resulted to mankind, and especially the christian world, from the
interference of civil power in matters of religion. Hence all persecution in every age,
and almost all the hatred and animosity that has arisen among the different sects and
parties of Christians, for which there would have been very little food, or exercise, if
civil magistrates had not interfered in the disputes of theologians. Hence a great
additional cause of taxation, and generally in the most inconvenient form; and hence
the introduction of a totallynew power,which it has been thought necessary to
combine with the old ones in the system of government, and which has generally been
placed on a par with all the rest; thechurchand thestatehaving become correlative
terms. And as nothing is found more difficult to balance thantwo powers,the one
necessarily gaining what the other loses, the struggle between these two was
incessant, and productive of the worst effects, for many centuries, in all parts of
christendom. At the reformation the power of the church was very much broken, but
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 66 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1790

Online Library of Liberty: Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke
still too much of it remains in all countries, and more of it in this, than in any
Protestant state whatever. For in no other of them have ecclesiastics a seat in the
supreme legislature of the nation.
But though the power of the church was derived from the feudal system, this most
absurd of all its parts still remains, when many other parts of it, far less exceptionable
and inconvenient, have been abolished. But as the church cannot now subsist of itself,
as it did formerly, when it overawed the whole of the state; it gives a vast additional
power to the crown, on which it is now wholly dependent; our princes having
assumed thatsupremacy over the church,which had been usurped by the popes.
Here, then, is an ample field of argument; and why may not the discussion be as cool
and amicable as any other? You, Sir, have made it a subject of popular declamation,
rather than of dispassionate reasoning; but that need not hinder others from taking it
up in a different and better manner: and if you will please to change your style, and
assume the character of aphilosopher,and not that of a mererhetorician,it will be
very agreeable to us to have you of the party. You are now of an age in which I should
have imagined, that the powers of theimaginationwould have been more checked by
those ofreason. On this subject, thepassions, as well as theimagination,should be
absolutely silent, and the friends and enemies of church establishments should simply
reason together.
It is time that we no longerhalt between two opinions,so very important and opposite
to each other, as, whether religion should be left to every man’s free choice, like
philosophy, or medicine, or it should be imposed upon men, whether they chuse it or
not; whether any man, or body of men, have a right to prescribe articles of faith to
others, or whether every man should be left to think and act for himself in this respect,
accountable only to God, and his own conscience. Let us come to a seriousissuein
this business, and if christian states have gone upon wrong and erroneous principles,
neither agreeable to truth, nor favourable to the interests of society, let them by all
means be reformed, and as speedily, and with as little inconvenience, as possible. Or,
if the constitution we complain of be a good one, orthe best all things considered,let
it appear to be so, in fair and open discussion, and we shall acquiesce in it.
In theseLetters,I have by no means exhausted this subject. Much more remains to be
said, and much more I have myself advanced in other publications, especially in my
Essay on the principles of civil government,the second edition, which includes what I
have advanced onchurch authority,in reply to Dr. Balguy; and in myFamiliar letters
addressed to the inhabitants of Birmingham.
To shew that I am not singular in my opinion of the impropriety of civil
establishments of religion, I would more particularly recommend to your notice, and
that of my readers, an excellent tract of Mr. Berrington’s, intitled,The Rights of
Dissenters; nor is he the only Catholic who sees this business of thealliance of
church and statein the same light that I do. Different as are our systems of religion, in
a variety of important respects, we are equally willing that they should stand or fall by
their proper evidence, and we ask no aid of the civil power to support them.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 67 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1790

Online Library of Liberty: Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke
I shall close this article with an extract fromDr. Ramsay’s History of the American
Revolution.Speaking of the new forms of government which were framed after the
emancipation of the Americans from their subjection of this country, he says, Vol. I.
p. 355, “It was one of the peculiarities of these forms of government, that all religious
establishments were abolished. Some retained a constitutional distinction between
christians and others, with respect to eligibility to office; but the idea of supporting
one denomination at the expence of others, or of raising any one sect of protestants to
a legal pre-eminence, was universally reprobated. Thealliance between church and
statewas compleatly broken, and each was left to support itself independent of the
other. The world,” he says, Vol. II. p. 317, “will soon see the result of an experiment
in politics, and be able to determine whether the happiness of society is encreased by
religious establishments, or diminished by the want of them.” It is an experiment, I
will add, on a sufficiently large scale, and in a very reasonable time, we may expect to
see the result of the process.
I Am, Dear Sir,
Yours, &C.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 68 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1790

Online Library of Liberty: Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke
[Back to Table of Contents]
LETTER XIII.
Of The Prospect Of The General Enlargement Of Liberty,
Civil And Religious, Opened By The Revolution In France.
Dear Sir,
I CANNOT conclude theseLetters,without congratulating, notyou,Sir, or the many
admirers of your performance, who have no feeling ofjoyon the occasion, but the
French nation, and the world; I mean the liberal, the rational, and the virtuous part of
the world, on the great revolution that has taken place in France, as well as on that
which some time ago took place in America. Such events as these teach the doctrine
of liberty, civilandreligious,with infinitely greater clearness and force, than a
thousand treatises on the subject. They speak a language intelligible to all the world,
and preach a doctrine congenial to every human heart.
These great events, in many respects unparalleled in all history, make a totally new, a
most wonderful, and important, æra in the history of mankind. It is, to adopt your own
rhetorical style, a change from darkness to light, from superstition to sound
knowledge, and from a most debasing servitude to a state of the most exalted
freedom. It is a liberating of all the powers of man from that variety of fetters, by
which they have hitherto been held. So that, in comparison with what has been, now
only can we expect to see what men really are, and what they can do.
The generality of governments have hitherto been little more than a combination of
the fewagainstthe many;and to the mean passions and low cunning of these few,
have the great interests of mankind been too long sacrificed. Whole nations have been
deluged with blood, and every source of future prosperity has been drained, to gratify
the caprices of some of the most despicable, or the most execrable, of the human
species. For what else have been the generality of kings, their ministers of state, or
their mistresses, to whose wills whole kingdoms have been subject? What can we say
of those who have hitherto taken the lead in conducting the affairs of nations, but that
they have commonly been eitherweakor wicked,and sometimes both? Hence the
common reproach of all histories, that they exhibit little more than a view of the vices
and miseries of mankind.
Hitherto, also, infinite have been the mischiefs in which all nations have been
involved, on account ofreligion,with which, as it concerns only God and men’s own
consciences, civil government, as such, has nothing to do. Statesmen, misled by
ignorant or interested priests, have taken upon them to prescribe what men should
believe and practice, in order to get to heaven, when they themselves have often
neither believed, nor practised, any thing under that description. They have set up
idols, to which all men, under the severest penalties, have been compelled to bow; and
the wealth and power of populous nations, which might have been employed in great
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 69 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1790

Online Library of Liberty: Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke
and useful undertakings, have been diverted from their proper channels, to enforce
their unrighteous decrees. By this means have mankind been kept for ages in a state of
bondage worse than Egyptian, the bondage of the mind.
How glorious, then, is the prospect, the reverse of all the past, which is now opening
upon us, and upon the world. Government, we may now expect to see, not only in
theory, and in books, but in actual practice, calculated for the general good, and taking
no more upon it than the general good requires; leaving all men the enjoyment of as
many of theirnatural rightsas possible, and no more interfering with matters of
religion, with men’s notions concerning God, and a future state, than with philosophy
or medicine.
After the noble example of America, we may expect, in due time, to see the governing
powers of all nations confining their attention to thecivilconcerns of them, and
consulting their welfare in the present state only; in consequence of which they may
all be flourishing and happy.Truth of all kinds, and especiallyreligious truth,meeting
with no obstruction, and standing in no need of heterogeneous supports, will then
establish itself by its own evidence; and whatever isfalseand delusive, all the forms
of superstition, every corruption of true religion, and all usurpation over the rights of
conscience, which have been supported by power or prejudice, will be universally
exploded, as they ought to be.
Together with the general prevalence of the true principles of civil government, we
may expect to see the extinction of allnational prejudice,and enmity, and the
establishment ofuniversal peaceand good will among all nations. When the affairs of
the various societies of mankind shall be conducted by those who shall truly represent
them, who shall feel as they feel, and think as they think; who shall really understand,
and consult their interests, they will no more engage in those mutually offensivewars,
which the experience of many centuries has shown to be constantly expensive and
ruinous. They will no longer covet what belongs to others, which they have found to
be of no real service to them, but will content themselves with making the most of
their own.
The very idea ofdistant possessions will be even ridiculed. The East and the West
Indies, and every thingwithout ourselveswill be disregarded, and wholly excluded
from all European systems; and only those divisions of men, and of territory, will take
place, which the common convenience requires, and not such as the mad and
insatiable ambition of princes demands. No part of America, Africa, or Asia, will be
held in subjection to any part of Europe, and all the intercourse that will be kept up
among them, will be for their mutual advantage.
The causes ofcivil wars,the most distressing of all others, will likewise cease, as well
as those of foreign ones. They are chiefly contentions foroffices,on account of the
power and emoluments annexed to them. But when thenatureanduses of all civil
offices shall be well understood, the power and emoluments annexed to them, will not
be an object sufficient to produce a war. Is it at all probable, that there will ever be a
civil war in America, about the presidentship of theUnited States?And when the
chief magistracies in other countries shall be reduced to their proper standard, they
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 70 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1790

Online Library of Liberty: Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke
will be no more worth contending for, than they are in America. If the actual business
of a nation be done as well for the small emolument of that presidentship, as the
similar business of other nations, there will be no apparent reason why more should
be given for doing it.
If there be a superfluity of public money, it will not be employed to augment the
profusion, and increase the undue influence, of individuals, but in works of great
public utility, which are always wanted, and which nothing but the enormous
expences of government, and of wars, chiefly occasioned by the ambition of kings
and courts, have prevented from being carried into execution. The expence of the late
American war only would have converted all the waste grounds of this country into
gardens. What canals, bridges, and noble roads, &c. &c. would it not have made for
us? If thepride of nationsmust be gratified, let it be in such things as these, and not in
the idle pageantry of a court, calculated only to corrupt and enslave a nation.
Another cause of civil wars has been an attachment to certain persons and families, as
possessed of some inherent rightto kingly power. Such were the bloody wars
between the houses of York and Lancaster, in this country. But when, besides the
reduction of the power of crowns within their proper bounds (when it will be no
greater than the public good requires) that kind of respect for princes which is
founded on mere superstition (exactly similar to that which has been attached to
priests in all countries) shall vanish, as all superstition certainly will before real
knowledge, wise nations will not involve themselves in war for the sake of any
particular persons, or families, who have never shewn an equal regard for them. They
will consider their own interest more, and that of their magistrates less.
Other remaining causes of civil war are different opinions about modes of
government, and differences of interests between provinces. But when mankind shall
be a little more accustomed to reflection, and consider the miseries of civil war, they
will have recourse to any other method of deciding their differences, in preference to
that of the sword. It was taken for granted, that the moment America had thrown off
the yoke of Great Britain, the different states would go to war among themselves, on
some of these accounts. But the event has not verified the prediction, nor is it at all
probable that it ever will. The people of that country are wiser than such prophets in
this.
If timebe allowed for the discussion of differences, so great a majority will form one
opinion, that the minority will see the necessity of giving way. Thus willreason be
the umpire in all disputes, and extinguish civil wars as well as foreign ones. The
empire of reason will ever be the reign of peace.
This, Sir, will be the happy state of things, distinctly and repeatedly foretold in many
prophecies, delivered more than two thousand years ago; when the common parent of
mankind willcause wars to cease to the ends of the earth,when men shall beat their
swords into plough-shares, and their spears into pruning books; when nation shall no
more rise up against nation, and when they shall learn war no more.Is. ii. 4. Micah
iv. 3. This is a state of things which good sense, and the prevailing spirit of
commerce, aided by christianity, and true philosophy, cannot fail to effect in time. But
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 71 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1790

Online Library of Liberty: Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke
it can never take place while mankind are governed in the wretched manner in which
they now are. For peace can never be established, but upon the extinction of the
causes of war,which exist in all the present forms of government, and in the political
maxims which will always be encouraged by them. I mention this topic in a letter to
you,on the idea that you are a real believer in revelation, though your defence of all
church establishments, as such, is no argument in favour of this opinion; the most
zealous abettors ofthem,and the most determined enemies of all reformation, having
been unbelievers in all religion, which they have made use of merely as an engine of
state.
In this new condition of the world, there may still bekings,but they will be no longer
sovereigns,or supreme lords, no human beings to whom will be ascribed such titles as
those ofmost sacred, or most excellent majesty.There will be no more such a
profanation of epithets, belonging to God only, by the application of them to mortals
like ourselves. There will bemagistrates,appointed and paid for the conservation of
order, but they will only be considered as the firstservants of the people,and
accountable to them. Standing armies, those instruments of tyranny, will be unknown,
though the people may be trained to the use of arms, for the purpose of repelling the
invasion ofBarbarians. For no other description of men will have recourse to war, or
think of disturbing the repose of others; and till they become civilized, as in the
natural progress of things they necessarily must, they will be sufficiently overawed by
the superior power of nations that are so.
There will still bereligion,and of courseministersof it; as there will be teachers of
philosophy, and practitioners in medicine; but it will no longer be the concern of the
state. There will be no moreLord Bishops, or Archbishops,with the titles, and
powers, of temporal princes. Every man will provide religion for himself; and
therefore it will be such as, after due enquiry, and examination, he shall think to be
founded on truth, and best calculated to make men good citizens, good friends, and
good neighbours in this world, as well as to fit them for another.
Government, being thus simple in its objects, will be unspeakably lessexpensivethan
it is at present, as well as far moreeffectualin answering its proper purpose. There
will then be little to provide for besides the administration of justice, or the
preservation of the peace, which it will be the interest of every man to attend to, in aid
of government.
They are chiefly our vices and follies that lay us under contribution, in the form of the
taxeswe now pay; and they will, of course, become superfluous, as the world grows
wiser and better. It is a most unreasonable sum that we now pay for the single article
of government.We give, perhaps, the amount of one half our property, for the secure
enjoyment of the rest, which, after all, for want of a good police, is very insecure.
However, the enormous debts which our present systems of government, and the
follies of our governors, have intailed upon us, like all otherevilsin the plan of
providence, promise to be eventually the cause of the greatestgood,as necessary
means of bringing about the happy state of things above described. And the
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 72 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1790

Online Library of Liberty: Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke
improvement of Europe may serve as an example to the rest of the world, and be the
instrument of other important changes, which I shall not dwell upon in this place.
By means ofnational debts,the wheels of several European governments are already
so much clogged, that it is impossible they should go on much longer. We see our
taxes, even without war, continually increasing. The very peace establishment of
France could not be kept up any longer, and the same must soon be the situation of
other nations. All the causes which have operated to the increase of these debts,
continue to operate, and with increased force; so that our approach to thisgreat crisis
of our affairs, is not equable, but accelerated. The present generation has seen the debt
of this nation rise from a mere trifle to an amount that already threatens ruin. And will
not the next generation, if not the present, see this ruin?
If the present change of the French government, brought on, to use a phrase of yours,
byfiscal difficulties,has been attended with such an interruption of their
manufactures, such a stagnation of their commerce, and such a diminution of their
current specie, as has greatly added to the difficulties of that country; what are we to
expect, in a similar crisis, inthiscountry, which depends so much more upon
manufactures and commerce than France ever did, and which has far less resource
within itself?
If you, Sir, together with your old or your new friends, can steer the ship of the state
through the storm, which we all see to be approaching, you will have more wisdom
and steadiness than has yet been found in any who have hitherto been at the head of
our affairs. And if, in these circumstances, you can save thechurch,as well as the
state,you will deserve no less thancanonization,andSt. Edmundwill be the greatest
name in the calendar. But great occasions call forth, and in a manner create, great and
unknown ability, as we have lately seen in the history of the American revolution. A
good providence also governs the world, and therefore we need not despair.
If the condition of other nations be as much bettered as that of France will probably
be, by her improved system of government, this great crisis, dreadful as it appears in
prospect, will bea consummation devoutly to be wished for,and though calamitous to
many, perhaps to many innocent persons, will be eventually most glorious and happy.
To you, Sir, all this may appear such wild declamation, as your treatise appears to me.
But speculations of this kind contribute to exhilerate my mind, as the consideration of
the French revolution has contributed to disturb and distress yours; and thus is
verified the common proverb, which says,One man’s meat is another man’s poison.
If this be a dream, it is, however, a pleasing one, and has nothing in it malignant, or
unfriendly to any. All that I look to promises no exclusive advantage to myself, or my
friends; but an equal field for every generous exertion toall,and it makes the great
object of all our exertions to be the public good.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 73 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1790

Online Library of Liberty: Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke
I Am, Dear Sir,
Your Very Humble Servant,
J. PRIESTLEY.
Birmingham,Jan.1, 1791.
[*]C’étoit, sans doute, une assez grande occasion; c’étoit un assez grand travail, que
de concourir à régénérer la France, à y sondre la liberté, & à y créer des lois & des
mœurs.
[†]Une très petite portion d’individus pourroit rendre inutiles les intentiones pures de
la majorité.
[*]Il est cependant vrai de dire, que tous les grandes principes, tous ces principes
tutélaires des sociétés, conservateurs des droits de l’homme, & de sa dignité,
protecteurs de son repos & de son bonheur, y sont renfermés. Je crois que cette
declaration pourra être applaudie, le jour où les troubles qui s’élevoient, pendant que
nous la rédigions, seront calmés.
[*]I am informed by a gentleman who was at Paris during the whole of these
transactions, that there is no truth at all in what Mr. Burke says of the queen’s
bedchamber being broke into, or the centinel killed. Nothing of the kind, he says, was
ever heard of till a considerable time after the event, and the report arose from the
Aristocrates.
[*]This title ofsovereign lord,derived from the Feudal system, given to a king of
England, is by no means agreeable to the nature and spirit of our present constitution,
which is alimited monarchy,and notunlimitedas that title implies. Our only proper
sovereignis the parliament.
[*]Neale says, that after the execution of his companion Mr. Cooke, who suffered
with the greatest heroism, be resumed his courage, and said to the sheriff, “Sir, you
have slain one of the servants of the Lord, and made me behold it, on purpose to
terrify and discourage me; but God has made it an ordinance for my strengthening and
encouragement.”
[*]This is done in England by the king issuing aConge d’Elireto the chapters of
each cathedral, impowering them to chuse such persons only as are named to them;
but in Ireland it is done without this form.
[*]Would it not be reasonable to fix some time, beyond which it should not be
deemed right to bind posterity? If our ancestors make a foolishlaw,we scruple not to
repeal it; but if they make foolishwars, and incur foolishdebts,we have, at present,
no remedy whatever.
[*]Let Mr. Burke’s conduct with respect to the Test Act, be compared with the
following passage in his present pamphlet. “You do not imagine that I wish to confine
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 74 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1790

Online Library of Liberty: Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke
power, authority, and distinction, to blood, and names, and titles. No Sir, there is no
qualification for government but true virtue and wisdom. Wherever they are actually
found, they have, in whatever state, condition, profession, or trade, the passport of
heaven to human place, and honour. Woe to the country which would madly and
impiously reject the service of the talents and virtues, civil, military, or religious, that
are given to grace, or to serve it, and would condemn to obscurity every thing formed
to diffuse lustre and glory around a state.” p. 74.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 75 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1790