PL RESEARCH LIBRARIES 

^3433 08236368 4 

\ 

'  (fe iv 

SCIENTIFIC COIfliKSl'ONDESCE 

JOSEPH PRIESTLEY. 

NINETY-SEVEN LETTERS 

ADDRESSED TO 

JOSIAH WEDGWOOD,  SIE JOSEPH BANKS,  CAPT.  JAMES KE1B,  JAMES 

WATT,  Dr.  WILLIAM WITHERING,  Dr.  BENJAMIN RUSH, 

AND OTHERS. 

TOGETHEH WITH 

AN A P P E X I)  I X  : 

I.    THE LIKENESSES OF PRIESTLEY IN OIL,  INK,  MARBLE,  AND METAL. 
II.    THE LUNAR SOCIETY OF BIRMINGHAM. 
III.     INVENTORY OF PRIESTLEY'S LABORATORY IN 1791. 

EDITED,   WITH 

COPIOUS BIOGRAPHICAL,  BIBLIOGRAPHICAL,  AND EXPLANATORY NOTES, 

BY 

HENRY CARRINGTON BOLTON. 

NEW YORK : 
PRIVATELY PRINTED. 

1892. 

-7,4* 

Copyright,  1891 
II Carrixgton Boltox. 

i iPIES PRINTED. 

•    PRINTING HOUSE, 
PHILADELPHIA. 

"  If we choose one man as a type of the intellectual energy 
of the eighteenth century we could hardly find a better than 
Joseph Priestley,  though his was not the greatest mind of the 
century.  His versatility,  eagerness,  activity,  and humanity; 
the immense range of his curiosity in all things,  physical, 
moral,  or social ;  his place in science,  in theology,  in philoso- 
phy, and in politics  ;  his peculiar relation to the Revolution 
and the pathetic story of his unmerited sufferings may make 
him the hero of the eighteenth century." 

Frederic Harrison. 

CONTENTS. 

Introduction    .... 

Brief Notices of the Persons 

Letter No.  1. 

.  1. 

March 26,  1780. 

2. 

Nov. 

30,  17-o. 

3. 

May 

26,  1781. 

4. 

May 

31,  1781. 

5. 

lull'* 

26,  1781. 

G. 

July 

22,  1781. 

7. 

Aug. 

8,  1781. 

8. 

Aug. 

L8,  1781. 

9. 

Marc] 

6,  17-2. 

10. 

Marcl 

21,  1782. 

11. 

Juue 

24,  17-2. 

12. 

Sept. 

16,  17-2. 

13. 

Oct. 

10,  17-2. 

14. 

Dec. 

-.  1782. 

15. 

Dec. 

8,  17-2. 

16. 

Dec. 

26,  1782. 

IT. 

Dec. 

2-,  17-2. 

IS. 

Jan. 

-.  1783. 

19. 

Jan. 

16,  1783. 

20. 

Jan. 

23,  1783. 

21. 

Feb. 

6,  1783. 

22. 

March 

7,1783. 

23. 

March 

— ,  1783. 

24. 

March 23,  1783. 

25. 

April 

29,  1783. 

26. 

May 

6,  1783. 

27. 

June 

23,  17-::. 

28. 

July 

24,  1783. 

29. 

Jan. 

16,  1784. 

30. 

Jan. 

23,  1784. 

31. 

Jane 

16,  17-4. 

32. 

Aug. 

1-,  1784. 

33. 

Nov. 

8,  17-4. 

to whom the Letters are Add 

To Benjamin Vaughan 
To Josiah Wedgwood 

To Benjamin Fkanklin 
To Josiah Wedgwood 

To James Watt 

To Sir Joseph Banks 
To Josiah Wedgwood 

To Sib Joseph Banks 
To Josiah Wedgwood 
To James Watt  . 
To Josiah Wedgwood 
To James Watt  . 
To Josiah Wedgw OOD 
To Sir Joseph Banks 
To Josiah Wedgwood 

To Mr.  Wilkinson 
To  ('apt.  James Keir 
To Josiah Wedgwood 

essed 

page 

1 
!) 

Ill 
21 
23 
25 
27 
28 
29 
31 
33 
35 
36 
38 
41 
43 
44 
45 
46 
48 
49 
50 
52 
53 
54 
55 
57 
59 
61 
63 
66 
68 
71 
7:1 
74 

CONTEXTS. 

No.  34. 

May 

-,  1785. 

May 

21.  1785. 

36. 

.IlllH' 

— ,  1785. 

37. 

Jan. 

21,  1786. 

:;-. 

April 

3,  L786. 

39. 

— ,  17-';. 

40. 

Marc] 

2.  17-7. 

41. 

Aug. 

26,  17-7. 

42. 

A iiir. 

— ,  1787. 

1  !. 

— ,  17-7. 

44. 

Jan. 

-.  17--. 

45. 

Jan. 

10,  1788. 

46. 

[Sept 

]       17--. 

47. 

Aug. 

— .  1788. 

48. 

Aug. 

18,  17--. 

4!!. 

Oct. 

9,  17--. 

50. 

[1789]. 

5 1 . 

[1790]. 

52. 

[1790]. 

April 

25,  17:'". 

.-.4. 

April 

27,  1790. 

' 

Oct. 

— ,  1790. 

56. 

[1791]. 

57. 

Feb. 

16,  1791. 

' 

Feb. 

26,  1791. 

59. 

.Tun*1 

20,  1791. 

60. 

July 

22,  1791. 

61. 

July 

26,  1791. 

62. 

July- 

2'.'.  1791. 

63. 

July 

— ,  1791. 

64. 

[July 

— ,1791.] 

'        65. 

Sept. 

7,  1791. 

66 

Oct. 

1-.  1791. 

67. 

Nov. 

5,  1791. 

68. 

Nov. 

22.  1791. 

69. 

Dec. 

2,  1791. 

70. 

Dec. 

29,  1791. 

71. 

Jan. 

1".  1792. 

72. 

Jan. 

12,  1792. 

1  ■  '■ 

Feb. 

25,  1792. 

74. 

Marcl 

13,  1792. 

75. 

Marcl 

13,  1792. 

76. 

May 

5,  1792. 

'        77. 

.1 ane 

2,  1792. 

78. 

Oct. 

2,  1792. 

To Josi Ml Wl DGWOOD 
From   "  " 

To M vn nr.w Bodlton 
To Joseph Johnson 
'I'm Mrs.  Croui b   . 
I'm  ('ait.  James Keik 
'I'.:  Benj.  Vadghan 

To Josiah Wedgvn: 

From    " 
To 

'I'm  ( '  \i'T.  .1 vmes Keik 
To Josiah Wedgwood 

I'm Sik Joseph Hanks 
'I'm Josiah Wedgwood 
'I'm  (  apt.  James Keir 

From   "  " 

I'm Sib Joseph Hanks 

To Josiah Wedgwood 
I'm  (  \ri .  James Keir 
To Josiah Wedgwood 

'I'm Thomas Wedgwood 
'I'm  (  'ait.  Ja vrs Kf.ik 

'I'm Jmsiah WEDGn mm I i 

To  ('ait.  James Keir 
From Josiah Wedgwood 
To 

To Thomas Wedgwood 
To Dr.  Wm.  Withering 
To Josiah Wedgwood   . 
To Dr.  Wm.  Withering 
To Mrs.  Crouch   . 
To Sir Joseph Ban ks  . 
To  ('ait.  James Ceib 
'I'm Thomas Wedgwood 
To Mr.  Lee 
To Thomas Wedgwood 

I'm I,  WMISIKI! 

To Dr.  Wm.  Withering 

CONTENTS. 

VII 

. 

Letter 

No.  79. 

Dec. 

31,  1792. 

To Mrs,  Ce i    . 

132 

80. 

April 

15,1793. 

'I'u Die.  Wm.  Withering 

L33 

81. 

Aug. 

21,  1793. 

'I'n Rev.  Dr.  Abercrombie    . 

l 16 

82. 

Oct. 

22,  1793. 

To Dr.  Wm.  Withering 

L37 

'        83. 

Sept. 

14.  1794. 

T.i Ds.  Hi. n.i.  Rush 

L39 

84. 

Oct. 

28,  1794. 

"            " 

141 

85. 

Nov. 

3,  1794. 

<(            i< 

143 

86. 

Nov. 

11,  1794. 

ti it 

144 

'       87. 

May 

22,  1795. 

it            (< 

145 

'       88. 

Oct. 

17.  L795. 

To John Vaughan 

146 

89. 

Oct. 

27, 1795. 

To Dr.  Wm.  Withering 

1 1- 

90. 

Nov. 

1,  1796. 

To Wm.  Vaughan 

151 

91. 

April 

19.  IT1.1-. 

To BENJ.  V M..IIAN 

L53 

92. 

Aug. 

8,  1799. 

Tip Dr.  Benj.  Rush 

L55 

93. 

April 

12,  1801. 

To Citizen Perigaux    . 

157 

94. 

May 

7.  L801. 

To Dr.  Benj.  Rush 

l.-iS 

95. 

Jan. 

27,  1802. 

"             "            .         . 

159 

'        96. 

Aug. 

5,  1802. 

u it 

160 

Marcl 

2,  1803. 

Invitation    .... 

161 

i 

97. 

Feb. 

6,  1804. 

Cooper to Rush  . 

.     162 

Rvvnoci 

C ftP Si V 

tv.vh;h 

T 1.1'  PT1TPS 

Memorandum 

FRmr Prtf.stt.f.v Tn Ml;.  WlT.KINSOJ 

Ili3 

and Others,  Preserved in the Warrington Museum and Library 165 

APPENDIX. 

I.    The Likenesses of Priestley in Oil,  Ink,  Marble,  and Metal 173 
II.   The Lunar Society,  or the Festive Philosophers of Birming- 

ham One Hundred Yeaf.s Ago 
III.   Inventory of Priestley's Laboratory in 1791 

.     L95 

.      221 

Index 

235 

SCIENTIFIC CORRESPONDENCE 

JOSEPH PRIESTLEY 

INTRODUCTION. 

The sources of information concerning the life of Joseph 
Priestley are numerous and detailed.  His philosophical writ- 
ings, liis theological controversies,  his liberal political essays, 
his notable discoveries in chemistry,  and even his misfortui  - 
in the Birmingham riots of 1791,  that caused hi-  eventual 
expatriation,  kept him constantly before the public.  Being 
both affectionately admired and cordially hated,  persecuted 
by his own townsmen yet highly esteemed by continental 
savans,  bitterly assailed by the public press and yet the 
frequent recipient of substantial testimonials of esteem from 
active and influential friends,  contemporary publications 
portrayed his acts,  his opinions,  and his remarkable talents. 

Since his death many men of letter-  have placed on re d 

their estimate of Priestley's philosophy,  of his theological 
system,  of his political tenets,  and of his contribution-  to 
science;  and,  finally,  every extended dictionary of biography 
and every encyclopaedia,  in three languages,  for three-quarters 
of a century,  has contained a sketch of his life and labors. 

Although himself a voluminous writer,  the modest autobi- 
ography which he left behind him is altogether too brief 
and scanty to satisfy posterity.  His Memoirs were extended 
by his son,  and this work was afterwards expanded to two 
volumes by Mr.  John Towill Rutt,  who added notes and 
1 

2 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

inserted several hundred letters written by Priestley to his 
friends.1 Believing,  as lie did,  that his reputation would be 
founded on his theological system,  Priestley,  in his Memoirs, 
has but little to say of his work in science:  and Mr.  Rutt, 
evidently sharing this view,  add-  nothing whatever which 
can extend or illustrate Priestley's reputation as a chemical 
philosopher. 

Notwithstanding this abundant material,  therefore,  the his- 
torian of science looks for the must part to Priestley's pub- 
lished treatises for information as to his notable discoveries  ; 
and the diffuse style of giving results of experiments prevail- 
ing in his day makes the search a lengthened one.  A\  e do 
not overlook the fact that several lectures or addresses portray 
Priestley as a chemist,  but these are compressed into the brief 
compass necessitated by the occasion of their delivery7. 

The ideal sketch of Priestley as an investigator in science 
is,  we think,  yet to be written  ;  we do not attempt in the fol- 
lowing pages to supply this want,  but rather to contribute 
material for some future historian to use in such a work. 
The advantages afforded by letters to obtain insight into the 
very thoughts of their writer and to illustrate his character are 
acknowledged by all,  and with this in view we have collected 
and annotated the correspondence which here follows. 

With few exceptions,  these letters are now published for the 
first time;  and those that have been in print may be appro- 
priately reproduced here,  for the connection increases their 
interest and value. 

1 Die originals of these letters are preserved in Dr.  Williams'  Library, 
Grafton St.,  London.  Two folio volumes contain them bearing the title: 
"  <  h-iginal Letters from Dr.  Joseph Priestley,  F.  1!  S.,  to the l!e\ .  Theo- 
philus Limlsey.  17GG-1S03,  and to the Rev.  Thomas Belsham,  1789 
1803."  Vol.  I.  contains letters written in England,  and Vol.  II.  letters 
written in America,  with a Supplement.  Another volume in this library 
contains:  "Manuscript letters of Dr.  N.  Lardner,  Dr.  Priestley  [and 
others],  f'rnin the year 17CI to the year 1801.  Addressed to the Rev.  J. 
Wiclie,  lev.  T.  Limlsey  [and others].  Presented by Mrs.  Benj.  Marden 
to Dr.  Williams'  library,  1866."  Thanks are due to the Lev.  F.  11. 
Jones,  Librarian,  for the privilege of examining these volumes. 

INTRODUCTION.  •'. 

To ilr?.  Robert A.  Wainewright of London,  Dr.  Priestley's 
only surviving1 granddaughter,  ne<  Sarah Priestley,  I am 
under great obligations for copies of forty-one letters which 
passed between Joseph Priestley and Josiah and Thomas 
Wedgwood.  Mrs.  Wainewright received these letters from her 
cousin Miss Finch  (a granddaughter of Priestley),  to whom 
they had been presented by the grandson of Josiah Wedgwoi d, 

Mr.  Francis Wedgw 1 of Barlaston,   Stone,   Staffordshire. 

We shall allude to tlii~  collection again. 

To William O.  Priestley,  M.D.,  LL.D.,  of London,  I am 
indebted for copies of five letters,  three written by Priestley 
to his sister Mrs.  ( )rouch,  one to Josiah Wedgwood,  and one to 
Mr.  J.  Johnson,  Priestley's publisher.  The two latter were 
loaned to Dr.  Priestley by Mr.  Swann Hurrell of Cambridge, 
England,  and were kindly copied by Mr.  Joseph Priestley, 
barrister,  of London. 

To Mr.  Swann Hurrell I am obliged tin'  the opportunity 
of copying two letters presented by him to the University 
Library,  Cambridge;  one addressed to Mr.  John Wilkinson, 
Priestley's brother-in-law,  and one to Josiah Wedgwood  (dated 
Nov.  22d,  1791). 

During the preparation of this volume I have been so for- 
tunate as tn have the friendship of the eminent historian and 
antiquarian Sam:  Timmins,  Esq.,  J. P.,  F.S.A.,  of Birming- 
ham. Mr.  Timmins was the promoter of the memorial to 
Dr.  Priestley which stands in so conspicuous a position in a 
crowded thoroughfare of the town,  a full-length marble statue 
of the chemist in the act of discovering oxygen.  Mr.  Tim- 
mins has for many years paid much attention to local history, 
aud especially to matters concerning I>r.  Priestley,  of whom 
he has frequently published essays.  (Transactions of the 
Archaeological Section of the Birmingham and Midland 
Institute.)  To my friend I am indebted for many favors, 
and particularly for copies of fifteen letters belonging to his 
own valuable collection of autographs or to those of hi> 

1 Since writing these lines,  the lady lias gone to her rest.  She died 
March 6th,  1891,  in the 84th year of her age. 

1 CORRESPONDENCE OP PRIESTLEY. 

friends  ;  of these seven are addressed to Sir Joseph Banks,  six 
to I>r.  William Withering,  one to Mr.  Lee,  attorn ey-at-law, 
and one is addressed to Priestley by Josiah Wedgwood. 

To Mr.  W.  M.  Vaughan of Cambridge,  Mass.,  I am in- 
debted for copies of four letters,  three of which are addressed 
to his grandfather Benjamin Vaughan,  and one to William 
Vaughan son of the latter. 

Mr.  Ferdinand J.  Dreer of Philadelphia kindly loaned me 
from his valuable autographs,  two letters,  one addressed to 
Mr.  John Vaughan  (brother of Benjamin above named)  and 
one to the Rev.  Mr.  Abercrombie of Philadelphia. 

To Mr.  James Keir Moilliet of Great Malvern I am much 
indebted for a copy of his privately printed Life of James 
Keir,  from which 1 have taken the ten letters in this corre- 
spondence. 

Professor Edouard Grimaux,  of Paris,  kindly sent me at 
my request a copy of a single letter from Priestley to Lavoi- 
sier, culled from the extensive collection of manuscripts and 
documents which forms the basis of Prof.  Grimaux's valuable 
life of the great French chemist. 

To Mr.  George F.  Kunz,  of Xew York,  I give thanks for a 
copy of a letter in his possession,  addressed to  <  'itizen Perigaux. 

To Mr.  Conyers Button,  of Philadelphia,  1 am indebted for 
a copy of a memorandum which concludes this collection of 
letters. 

To the Trustees and the Librarian of the Library  <  Jompany 
of Philadelphia 1 am obliged for permission to copy the nine 
letters addressed to Dr.  Benjamin Rush. 

The four letters addressed to James Watt are taken from 
Muirhead's Discovery of the Composition of Water;  the letter 
to Franklin was read at the Northumberland Celebration of 
the Centenary of the Discovery of Oxygen,  and published in 
the Proceedings.    (Philadelphia,  1875,  4to.) 

To the Trustees and Librarian of the Warrington Museum 
and Library I am obliged for a synopsis of the collection of 
letters from Priestley to Mr.  Wilkinson,  at the close of this 
work. 

INTRODUCTION.  0 

Tii all the persons and institutions named I express my 
cordial thanks for many eonrtesio,  especially for responses to 
letters of inquiry,  without which my labors had been vain. 

A majority of the letters embraced in this volume are ad- 
dressed to Priestley's scientific friends,  and treat of scientific 
matters of mutual interest;  on this account I venture to 
call the collection the Scientific Correspondence of Joseph 
Priestley. 

THE PRIESTLEY-WEDGWOOD LETTERS. 

The letters to Wedgwood are written for the most part on 
letter-paper measuring 18x24 cm.  (7 x 9 J inches),  though 
some of the larger ones are on paper 20.5 cm.  x 32.5 cm.  (8 s 
12|  inches).  The paper is of course unruled,  the letters are 
folded in the manner which obtained prior to the use of 
envelopes,  and are sealed with red wax.  Priestley used two 
seals,  one about one-half inch in diameter,  circular in shape 
and consisting of two simple lines surrounding a classical 
head;  the other is larger,  being an oval one inch by seven- 
eighths,  and bearing his coat of arms with the motto,  "Ars 
longa,  vita brevis."  Some of the impressions are nearly as 
fresh as when they left Priestley's hand one hundred years ago.1 

The Wedgw 1 letters are folded lengthwise for the pur- 
pose of filing and are endorsed with the name  "  Dr.  Priestley" 
and the date;  this has evidently been done in part by Josiah 
himself,  in part by his secretary,  Chisholm,  and on letters ad- 
dressed to Thomas Wedgwood by the recipient.  They arc in 
good preservation with a i\-w exceptions in which the paper is 
exceedingly tender as if it had been exposed to acid fumes in 
a laboratory.2 

1 Of one of these seals we have a silver electrotype,  made by Tiffany 
&  Co.,  which is a very admirable facsimile. 

2 The other letters of this work require no special description,  not 
differing essentially from tin-  Priestley- Wedgwood epistles. 

Priestley's handwriting is fairly regular and generally very legible  : 
here and there rough diagrams of apparatus are inserted. 

6 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

Willi the exception of Xos.  3 I.  35,  6 I.  68,  the letters which 
passed between Priestlej and the two Wedgwoods were in the 
hands of Miss Eliza Meteyard,  the biographer of Wedgwood, 
at the time she was engaged on her admirable works.1 Thi- 
i-  evident from references made by Miss Meteyard to the 
friendship existing between Wedgwood and Priestley,  and to 
very brief allusions to this correspondence ;  it is further con- 
firmed l>y tlic existence on the brown wrapping paper envelop- 
ing the package of letters,  loaned to the writer,  of the words 
'•.Miss Finch with Miss Meteyard's compliments,"  words ob- 
viously written on returning the bundle to the lender.  Part 
of the correspondence is also referred to by Dr.  George Wilson 
in his Life of the Hon.  Henry Cavendish  (London.  1851). 
Dr.  Wilson makes some use of their contents in discussing the 
water-controversy.  Only detached fragments of a portion of 
the letters,  however,  arc quoted. 

The previous references to these letters by no means detract 
from the interest attached to their present publication;  they 
cover a period of thirteen years I 1 780-1 792)  and compose the 
whole of the extant correspondence between the chemist and 
the potter.  They treat almost exclusively of scientific matters, 
and are written in the confiding spirit which characterized the 
friendly intercourse of the men of science.  Priestley often sat 
down to write his friend while flushed with delight at the com- 
pletion of a successful experiment,  sometimes even before his 
crucibles had cooled  ;  and feeling assured that his communica- 
tions would be received by a sympathizing reader,  he wrote his 
first impressions,  his hopes,  and his plans with a naturalness 
and self- portrayal pleasant to behold. 

Dr.  Priestley,  while admitting his great indebtedness to the 
wealthy manufacturer of earthenware for frequent supplies of 
apparatus,  shows his strong confidence in his friend's esteem 
by repeated requests for further favors,  and at the same time 
shows great delicacy in accepting the gifts of money sent by 

1 Lite of Josiah Wedgwood,  London,  18G5;  and A Group of Eng- 
lishmen, being Records of the Younger Wedgwoods,  Loudon,  1871. 

INTRODUCTION.  i 

Wedgwood to defray the extraordinary expenses of the philo- 
sophical experiments,  and expresses his gratitude in terms 
which must have been most agreeable to li is benefactor. 
Letter 33.) 

The large number of letters published in Knit's Life are 
almost wholly on theological and literary matters,  and throw 
light only on that feature of their busy author;  the Priestley- 
Wedgwood letter-  portray the philosophical and chemical side 
of this man of many talents.  They chronicle from week to 
week and year to year the experiments and immediate deduc- 
tions of the chemist,  and it is no reflection on Priestley,  that 
l>y the light of later discoveries it becomes easy for us to point 
out errors of fact and judgment.  Priestley himself candidly 
admits in one of these letters that his power of observing 
phenomena is superior to his power of interpreting them 
aright,  an admission borne out by his unyielding adherence to 
the phlogistic theory throughout his life. 

Wi are by no means desirous of increasing the numb 
biographies of Priestley by our own labors,  but a brief state- 
ment of the salient facts in his history previous to the date of 
these letters seems to be expedient in order to introduce the 
reader to tliein. 

Joseph Priestley was born near Leeds,  Yorkshire,  in 17-".-".. 
received a grammar-school education,  showed great aptitude 
tin-  acquiring languages living and dead,  and studied divinity. 
At the age of 22,  he became pa-tor of a small con^  >n of 

Unitarians at Needham,  where he preached three years,  and 
taught school to eke out his small salary of  £30 per annum. 
He  .served three years more in a similar capacity at Nantwieh, 
where his talents secured for him the chair of languages and 
belli 3-lettres at the flourishing academy in Warrington.  This 
was in 1761,  in the 28th year of his age.  Here he remained 
six years,  and  "by the splendour of his talent-  he added 
greatly to the celebrity"  of this institution.  During this 
period he delivered lectures upon the Theory of Laugu: 
upon Oratory and Criticism,  upon History and general Policy, 
and upon the Constitution and Laws of England,  some of 

8 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRrESTLEY. 

which were afterwards published.  He also published an 
Essay  "ii Government,  and  :i Chart of Biography.  At War- 
rington he married the daughter of a worthy iron-master, 
Isaac Wilkinson,  and while residing here the University of 
Edinburgh conferred on him the honorary degree of LL.D., 

and upon the n emendation of Dr.   Franklin,  Dr.  Price, 

and other philosophical friends,  he was admitted a Fellow of 
the Royal Society.  In 17<>7 he accepted the charge of a large 
congregation at Leeds,  and here he continued another six 
yeare.      During this period he was constantly writing and 

publishing on history,  political i nomy,  and theology. 

Priestley had a predilection for natural science,  and not- 
withstanding his many and diverse pursuits,  undertook,  at 
the suggestion of Dr.  Franklin,  a History of the Discoveries 
in Electricity.  This he completed and printed in less than 
one year;  it increased greatly his reputation.  At Leeds,  he 
began his enquiries into the subject of the various kind-  of 
air,  and announced the discovery of nitric oxide  (1772).  He 
also published  "Directions for Impregnating Water with 
Fixed Air"  (London,  1772),  which attracted much attention. 
His reputation as a philosopher and scientist brought him 
an imitation from Lord Shelburne to reside with him at 
Bowood  (mar Calne,  Wiltshire),  as literary companion and 
nominal librarian.  This he accepted,  as the pecuniary terms 
were favorable to the support of his growing family,  and he 
would enjoy abundant leisure for his researches.  He was now 
forty years old,  hut it was not until a year later that he isolated 
oxygen gas and drew to himself the attention of the whole 
world of science.  Free from pastoral cares ho devoted him- 
self' to the chemistry of gases,  discovering in rapid succession 
ammonia,  hydrochloric acid,  sulphurous acid,  silicon fluoride, 
and nitron-  oxide,  afterwards known in Davy's time as 
"laughing gas."  He published at intervals six volumes 
entitled  "Experiments and Observations on Different Kinds 
of Air."  which won for him the appellation,  "  Father of Pneu- 
matic Chemistry."      He remained seven years with Lord 

INTRODUCTION.  H 

Shelburne,  and then removed to Birmingham,  an event which 
he calls  "the happiest of my life." 

The first of the letter-  dow published is dated,  Calne, 
March 2ii,  1780,  being a few weeks before his settlement in 
Birmingham.  At this date Priestley was in the prime of life, 
had an established reputation at home and abroad as a chemical 
philosopher,  and as a theological writer of fertility and zeal. 
lie had published four of the volumes on Different Kinds of 
Air,  and was engaged in printing the fifth.  He continued to 
experiment in the laboratory and communicated the result-  to 
his friend Wedgwood in return for the generous supply of 
apparatus with which the latter favored him. 

BRIEF NOTICES OF THE PERSONS TO WHOM THE 
LETTERS WERE ADDRESSED. 

Josiab Wedgwood to whom a majority of these letters 
are addressed needs no introduction to our readers;  his name 
is imperishable associated with the beautiful earthenware first 
produced by his skill.  Wedgwood was born at Burslem in 
1730 and was therefore three years older than his correspon- 
dent. His early education was very limited,  being obliged to 
work in his elder brother's pottery.  In 1759 he founded a 
manufactory of ornamental pottery,  ami ambitious to produce 
the finest articles,  he conducted experiments which led to the 
invention of the ware known by his name.  The beautiful 
character of the new ware and the artistic workmanship of the 
products of his establishment soon gained for him a high 
reputation.  He caused copies to be made of antique vases, 
medallions,  and sculptures which were of remarkable accuracy 
and exquisite beauty.  His growing'  business caused him to 
establish large work-  near Newcastle-under-Lyme,  which place 
he named Etruria,  and to which the letters of tin-  collection 
were addressed. 

Wedgwood was no ordinary potter;  his elegant products 
exerted a marked influence in refining the national taste,  and 
his establishment was of positive benefit to the commercial 
prosperity of England. 

10 CORRESPONDENCE OP PRIESTLEY. 

As Wedgwood advanced in years he surrounded himself with 
literary and scientific treasures,  and gradually made up for the 
deficiencies of his earh education,  paying much attention to 
scientific studies bearing upon his industrial pursuits.  His 
acquaintance with men of science was a natural sequence. 

The first letter of this correspondence bears the date Novem- 
ber 30th,  1780:  at this date Priestley and Wedgwood had 
already been acquainted eighteen years.     They first met at the 

residence of Thomas Bentley in Liver] 1,  where Wedgwood 

was confined to the house by an accident to his knee,  and his 
physician Dr.  Matthew Turner brought in Priestley  (tempor- 
arily in Liverpool)  to see his patient.     (Meteyard,  I.,  3    • 

This was in the spring of 1762.  Dr.  Priestley had previous 
acquaintance with Mr.  Bentley,  who was one of the founders 
..I'  Warrington Academy  (1757),  where Priestley was at tin's 
time a teacher.  Priestley writes of Bentley as  "  a man of ex- 
cellenl taste,  improved understanding,  and a good disposition, 
but an unbeliever in Christianity which was therefore often 
the subject of our conversation."     (Rutt,  I..  60.) 

Even when first introduced Priestley and Wedgwood were 
not strangers in name,  and the latter had already discussed 
Priestley's discoveries in writing to Bentley.  Indeed Bentley 
seems to have kept Wedgwood well informed of Priestley's 
work prior to the direct correspondence of the chemist and the 
potter.  Subsequently,  Wedgwood became much interested 
in Priestley's  "  Essay on a Course of Liberal Education for 
Civil and Active Life"  (1765),  and aided Priestley financially 
in publishing his works.     (Meteyard,  1.,  391.) 

<  hi the occasion of Priestley's engagement with Lord Shel- 
burne,  Wedgwood wrote to Bentley:  "  I am  "lad to hear of 
Dr.  Priestley's noble appointment,  taking it for granted that 
lie is to go  <m writing and publishing icith the same freedom 
lie now does,  otherwise,  I had much rather lie still remained 
in Yorkshire."     (Meteyard,  II.,  451.) 

Thomas Bentley became in 1767-68 the partner of Wedg- 
wood, and rendered important service in building up the vast 
establishment lor producing the creations of Wedgwood's 

INTRODUCTION.  ]] 

genius.  A strong attachment grew up between the partuers, 
which continued throughout life.  We bave given these par- 
ticulars of the intimate relations of these three men,  because 
in the first letter of their correspondence Priestley condoles 
Wedgwood on the loss of his friend and partner Bentley. 
Bentley died Sunday.  November 26th,  1780,  and Priestley's 
letter was written four days later. 

Wedgwood afterwards erected a tablet in Chiswick Church 
t>>  Bentley's memory.  This i-  figured in Meteyard's Lit!'  of 
Wedgwood.     (Vol.  II.,  460.) 

At the date of the first letter in tin series Wedgwood's davs 
of trial and poverty had passed  ;  he had overcome the diffi- 
culties connected with his manufactures,  and.  except for tin 
recent loss of his partner,  was happy in his family life,  his 
wealth,  reputation,  ami influence.  The intimate nature of the 
friendship between the correspondents the letters themsel 
will disclose;  we shall intrude our own notes only so far as 
seems useful in explaining allusions to tacts ami to persons. 

Five of the letter-  (Nos.  -V.'.  oil.  73,  75,  76)  towards the 
close  "t'  the correspondence are addressed to Josiah's youi E 
son,  Thomas.  Thomas was horn in 1771.  and was conse- 
quently only twenty year-  of age when thus favored by 
Priestley's notice.  Inheriting great wealth and enjoving but 
little robust health.  Thomas had not the energy and industry 
of his father,  though in other respects he was a worthy 
lie possessed high ability and scientific tastes,  and i-  credited 
by his friends with  "unfolding the first germs  "t'  photographic 
art."  The letters written him by Priestley  -how hi'  was en- 
couraged to pursue his researches by the eminent chin 

Benjamin Vaughan and hi-  brothers. — The friend- 
ship between Priestley and the Vaughan family dated hack to 
the day-  when he taught school at Warrington.  Mr.  Samuel 
Vaughan,  born in 1720 died in 1802,  had four sons,  Samuel 
dr..  John,  Benjamin and William,  and urged Dr.  Priestley to 
receive the two latter into his family as boarding pupils.  Dr. 
Priestley at first declined the proposal of Mr.  Vaughan,  hut 

12 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

afterwards consented and received the very moderate com- 
pensation of fifty pounds a year for each son  (Rutt,  I.,  59). 
Dr.  Priestley's action laid the foundation of a friendship that 
bound the families together throughout life. 

( )f the live letters in our work three arc addressed to Ben- 
jamin, one to William,  and one to John.  Benjamin was born 
in Jamaica in 17ol and died at Hallowell,  Maine,  to which 
place he and his brother Samuel,  Jr.,  had emigrated.  Imme- 
diately after the Birmingham riots of lT'.M William received 
Dr.  Priestley into Ins house,  showing as the latter writes 
"no small degree of courage and friendship."  There Dr. 
Priestley dictated  (his eyes being temporarily weak)  to Mr. 
Vaughan's daughter an  "Appeal"  which he afterwards pre- 
sented to her together with a valuable pin,  set in pearls,  and 
the word  "Appeal"  on the hack.  (Private communication 
from Mr.  W.  M.  Vaughan of Cambridge,  Mass.) 

John Vaughan settled in Philadelphia and was long active 
in the American Philosophical Society,  becoming i tr-  President. 

I  >r.  Priestley frequently mentions the different members of 
the Vaughan family in liis correspondence.  Of Mr.  Benjamin 
Vaughan he wrote,  under date of Northumberland,  Sept.  4, 
1798  :  "He is a man that any country may be proud to pos- 
sess, having for ability knowledge of almost every kind,  and 
the most approved integrity,  few equals.  He is well known 
to,  and frequently corresponds with the President.  *  : 
He has fixed his residence at Kennebeck because his family 
has large property there."  (To Mr.  Corbett,  Rutt,  II.,  406.) 
In another letter Dr.  Priestley remarks:  ''I should much 
rejoice to see Mr.  B.  Vaughan,  hut it would be very unreason- 
able to expect it.  lie would enter into all my views,  theo- 
logical or political."  And he sends  "his best respects to Mr. 
Vaughan,  Mr.  Freeman,  and Mr.  R.  Vaughan."  (Letter of 
Nov.  10,  1795,  to Mr.  Russell.     Rutt,  II.,  321.) 

Mr.  John Wilkinson,  to whom one of the letters is ad- 
dressed, was one of Dr.  Priestley's brothers-in-law.  Of him 
Miss Meteyard writes as follows:    "John Wilkinson and 

INTRODUCTION.  1  •"> 

his father Isaac played no unimportant part in the vast in- 
dustrial movement of their time.  Isaac invented and first 
brought into action the steam-engine blast at his iron-works 
near Wrexham  ;  John,  at the same place as also at Bradley 
Forge,  in Staffordshire,  executed all the ponderous eastings 
for the steam-engines required in the Cornish mines,  as well 
as those for Boulton and Watt when they first commenced 
business."     (Life of Wedgwood,  I.,  .317.) 

Mr.  John Wilkinson lies buried near Castlehead,  in the 
township of Upper Allithwaite,  Cartmel,  Lancashire.  His 
tomb is a pvramidical mausoleum consisting of twenty tons 
of iron,  on which is inserted the following epitaph,  writ tin 
by himself: — 

"  Delivered from persecution of malice and envy here rests 
John Wilkinson,  Iron-Master,  in certain hopes of a better 
state and heavenly mansion,  as promulgated by Jesus Christ, 
in whose Gospel he was a firm believer.  His life was spent in 
action for the benefit of man,  and he trusts in some degree to 
the Glory of God." 

Castlehead is a conical rock,  and is supposed,  from some 
imperial coins found there,  to have once had a Roman in- 
habitant. Mr.  Wilkinson,  in adopting it for his abode,  found 
many relics of antiquity,  such as ancient rings,  coins,  fibulae, 
beads,  and other ornaments.  These were preserved and labeled 
by Dr.  Priestley and others,  placed in the line mansion built 
by Mr.  Wilkinson fir his residence.1 

( )f his brothers-in-law Dr.  Priestley writes  :  "  The favors I 
received from my two brothers-in-law deserve my most grate- 
ful acknowledgments.  They acted the part of kind and gene- 
rous relations,  especially at the time when I most wanted 
assistance.  It was in consequence of Mr.  John Wilkinson's 
proposal,  who wished to have us nearer to him,  that,  being 
undetermined where to settle,  I fixed upon Birmingham, 
where he soon provided a house for me."  (Putt.  I.,  217.) 
This invitation of Mr.  Wilkinson is mentioned by Priestley 

1 Edward Baines'  History of Lancaster.  Liverpool,  lsi'4,  vol.  i.,  p. 
596. 

1 1 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

in a letter to the Rev.  R.  Scholefield,  dated June 1,  1780. 
(Rutt,  II..  335.) 

William Withering,  M.I'..  F.K.S.,  born March 2s. 
17 11.  died October ti.  1799,  was a physician,  chemist,  and 
botanisl of eminence.  He received his medical education at 
tlic University of Edinburgh,  practised his profession eight 
years in Stafford,  and was then called to Birmingham to suc- 
ceed Dr.  Small,  who died in 177">.  Here he pursued bis 
original researches in botany and chemistry,  publishing sev- 
eral essays and translations;  he became a member of the 
Lunar Society and joined in the festive meetings of the 
learned members.  His analysis of JEratcd Terra Ponderosa 
established a new mineral species now called by his name, 
"  Witherite."  In 17*4 he was elected to the Royal Society. 
During the Birmingham riots of July,  1791,  Dr.  Withering 
was forced to abandon his residence,  Edgbaston Hall,  hut the 
arrival of military prevented it-  destruction.  Failing health 
caused him to s<rk a milder climate,  and he spent the winter 
of 1792—93 in Portugal,  but with only slight advantage. 
Hi-  debility increased,  but he lingered until October,  1799. 
His chief publication was entitled.  A Botanical Arrangement 
of all the Vegetables naturally growing in Great Britain,  li 
vols.  8vo.,  17(i(i,  and a second edition in three volumes,  1787- 
92,  and a third edition in four volumes,  1796.  His Miscel- 
laneous Tract-,  with a Memoir of his Life,  were published by 
his  -on in 1822.      (London,  "_'  vols.  8vo.) 

Sir Joseph Banks,  the distinguished botanist and traveler, 
was born in London February 26th,  1743.  He received his 
education at Eton and Oxford and early developed a predilec- 
tion for natural history.  Soon after taking hi-  degree he 
inherited an ample fortune and thenceforth devoted his energy 
to the advancement of science.  Banks took part in or organ- 
ized several expeditions to little known regions and brought 
back with him rich collections in natural history and abun- 
dant -tores of knowledge;  the first was to Newfoundland and 

INTRODUCTION.  15 

Labrador in 17(]ii ;  the second was in Captain Cook's memor- 
able three-years'  voyage to the Sandwich Islands;  the third 
was to Ireland,  returning by the Hebrides and Staffa,  the 
wonders of which Banks was the first scientisf to describe. 
In 1778 Hank-  was elected President of the Royal Society,  a 
position wliieh ho filled fur forty-two years with the greatesl 
zeal  :  during his term of office he succeeded in securing eom- 
mnnications of the highest importance,  in gaining accessions 
of persons  <>t'  rank and talent,  and in exciting the whole bodv 
to extraordinary diligence and activity. 

Banks was created a baronet in 1 781,  invested with the 
order of the Bath in 1795,  and received a multitude of other 
honor-;  at home and abroad.  His activity in promoting scien- 
tific research and geographical exploration was untiring.  Hi- 
purse was always open to the cause of science and his library 
to fellow-students of natural history.  His publications were, 
however,  comparatively few and of no startling importance. 
Sir Joseph died March 19th,  1820,  aged 77,  and bequeathed 
his valuable library and botanical collections to the British 
Museum. 

James Watt,  the illustrious improver of the steam-engine, 
was born at Greenock on the 19th of January,  1736.  When 
a youth ill health prevented his receiving the regular discipline 
of schools,  yet seems to have led him to self-culture of his 
intellectual powers.  He contended throughout life with a 
delicate constitution.  After serving an apprentice-hip to a 
mathematical instrument-maker he established himself in 
similar business in connection with the University of  ( Glasgow. 
In this capacity he had occasion to repair a small model of 
Newcomen's steam-engine,  and was thus led to investigate tin- 
use of steam as a motive power.     His prime invention of the 

separate condenser was completed as early a-    1765.      Fi i 

this date to 1773 he Mas engaged in important surveys and 
engineering works in Scotland.  In the following year he 
joined Matthew Boulton of Soho,  and from this partnership 
flowed most memorable results.     Of their achievements in 

Ill CORRESPONDENCE OF TRIESTLEY. 

developing steam-engines,  in spite of great obstacles,  much 
might be written.  The partnership of Boulton and Watt 
terminated in 1800,  when the latter retired from business and 
passed the remainder of Ins life quietly,  but in the incessant 
pursuit of mechanics.     He died August 19th,  1819. 

Watt is one of*  the claimants for the honor of the discovery 
of the composition of water,  information of which will be 
found in the ensuing correspondence.  Of Watt's genial 
character and great intellectual powers some account will he 
found in the article on the Li'nar Society  (see Appendix). 

James Keir,  F.R.S.,  Captain in the Royal Army,  was 
born at Edinburgh,  September  .!!),  1735.  As his father died 
while  .lames was very young,  his mother took charge of his 
education;  he attended the High School and the University, 
pursuing medical studies and enjoying the facilities which an 
ample patrimony afforded. 

Having completed his medical studies lie entered the army, 
and saw service in the West Indies where his medical skill 
was useful.  After his marriage witli Miss Harvey he left the 
army  (about 1770)  and went to reside in Birmingham.  In 
1775 he began business as a glass manufacturer,  and a few 
years later took sole charge of the extensive works of Boulton 
and Watt at Soho.  In partnership with Mr.  Blair,  a brother 
officer,  he established near Dudley works for the manufacture 
of alkali and soap.  To these were subsequently added litharge 
and other chemicals. 

While at the University of Edinburgh he formed the ac- 
quaintance of Dr.  Erasmus Darwin,  and their friendship was 
strengthened by personal contact in Birmingham.  Of his 
activity in the Lunar Society we have written elsewhere. 
Chemistry was always an attractive pursuit,  and he contributed 
numerous articles to the Royal Society.  He also translated 
Macquer's Dictionnaire de chimie into English,  a work which 
extended his name and influence.  He was the author of several 
ingenious processes in the manufacture of various chemicals,  and 
tlie inventor of alloy almost identical with  "  Muntz-metal." 

INTRODUCTION.  17 

Captain Keir died October 11th,  1820,  at theadvanced age 
of eighty-five,  and was buried in Wesl Bromwich churchyard. 
His grandson James Keir Moilliet printed for private circula- 
tion (in 1868)  a volume of Keir's life and correspondence, 
from which we have culled these few details.  Weexpress our 
thanks to Mr.  Moilliet for a copy of the work. 

The Rev.  James Abeeceombie,  D.D.,  b.  1758,  d.  1841, 
an eloquent and learned clergyman of the Episcopal Church 
in Philadelphia.  He was prepared to enter the ministry when 
his eyes gave out and he turned to mercantile pursuits.  After- 
wards he became a teacher and then devoted himself to the 
ministry.  He was regarded as one of the best readers of the 
period. 

Benjamin Franklin  (1706-1790),  the printer,  journalist, 

philosopher,  statesman,  patriot and scientist is too well known 
to need even a brief biography in these pages.  Of him Mira- 
beau wrote:  "Antiquity would have raised altars to this 
mighty genius,  who,  to the advantage of mankind,  compass- 
ing in his mind the heavens and the earth,  was able to restrain 
alike thunderbolts and tyrants." 

Priestley formed the acquaintance of Franklin in 1766 
during one of his annual visits to London.  There he met 
Dr.  Watson,  Mr.  Canton,  Dr.  Franklin and other philosophers 
and electricians,  by whose encouragement he was led to write 
the History of Electricity published in 1767.  (See Rutt,  I., 
55 et seq.) 

Franklin's Estimate of Dr.  Priestley.— Benjamin Vaughan 
and Franklin corresponded,  and in one of the letters from the 
latter to the former,  written October,  1788,  occurs this inte- 
resting reference to Priestley and his theological views: 
"  Remember me affectionately,"  writes Franklin,  "  to the good 
Dr.  Price and to the honest heretic Dr.  Priestley.  I do not 
call him honest by way of distinction,  for I think all the 
heretics I have known have been virtuous men.  They have 
the virtue of fortitude,  or they would not venture to own their 
2 

I 8 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

heresy  ;  and they cannot afford to be deficient in any of the 
other virtues,  as that would give advantage to their many 
enemies;  and they have not,  like orthodox sinners,  such a 
number of friends to excuse or justify them.  Do not how- 
ever mistake me.  It is not to my good friend's heresy that I 
impute his honesty.  <  >n the contrary  'tis his honesty that has 
brought upon him the character of heretic." 

Benjamin Rush,  the distinguished physician and philan- 
thropist, was born near Philadelphia,  December 24th,  1745. 
After being graduated at Princeton College he studied medi- 
cine at Edinburgh,  London,  and Paris.  In the first-named 
city lie attended the lectures on chemistry by the eminent 
Dr.  .Joseph Black.  On August 1,  17(19,  Dr.  Push was elected 
to the chair of chemistry in the University of Pennsylvania, 
and thus has the distinction of being the first Professor of 
(  heinistrv in America.  It was however as a teacher of medi- 
cal science that he acquired the high reputation which survives 
him,  possessing great learning and power of expression.  He 
took a prominent part in public affairs,  supporting the popular 
cause in the Revolution,  and being one of the signers of the 
Declaration of Independence.  He held at different times the 
important positions of surgeon-general of the army,  treasurer 
of the Mint,  and Vice-President of the Bible Society of Phila- 
delphia. He was distinguished for industry,  benevolence and 
piety.  He was a well-known writer on medicine,  philosophy, 
political affairs,  etc.,  and had an extensive medical practice in 
Philadelphia.  Dr.  Push died in April,  1813,  leaving nine 
children. 

<  >n the arrival of Dr.  Priestley in Philadelphia,  Dr.  Push 
promptly welcomed him to his circle of friends,  the more cor- 
dially as they had common views and sympathies in politics, 
science,  and to some extent in theology.  When Dr.  Priestley 
settled in Northumberland the friendship was cemented by 
correspondence,  a portion of which has been preserved. 

CORRESPONDENCE. 

Xo.  1. 

PRIESTLEY TO BENJAMIN VAUGHAN. 

Calkb,1 26 March,  1780. 

Dear Sir:  I send you among a few others a copy of m\ 
letters1  &c.,  for the sake of collecting such remarks as I niav 
avail myself of in the page or two that remain vacant at the 
end of the Preface — I wish to see what you have written on 
the subject of cause ami effect,  but I dare say it will not clash 
with what I have written,  at least materially — 

I thank you for your repeated accounts of Ld.  Shelburne,3 

1 Calne,  Wiltshire,  near Lord Shelburne's seat Bowood. 

2  "  Letters to a Philosophical Unbeliever"  which were written after 
reading Hume.  Part 1.  was published in 1780 and Part II.  in 17s'J. 
Both reached a second edition in 1787. 

3 William Petty,  Earl of Shelburne and Marquis of Lansdowne  ( 1 7::7- 
1805),  a statesman and liberal patron of learned men.  He held the office 
of Secretary of State under Pitt and favored a conciliatory policy towards 
the American colonies.  In 1782 he became Prime Minister,  and the in- 
dependence of the United States was recognized by treaty during his 
administration.  He had one of the finest private libraries in Great 
Britain,  the control of which was enjoyed by Dr.  Priestley during his 
seven years'  residence with the Earl.  Of Lord Shelburne's disposition 
towards him Priestley wrote  :  "  The greatest part of the time that 1 
spent with Lord Shelburne I passed with much satisfaction,  his lordship 
always behaving to me with uniform politeness and his guests with re- 
spect;  but about two years before I left him I perceived evident marks 
of dissatisfaction,  though I never understood the cause of it.  and until 
that time he had been even lavish on all occasions in expressing liis satis- 
faction in my society to our common friends.     When 1 left him I asked 

20 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

and am glad he is in so good a way — Last night I wrote him 
a short letter of congratulation on his recovery  ;  but,  iu the 
present state of his mind with respect to me,  I do not think 
that either that,  or anything else I can do,  will please. 

I have been busy with some experiments,  and among other 
things have satisfied myself that it is altogether without 
reason that M.  Fontana,4 and Dr.  Ingenhousz5 pretends that 
the reasons of good and bad nitrous air comes to the same 
thing in his method of applying the test.  I am astonished, 
and provoked,  at the little care with which some persons 
make experiments,  and the confidence with which they report 
them. 

I thank you for procuring me the thermometers,  which came 
sate.  They seem very well adapted to the purpose,  provided 
they be sufficiently sensible. 

Mr.  Arden too observed,  and I think the experiment very 
fairly tried,  that air parts with its heat in condensation.  I 
intend to repeat the experiment,  with different kinds of air. 

I wish you could get dowu with the Letters before the cud 
of the week,  as I may possibly want the copy when I come to 

dim it'  In'  had any fault to find with my conduct,  and he said none." 
(Putt,  I.,  "20(1.)  On leaving Lord Shelburne Priestley retired with an 
annuity of  £150,  and two years later his lordship invited him to return 
to his former position,  but Priestleyr declined to leave Birmingham. 

1 Felice Fontana,  b.  Apr.  15,  1730,  d.  Jan.  11,  1805,  Abbe and Pro- 
fessor el'  Physics at the University of Pisa.  An industrious and ingenious 
investigator,  the inventor of the nitric oxide eudiometer,  and author of 
many original papers on pneumatic chemistry. 

Priestlej discusses his labors in each of the prefaces to the three vol- 
umes ('2.  ::.  and 4)  of his Experiments and Observations on Air  (1776-79). 

5 Jan Ingenhousz,  born 1730 in Holland,  lived from 1767 in England 
where he died in 1799.  A practitioner of medicine and investigator in 
chemistry  ;  author of many original papers.  A letter from Ingenhousz 
te Priestley is given in the Appendix to vol.  iv.  of his Experiments and 
Observations on Air.  Priestley's special interest in Ingenhousz was 
aroused by the paper of the latter entitled  :  "On the degree of Salubrity 
of the Common Air at Sea,  compared with that of the Seashore and that 
of Places far removed from the Sea."     (Phil.  Trans.  1780,  354.) 

LETTER TO WEDGWOOD.  2] 

town.     But I wait a letter from you before I determine about 

my journey. 

My wife joins me in respect to you also. 

Yours sincerely, 

J.  PRIESTLEY. 
To Benjamin Vaughan,  Esq. 

No.  2. 
PRIESTLEY TO WEDGWOOD. 

Bmsr.,  30th Nov.,  1780. 

Pear Sir:  I thank you for thinking of me on the melan- 
choly occasion of your letter.  By very few will Mr.  Bentlev1 
be more lamented,  as,  from so long an acquaintance,  but few 
can be so fully sensible of his worth.  In a few days I should 
have written to him,  to give him an account of iny situation 
here,  and the progress I have made in another volume of ex- 
periments, which,  if all be well,  will go to the press in about 
a month.2 

Few of my friends interested themselves so much as he did 
in the success of my philosophical pursuits,  and I shall now 
feel myself less interested in them myself.  For the pleasure 
of communicating our discoveries is one great means of engag- 
ing us to enter upon and pursue such laborious investigations. 
Indeed every friend we lose  (and none of us have many so 
justly entitled to that appellation as Mr.  Bentlev was with 
respect to me)  makes life itself of less value,  and prepares u- 
for leaving it with less regret. 

You are very kind to inquire after my health.3 It is,  I 

1 Thomas Bentley,  Wedgwood's partner and friend.  See Introduction. 
A fine portrait of Bentley forms the frontispiece to the second volume oi 
Meteyard's Life of Wedgwood. 

2 Experiments and Observations in Different Kinds of Air,  vol.  v.. 
London,  1780. 

8 Dr.  Priestley writes thus of his health :  "  I have never been subject 
to headaches,  or any other complaints that are peculiarly unfavorable to 

22 CORRESPONDENCE OF PEIESTLEY. 

thank  (lod,to all appearances,  perfectly reestablished,  except 
that I cannot hear animal fund,  and feel in sonic respects a 
want of strength.  But I have as good spirits,  and am as 
capable of application as ever;  and I am preparing to do 
more business in a philosophical way than ever,  having a 
laboratory built on purpose,  and everything nearly ready to 
go work with advantage. 

No person wished more ardently than Mr.  Bentley,  that 1 
should have the leisure,  I now have the prospect of enjoying 
for the study of nature;  and I had flattered myself that,  in 
my present situation,  I might,  sometime or other,  have been 
favoured with a visit from him. 

I hope I shall not be deprived of the satisfaction of seeing 
you in his place,  if it were only to indulge our mutual sorrow. 
I shall be entirely at liberty at the time you mention,  and 
have a bed at your service. 

With much respect,  I am,  Pear Sir, 

Yours sincerely. 

J.  PRIESTLEY. 

1'.  S.  I communicated your ingenious paper to Mr.  Bauks4 
and doubt not its being well received by the Royal Society.    I 

study.  I have never found myself less disposed or less qualified for 
mutual exertions of any kind at one time of the day more than another; 
Inn all seasons have been equal to me.  early or late,  before dinner and 
alter,  etc.  :  and so far have I been from suffering by my application to 
study  (which,  however,  has never been so close or intense as some have 
imagined),  that 1 have found my health improving from the age of eigh- 
teen to the present time  [1787];  ami never have I found myself more 
tree from any disorder than at present;  I must however except a short 
time preceding ami following my leaving Lord Shelburne,  when I labored 
under a bilious complaint in which I was troubled with gall-stones,  which 
sometimes gave me exquisite pain  ;   but by confining myself to a vegetable 

diet I perfectlyr vend."     (Rutt.  L,  342-343.)    See also letter to Rev. 

X.  Lindsey,  dated Oct.  20,  1768;   Rutt,  11..  12. 

1 Sir Joseph Banks,  here referred to,  was not knighted until 1 781.  He 
was at the date of this letter President of the Royal Society and Wedg- 
wood's paper was referred to him officially.      See Introduction. 

LETTER TO WEDGWOOD.  23 

have two or three honks of Mr.  B.'s*  which I shall dispose of 
as von direct. 

To Mb.  J.  Wedgwood,  Greek Street,6 Soho,  London. 

Xo.  3. 

PRIESTLEY TO WEDGWOOD. 

Birm.  26 May,  1781. 

Dear Sir  :  I must take the liberty to give you this trouble 
about the earthen retorts you were so good as to promise me, 
and of which I am in great want.1 I am analyzing various 
earthy substances,  especially to ascertain the pabulum of sub- 
terraneous fires,  and have already made several experiments 
which throw great light upon the subject. 

The common bluu slate yields an amazing quantity of air, 
and is then a black glassy substance.  A sandstone also that I 
find here yields air in considerable plenty,  but it is just now 
in a white heat,  and I cannot tell what the residuum will be. 

I have also made some other experiments of considerable 
consequence since my return from London,2 especially some 
that I think arc decisively in favor of my theory of respira- 

5  '-B"  evidently refers to Bentley,  not to Banks. 

6 Greek St.,  Soho,  was the location of Wedgwood's extensive ware- 
rooms in London,  opened in April,  1774.  Dr.  Erasmus Darwin wrote 
to Josiah Wedgwood Xov.  29,  of the same year,  offering his condolences 
on the death of Bentley.      (Krause.) 

1 Retorts,  crucibles,  evaporating baths,  and many other vessels tor the 
laboratory had been supplied to Priestley by Wedgwood even before the 
former left Leeds in 1773.  These articles of Wedgwood's manufacture 
were in demand by chemists in England and on the continent.  A cata- 
logue of them was issued in 172-2.      (Meteyard,  II..  409.) 

2 Priestley was in the habit of spending one month every year in Lon- 
don; there he saw and heard  ;t great deal,  made additions to his library, 
and to his chemical apparatus.  A new turn was frequently given to his 
ideas.  New and useful acquaintances were formed and old ones con- 
firmed.    (Rutt,  I.,  55.) 

•24 CORRESPONDENCE OF TRIESTLEY. 

tion,3 against a series of papers by Mr.  Lavoisier4 in the las* 
volume of Parisian Memoires  ;5 but having hurt my hand,  I 
write with difficulty.  You will therefore  [excuse]  my adding 
nothing more at present  !jut that I am,  Dear Sir, 

Yours sincerely, 

J.   PRIESTLEY. 

P.  S.  If there lie any earthy substance that you wisli me 
to examine in my way,  especially such as you may suspect to 
be found in places where volcanoes abound,  and that have not 
been exposed to heat already,  I shall be much obliged to you 
if you will send specimens of them,  along with the retorts. 

"The retort in which I heated the blue slate cracked before 
the experiment was over. 

I beg my best respects to Mrs.  Wedgwood. 

To Me.  Wedowood,  near Neweastle-under-Lyne.6 

3 See Priestley's views on Respiration in a paper to the Royal Society 
read Jan.  25,  17711,  Phil.  Trans,  lxvi.,  p.  226.  "Respiration is a true 
phlogistic process."  "  Black blood contains more phlogiston than red 
blood." 

4 Antoine Laurent Lavoisier,  b.  Aug.  16,  1743,  died on the guillotine 
May 8,  1 794.  The eminent French chemist,  as author of the new chemical 
theory of combustion,  opposed to the prevailing theory of phlogiston, 
was one of Priestley's most active rivals in chemical philosophy.  He 
announced his doctrine that calcination and combustion are the results of 
the union of a highly respirable gas with combustible bodies in 17 75,  one 
year after Priestley had isolated oxygen.  As is well known Priestley 
never accepted the new theory,  but stoutly defended the phlogistic theory 
to the last. 

5 Sur la respiration des animaux et sur les changements qui arrive a 
Tair en passant par leurs poumons.  Memoires de l'Acad.  Sei.  Paris. 
1777. 

6 Newcastle-under-Lyne  (or,  under-Lyme),  was the seat of Wedg- 
wood's extensive potteries. 

LETTER TO WEDGWOOD.  2o 

No.  4. 

PRIESTLEY TO WEDGWOOD. 

Birm.  31 May,  1781. 

Dear Sir:  The day after I had written to you I received 
the retorts you were so obliging as to send me very safe. 
They have no fault except that they are something too large 
in the belly to go into the aperture of my furnace,  so that 1 
am obliged to invert them before I can get them placed 
properly.  However,  they will answer for many purposes 
very well. 

As I know your readiness to supply any of my wants of 
this kind,  I shall take the liberty to beg a few more of dif- 
ferent, but all smaller sizes,  the largest nut to exceed oh inches 
on the outside,  and also a few in form of tubes closed at one 
end,  not exceeding an inch in diameter inside,  and L5 inches 
long.  For several purposes these will be more useful than 
retorts,  especially for the examination of small specimens,  of 
which I have a considerable number. 

Every stone that I have yet examined yields more or less 
of air in a state to support flame  ;  but I shall give you a more 
particular account of this course of experiments when it is 
farther advanced. 

I should infirm you that Mr.  Shore of Xorton near Sheffield 
u'live me ten guineas and  >ai<l he should continue to contribute 
that sum annually to defray the expense of my experiments.1 

1 Mr.  Samuel Shore was one of Priestley's numerous benefactors,  who 
contributed either single donations or annuities to aid him in publishing 
his works anil conducting his researches.  Among those whom Priestley 
terms  "regular subscribers"  were Dr.  Watson and his son,  Josiah 
Wedgwood,  and later his son Thomas,  Mr.  Moseley,  Mr.  Samuel Salte, 
Mr.  Jeffries,  Mr.  RadclifFe,  Mr.  Remington,  Mr.  Strutt,  Mr.  Shore,  Mr. 
Reynolds,  Messrs.  Galton,  father and son,  the Rev.  Mr.  Simpson,  Dr. 
Fothergill,  Dr.  Price,  Sir Theodore Jansen,  Mr.  Constable,  and Sir 
George Savile.  Many of these,  if not all,  contributed ten guineas annu- 
ally; Wedgwood himself gave 25 guineas,  making the handsome sum el' 
about 200 guineas.  Mrs.  Rayner,  Dr.  Heberden,  Dr.  Withering,  ami 
Mr.  Tayleur  (see Letter Mo.  40),  also sent him large sums at different 

26 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

My hand is not quite well,  so that it is painful to me to 
write. 

With mv best respects to Mrs.  Wedgwood,  I am,  Dear Sir, 

Yours sincerely, 

J.  PRIESTLEY. 
I*.  S.     Pray have you not your operator?2 
To Mr.  Wedgwood,  at Hetruria,3 near Newcastle under line. 
[Endorsed.]      Received dune 1st. 

times.  Priestley on leaving Lord Shelburne lost half his income,  ami had 
intended making up the loss by taking pupils,  but his friends believing 
him  "well qualified to serve the interests of science"  offered this pecu- 
niary aid t<>  relieve him of teaching.  Priestley himself says of their 
generosity:  "  I thought it right to accept it and I preferred it to any 
pension from the court,  offers of which were more than once,  made by 
persons who thought they could have procured one for rue." 

To the above let  (which is net complete)  should be added Mr.  William 
Russell,  who secured for him a present of  -.'on pounds from some of the 
"heads of the congregation"  in Birmingham.  Priestley says :  "  With- 
out assistance I could not have carried on my experiments except on a 
very small scale anil under great disadvantages,"  and refers with great 
candour to his expenses for housekeeping and for the education of his 
three sons and a daughter,      (Rutt,  I.,  214-217.) 

After the disastrous riots of 1791 Priestley received many handsome 
gifts and oilers.      Compare Letter No.  64. 

Lord Brougham,  in his Lives of Philosophers of the Time of George III. 
(London.  1855),  Article,  Priestley,  criticises him severely for accepting 
pecuniary aid from his friends ami says:  "We find in his correspond- 
ence a painful thankfulness expressed,  in anything rather than the lan- 
guage of a philosopher,  to Mrs.  Rayner and Mr.  Lee for seasonable 
benefactions."  After examining with care the frequent allusions in the 
Priestley- Wedgwood letters to the generosity of the latter,  we believe 
that any unprejudiced person would dissent from this view:  Dr.  Priestley 
expresses his appreciation and gratitude in great simplicity and earnest- 
ness :  confident of the friendship of his benefactor he does not for a mo- 
ment dream of its limitation or interruption owing to the   ] uniary 

relations existing between them. 

2 This question may refer to Mr.  Alexander Chisholm,  wdio entered 
Wedgwood's service as secretary and chemical assistant in the spring of 
1781. 

3 Hetruria,  the new title of the Ridge House Estate where Wedgwood 
had built his extensive potteries.  The old classical dictionaries spelled it 
as given,  but the H was afterwards dropped.  For a view of Etruria see 
Meteyard's Life of Josiah Wedgwood,  vol.  ii.,  p.  129. 

LETTER TO WEDGWOOD.  27 

No.  5. 

PRIESTLEY TO WEDGWOOD. 

Bikm.  2fith June,  1781. 

Dear Sir-.  I have not yet received the last parrel of re- 
torts, &c,  you were so obliging as to send me,  and it is acces- 
sary for me to inform you that,  having this day examined 
those I received last,  I find none that 1 cannot force my 
breath through,  and some in great streams,  as may he seen 
when thevare plunged iu water.1 The material of the former 
small retorts seems to be better adapted to my purpose.  They 
also hear the greatest heats that I can give them.  1 am sorry 
that they are all used,  though I hope to good purpose.  They 
had no fault but that they sometimes opened at the junction 
of the two pieces of which they were composed.  Possibly 
their having been compressed in a mold would make them 
more compact,  and therefore  (if more care were used in joining 
them)  they might still do better than any other.  I also now 
think the form of them as convenient as any other,  as I use 
them iu something of a different manner. 

You would oblige me.  therefore,  if you would order the 
sunn m<, lil-'  to be used as before,  and that a fresh parcel may 
he sent me as expeditiously as possible.  I know you will not 
blame my eagerness,  as I am in the midst of a very interesting 
course of experiments,  the result of which I flatter myself will 
not be uupleasing to yourself. 

The bottom of one of the retorts was yesterday quite eaten 
away by some fluor,  which proves that it contain-  a  -peculiar 
arid?  and that is not,  as I before concluded,  the vitriolic acid 
that was the basis of it.  There was nothing-  but the fluor 
it-elf,  exposed to a great heat.      The Rowley ray3 of this 

1 The porosity of the earthenware retorts and tubes with which 
Priestley worked was one of the sources of errors into which he fell and 
afterwards himself perceived.      Compare Letters Nos.   17.   is,  and 26. 

2 Hydrofluoric acid had been obtained  (in an impure state)  by Seheele 
in 1771,  ten years before. 

3  "  Rowley-rag,"  a kind of basalt ascribed by Jukes to the Palaeozoic. 
See Letter 8,  note 2. 

28 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

country melts to a substance not to lie distinguished from the 
shistos,  or blue slate,  and gives air like it. 
I cannot add more,  but must conclude, 

Yours sincerely, 

J.  PRIESTLEY. 

J'.  S.     I shall be obliged to you for a pound or two of 
ground flint*  the next time you send me anything. 

To Mk.  Wedgwood,  Greek Street,  Soho,  London. 

No.  6. 

PRIESTLEY TO WEDGWOOD. 

Birm.  22d July,  1781. 

Dear Sir  :  I am sorry I had not the pleasure of seeing 
you last week,  and hope I shall not be so unfortunate the next 
time you come this way. 

The last retorts you were so obliging as to send me were 
excellent.  I mean the white ones,  the brown ones cracked on 
applying heat to them,  tho'  I used all the precaution I could. 
Indeed one of the white ones did so too.  Either these,  or the 
first you sent me will answer very well.  Tubes will generally 
do as well as retorts,  and your servants may always know 
whether they will do,  by plunging them in Mater,  and endea- 
vouring to blow thro'  them. 

It happened unfortunately that the retorts cracked when I 
had in them the day and the flint from the Apalachian moun- 
tains' that you favoured me with.  I shall be glad of a small 
quantity of each along with the ground flint. 

*  Flint grinding was an important operation in Wedgwood's works. 

He used Thomas Benson's process of grinding under water,  and later 
Brindley's improved mill.     (Meteyard,  I.,  149 el set].} 

1 Wedgwood,  in his efforts to improve the pottery and porcelain for 
which his establishment became famous,  collected clays,  earths,  and mine- 
rals of unusual aspect in all parts of Great Britain and even in America. 
From the latter country samples of clays and minerals were brought by 

LETTER TO WEDGWOOD.  29 

I have not yet got any basaUes or lava,  but am in hopes 
that some of my friends in London will succeed for me. 
With the greatest gratitude for your many favours,  I am, 
Dear Sir,  Yours sincerely, 

J.  PRIESTLEY. 

P.  S. — Could you send me a little Granate2 with the other 
things. 

To Mr.  Wedgwood at Hetruria,  near Newcastle-under-Line. 

Rec'd July 23d,  1781. 

No.  7. 

PRIESTLEY TO WEDGWOOD. 

Birm.  August Stli.  1781. 
Deab Sir  :  I have been favoured with your obliging letter 
and also two bo.rc.~i of retorts,  etc.,  which came to hand only on 
Saturday last.  The cover of the larger box was quite off,  and 
ten of the retorts broke,  most of them so as to be of no use at 
all.  They were sent late at night,  and I had paid the car- 
riage (4 sh.)  before I was aware of the accident.  I suppose 
there is no remedy in the case.  Air.  Boulton1 says you will be 
mure likely to get it than 7".  I shall,  however,  speak to the 
book-keeper here. 

1 do not know how to desire a reparation of the loss,  but 
indeed I shall soon want them much.  I have used two that 
were whole and find them very good,  and yet those of the 
porcelain kind are more compact and better for some purposes. 

Your specimens were very acceptable.  The basalte is p re- 
captains of merchant vessels on their return voyages.  Clays from the 
Carolinas,  Georgia,  and Florida and varieties of spar were examined 1>\ 
him,  and specimens were submitted to his friend Priestley wdio gave him 
useful hints concerning them. 

2 Granate,  the old way of spelling garnet  (granatus). 

1 Matthew Boulton,  of Boulton and Watt.  See  "Lunar Society," 
in Appendix. 

30 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

cisely the same thing with our Rowley rag.  I had some from 
London as well as yours.     The lava from Vesuvius gave a 

g 1 deal of air,  Imt before the process was over,  the retort 

cracked.  The remainder of the specimen I put into a retort 
I particularly valued,  it having sustained the greatest heat I 
inn give it three times before;  but it cracked presently this 
time,  an accident I lament much.  It was peculiar to both 
these experiments with the lava,  that I found the retort when 
cold broke into many pieces,  as it'  by the expansion of the 
matter in cooling.     It is a perfectly black glass. 

The toadstone2 yields much air and becomes a black glass 
also.  Mr.  Keir3 however thinks that even the basaltes may 
have been in fusion,  and that,  tho'  a perfect glass at first,  it 
might become the substance it now is by length of time.  What 
think you of this'.'  I mean to try what a heat of a week or 
two will do.  Are your tires at all convenient for an experi- 
ment of this kind '.' 

If you could favour me with another piece of the same kind 
of lava,  I should value it much.  It resembles a stone,  and 
not a cinder.     The latter do not so well answer my purpose. 

The granatt gives a good deal of air,  and at the last pretty 
pure;  as also was the last from the lava ; .for the retort,  by 
some means or other,  closing before the process was over,  I 
got both the first and the last produced.  I think a great deal 
would have been given. 

Yours sincerely, 

J.  PRIESTLEY. 

P.  S. — Please to direct the next parcel to Wm.   Russel,'* 

2  "Toadstone."  the Derbyshire name for a sot':  earthy variety of trap. 
See Letter No.  8,  note 2. 

3 Capt.  James Keir.     See Introduction. 

*  William Russell,  of Birmingham,  with whom Priestley had become 
recently acquainted,  remained his steadfast friend in prosperity and ad- 
versity. Mr.  Russell gave him a refuge after the riots of 1791,  and fol- 
lowed Dr.  Priestley to America in August,  1795.  (Rutt,  I.,  21 0 and 
passim.')     See Letter Xo.  90,  to Mr.  William Vaughan. 

LETTER TO WEDGWOOD.  31 

Esq.,  with  (P)  under the name.  It will come readier and 
cheaper.  I do so with all my parcels from London.  I hope 
you have used the furnace. 

T.i Mr.  Wedgwood,  Etruria,  near Xewcastle-uuder-Line. 

[Endorsed]     Rec'd August 9th. 

No.  8. 

PRIESTLEY TO WEDGWOOD. 

Bikm.  18th Aug..  1781. 
Dear Sir  :  I can only most heartily thank you for your 
great readiness to make up the lossof the retorts.  In due time 
I hope to receive them,  and then hope to give a satisfactory 
account of them.  The last that I used was Xo.  5 and a better 
cannot lie made.  It bore my greatest heat,  gave no air of 
itself,  and that which was expelled by heat was not at all con- 
taminated. I therefore think that nothingcan he more perfect 
in its kind.  But I shall note any difference that I may happen 
to observe in the other-. 

The coals are to be put in at the great opening in the top 
of the furnace,  and afterwards covered with two bricks.  The 
openings in the sides are for retorts.  The screws are of no 
use,  and the iron plates that now cover the holes are only for 
plugs to stop the holes when they are not used for that purpose. 
There should be laid upon them a quantity of the same mate- 
rials that line the inside of the furnace.  But finding these plugs 
inconvenient,  I only put stones into the holes,  and plaster them 
on the outside with sand and clay.  I have found it necessary 
to build the chimney more than twice as high as I fi mnd it. 

Since I wrote the above the box and cont.  are come safe 
to hand,  and nothing in the least damaged.  I value the con- 
tents very much,  and in time shall not fail to give you the 
best account I can of all the specimens you have favored me 
with. 

It is of some consequence to determine whether the lava 

;J2 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

conies out of the volcano in the stone-like state in which we 
now find it,  or acquires its present consistence of power and 
of yielding air afterwai'ds.  I hope to find this,  and I can have 
the use of a glass-house fire for the purpose,  of which I hope 
to make good use,  as well as of my own. 

Your fact from Dr.  Solander1 is very curious and valuable. 

Whatever the basalies is,  the same is the Rowley rag,  and 
similar to it may be the toadstone,  and perhaps as you conjec- 
ture even granate,  and many other substances.2 

My friend Mr.  Russel goes to Brighthelmstone3 on Monday 
night,  and has persuaded me to accompany him.     I hope it 

1 Karl Daniell Solander  (1736-1782),  a naturalist of Swedish birth 
and British residence.  He accompanied Sir Joseph Banks on Captain 
Cook's voyage around the world  ;  published on geology and botany. 

2  "Toadstone"  and  "Rowley-rag,"  several times named in these 
Utters,  were described and analyzed by Dr.  Withering in a paper read 
to the Royal Society May 16,  1782,  and communicated by Joseph 
Priestley.  Dr.  Withering describes Rowley-rag from southern part of 
Staffordshire thus:  "In appearance dark gray,  with minute shining 
crystals  ;  exposed to weather gets an ochry color on the outside  ;  strikes 
tiie with steel ;  cuts glass;  melts though not easily under the blowpipe ; 
heated ill open lire becomes magnetic."  The analysis lie reports as 
follows  :  — 

Pure siliceous earth  .....      47^ 

Pure clay free from fixable air  .         .         .     •"•'-'  j 

Iron in a calciform state  .  .  .  •  .20 

100 
The toadstone from Derbyshire is described thus:    "Dark brownish 
gray,    granulated texture,   with several cavities filled with crystallized 
spar.      It does not strike lire with steel ;    it melts to a black glass." 
Analysis  — 

Siliceous earth  ....••      56 

More siliceous earth  .....       7T55 

Calciform iron  .  .  .  .  •  .16 

Calcareous earth       ......        'fa 

Earth of Allum 14,80 

ioi A 

The paper is dated October 1,  1781   (Phil.  Trans.  1782,  327). 

3 Brighthelmstone,  now called Brighton,  Sussex. 

LETTER TO WEDGWOOD. 

will contribute to the peri  -  of my health.     I 

shall return iu less than a month.    In passing through I 
I pi-       -    -     stay about a week.     If I meet with anything 
the philosophical way.  you shall hear of it. 
"With the greatest gratitude and respect, 
E am,  D 

J.  PEIESTLEY. 
Mb.  Wedgwood,  E:ruria,  near  >".-weastle-under-Line. 

PRIESTLEY TO WEDGW< 

" 
Deae Sip.  :  Having made an experiment which I think will 
give yon pleasure,  I take the first opportunity of acquainting 
you with it. 

I throw the focus of a burning lens on s 
-   of which the air has been expelled J when confined in 
inflammable air.     The air is rapidly absorbed,  lead is formed, 
and what remains of the air is as inflanirual/- 
This simple experiment seems to prove,  that what we have 
called phloffiston1 is the same thing with infl  ■  in 

■        bination with othei  -      -  -    on- 

tained in chalk.     From 40-ounce measures of air I reo 
about 5 dwts.  of lead.     The inflammable air v . .  -   d 
iron by oil of vitriol. 

1 Priestler here records the important fact of the redaction  • 

oxides by hydrogen,  but his interpretation of the phenoni-  i       -  ord- 

ance with the phlogistic theory to which he unhesitatingly adh 
throughout his life. 

2  ••  Phlogiston."  according to Stahl,  was the principle of ii 
but later it came to signify the principle common to all th  - 

left in contact with the air lessened its power of supporting animal life 
and flame.     The belief,  here announced by Priestley,  of the identity of 
phlogiston and inflammable air  (hydrogen)  was first proposed by Caven- 
dish, and strongly urged by Kirwan.        -  •*-.) 
3 

•".1 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

I have made a similar experiment with charcoal,  proving 
ilia!  common air becomes phlogisticated by a combination of 
inflammable air with it.3 And I have also succeeded in mak- 
ing nitrous air from nitrous acid4 and inflammable air,  I am 
pursuing the experiment farther,  as I have opportunity  ;  but 
]  want sunshine,  and for that I must wait. 

I am ashamed to be so troublesome,  but another cargo of the 
smallest sized retorts No.  5 would be very acceptable and useful 
tn mr\  as also the vessels you make of the same materials with 
your mortals that you supplied Mr.  Boulton with.  I should 
like mine to be 12 inches high and about 1 J.  inches or 2 inches 
in the inside.  They are to stand in a sand heat.  Pray would 
they bear a red heat  '.'  It' they would,  they would be excellent 
for many purposes.  I want much something that will bold 
alkalis in fusion  ;  but am afraid no such thing can be got. 

I ex] t to be in London in about a month,  and should be 

happy to meet you then.      With gratitude for all your 
favours,  I am,  Dear Sir, 

Yours sincerely, 

J.  PRIESTLEY. 
Tn Mr.  Wedgwood,  Hetruria,  near Newcastle-under-Line,  Staffordshire. 

3 This is not the place for a discussion of the phlogistic theory,  but a 
brief explanation of the terms currently used by Priestley may be useful 
to some of our readers.  Priestley regarded common air as a compound 
of phlogiston and oxygen,  or as hecalled it  "  dephlogisticated air,"  f.  ... 
air deprived of phlogiston.  The other constituent of common air,  nitrogen, 
he regarded as air saturated with phlogiston,  hence called  "  phlogisticated 
air."  He thought all combustible bodies contained hydrogen,  and he was 
inclined to the belief that hydrogen and phlogiston are identical,  as above 
stated.  Regarding the different gases as varieties of air.  Priestley used 
tire following nomenclature:  "fixed air"  for carbonic aeid gas  (carbon 
di-oxide)  ;  "  nitrous sir"  for nitric oxide;  "  alkaline air"  for ammonia  ; 
•■  inflammable air"  for hydrogen and in part t'ur carbon monoxide mixed 
with marsh gas or alone;  besides the terms for oxygen and hydrogen 
above given.  In the cumbersome language of the phlogistic theory  "  de- 
composition of air in conjunction with inflammable air"  signifies the union 
of air and hydrogen,  which was usually effected by the electric spark. 

*  '*  Nitrous acid"  signifies in modern language nitric acid. 

LETTER TO WEDGWOOD.  30 

No.  10. 

PRIESTLEY TO WEDGWOOD. 

Bikm.  21 March.  1782. 

Dear Sir  :  I Jiave received vour oblisjins letter containing 
vour generous contribution,  and that of Dr.  Darwin,  to the 
expences of my experiments.1 Whatever be my success,  with 
such assistance I should be much to blame if my zeal and 
assiduity should be wanting. 

Since my last I have found that alkaline air reduces the 
calx of lead with as much ease as inflammable air,  and I think 
iu greater quantity.2 This you will think a very extra- 
ordinary tart  :  but it agrees with several of my former experi- 
ment-, and throws great light upon them,  ami other things in 
the theory of chemistry  :  especially by convening alkaline air 
into inflammable air by the electric spark,  the production of 
volatile alkali from iron superphlogisticated,  and the affinity 
of all acids both witli alkalis and phlogiston,  which appear to 
be modifications of each other.  However,  when the calx has 
al'-'  irbed all the alkaline air that it can.  there is a large residuum 
of phlogisticated air,  whereas what remains of the inflammable 
air is unchanged  ;  which seems to prove that the inflammable 
air is the more simple principle of the two. 

Other remarkable fact-  have occurred in the course of thi  - 
experiments  :  but as I want sunshine to ascertain them,  I shall 
not trouble you witli the mention of them at present. 

I thank you for the communication of Dr.  Darwin's note, 
and shall write him on the subject. 

Before my late experiments phlogiston was indeed alm<  si 
given up by the Lunar Society,3 but now it seems to lie re-estab- 

1 See Letter No.  4,  note 1. 

2 Alkaline air,  or ammonia,  had been obtained in the gaseous state by 
Priestley in 1774.  This experiment,  as he justly remarks,  throws great 
light on known phenomena.  He i-  mistaken a-  to tin-  reduction being 
effected more easily,  but right in concluding that inflammable air is a 
"more simple principle"  than alkaline air. 

3 See  "The Lunar Society"  in Appendix. 

:>6 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

lished.  Mr.  Kirwan,4 in a letter 1 have received from him this 
day,  savsthat he has given in a paper to the I J.  Society,  to prove, 
from my former experiments,  that phlogiston must be the same 
thing with inflammable air,  and also that dephlogistieated air 
and phlogiston make tixed air.     This last I much doubt. 

I could say much more;  but as I hope to have the pleasure 
of seeing you soon,  I am,  with my respectful compliments to 
Mrs.  Wedgwood,  and your son,  Dear Sir, 

Must sincerely yours, 

J.  PRIESTLEY. 

]'.  S.  I thank you for the retorts,  which I hear are arrived. 
Mr.  Boulton had mentioned to me your curious and valuable 
thermometer.6 It will be very useful to me,  and many other 
persons. 

To Mr.  Wedgwood,  Greek Street,  Soho,  London. 

No.  11. 

PRIESTLEY TO FRANKLIN. 

Birmingham,  June 24th,  1782. 

Dr.  Benjamin Franklin  : 

Dear iSir  :  You have made me very happy by your letter, 
as I find by it that notwithstanding-  the unpleasant state of 

*  Richard Kirwan,  F.R.S.  (1735-1812),  the distinguished Irish min- 
eralogist and chemist.  He was the champion of the view that phlo- 
giston and hydrogen are identical and developed it in his  "  Experiments 
and Observations on the Specific Gravities and attractive Powers of 
various Saline Substances,"  a paper presented to the Royal Society in 
1781,  and followed by a supplement witli the same title in 1782.  It is 
to this second essay that Dr.  Priestley refers. 

5 The first mention in this correspondence of Wedgwood's newly in- 
vented Pyrometer for measuring high temperatures.  On May 9,  1782, 
Wedgwood's first paper was read to the Royal Society by Sir Joseph 
Banks  :  "  An Attempt to make a Thermometer for measuring the higher 
degrees of Heat from a red Heat up to the strongest that vessels made of 
Clay can support."  (Phil.  Trans.  1782,  305.)  For construction of the 
Pyrometer see also Black's Lectures on Chemistry,  London,  1803,  I. 

LETTER TO FRANKLIN.  37 

politicks,  your usual humour and pleasantry lias not forsaken 
you.  I am only concerned that you have not mentioned the 
case of my friend Mr.  Russell,1 about which I wrote you so 
particularly.  But I have taken the liberty to assure him that, 
notwithstanding tin's omission,  I am as confident that yon 
have not neglected the business as if you had given me the 
most expressed assurance of it.  One line,  however,  inform- 
ing me what you think of the case will give me great satis- 
faction. 

Having at length got sunshine,  I am busy in prosecuting 
the experiments about which 1 wrote to von,  and shall soon 
draw up an account of them for the Royal Society. 

Please to inform the Due de Rochefoucauld,2 whose civili- 
ties to me I remember witli pleasure,  that my experiments are 
certainly inconsistent with Mr.  Lavoisier's supposition of 
there being no such thing as phlogiston,  and that it is the 
addition of air,  and not the loss of anything that converts 
a metal into a calx.  In their usual state calces of metals do 
contain air,  but that may he expelled by heat,  and after tin's I 
reduce them to a perfect metallic state by nothing hut inflam- 
mable air,  which they imbibe in toto,  without any decomposi- 
tion. I lately reduced 101 ounce measures of this air to two 
by calx of lead,  and that small remainder was still inflam- 
mable. I explain Mr.  Lavoisier's experiments by supposing 
that precipitate pet'  se contains all the phlogiston of the 
metal mercury,  but in a different state  ;  hut I can show other 
calces which also contain more phlogiston than the metals 
themselves.  That mercury in its metallic state does contain 
phlogiston or inflammable air,  is evident from the production 
of nitrous air by the solution of it in spirits of nitre,  and I 
make nitrous air from nothing hut nitrous vapor and inflam- 

1 See Letter No.  7,  note 4. 

2 Francois Alexandre Frederic de la Rochefoueauld-Liancourt,  the 
liberal French peer and philanthropist  (1747-1827),  was at this time 
visiting America.  His  "Travels in tlie United States of America" 
were published,  in 8 vols.,  in 1800,  and contain stat<  nienls about Penn- 
sylvania, which Priestley's son Joseph pronounces  "false and injurious." 
(Memoirs I.,  172.) 

38 CORRESPONDENCE OF 1'RIESTLEY. 

mable nir;  so that it indisputably consists of these two in- 
gredients. I have already ascertained the proportion of 
inflammable air that enters into the composition of lead,  tin, 
copper,  and silver,  and am proceeding to the other metals as 
fast as I can.  When the whole is completed 1 shall give von 
a further account of it. 

I am exceedingly concerned to find that it is so difficult a 
tiling to make peace  ;  but I hope before the campaign is over 
all parties will have had enough of inn;  and ho sensible that 
they will gain nothing by continuing it.  If 1 had any voice 
in the business,  the prospect of seeing yon in this country 
would be a strong additional motive to accelerate the negotia- 
tions. 

With the greatest respect and every good wish, 

I am,  dear sir,  yours sincerely, 

J.  PKIESTLEY. 

P.  S. — If von should think it proper,  I have no objection 
to your sending a copy of my former letter to Rosier's Jour- 
nal,3 as a general outline of what I am doing.  I wish to have 
every new fact-  to be as speedily and as generally known as 
possible. 

No.  12. 

PRIESTLEY TO WEDGWOOD. 

Bikm.,  16 Sept.,  1782. 

Dear Sie  :  As you are pleased to interest yourself so much 
iu my philosophical pursuits,  I  (latter myself it will lie agree- 
able to you to be informed that I have of late been very busy, 
anil very successful. 

The late sunshine,  of which I hardly lost a single hour,  has 
given me an opportunity of ascertaining beyond all doubt the 

3 Observations et uiemoircs sur la physique,  sur I'histoire naturelle et 
sur les arts et metiers.  Par l'Abbe Rozier.  Paris,  1771-1822.  An 
important early periodical devoted to science. 

LETTER TO WEDGWOOD.  39 

identity of phlogiston and inflammable air;  but I have not 
succeeded so well as I expected in ascertaining the quantity of 

inflammable air that outers into the mposition of all the 

metals,  because the heat of the lens is capable of decomposing 
iron,  and some other metals.  Also,  though I made bismuth, 
and regulus of Cobalt I cannot make zinc,  or regulus of 
arst nic,  or of antimony,  except in alkaline air.  I made sulphur- 
readily,  by evaporating oil of vitriol to dryness in inflammable 
air.  It incrusts all the sides of the glass vessel in which the 
experiment is made. 

It will perhaps surprise you to be informed,  that the heat 
produced by this lens reduces the whole of charcoal  (perfectly 
made)  to inflammable air,  without the least particle of fixed 
air in it.1 The ashes are so little as not to lie discerned. 

I have also completely proved that the electric matter,  i~,  "i 
contain*,  phlogiston,  by taking the electric spark in common 
air confined in a glass syphon by spirit of salt  ■}  for in these 
circumstances the air is diminished and phlogistieated,  though 
no metal,  as before,  was contiguous to it.  When I use oil of 
vitriol or spirit of nitre,  in this manner,  I get an additional 
quantity of air,  and this is all dephlogisticated air,  being pro- 
duced from the pure acids faster than the electric matter can 
injure it.  I never before produced this air,  except when the 
acids were previously combined with some earthy base.  It 
seems therefore to prove that pure air is jmn arid in another 
form,  perhaps with the addition of latent heat.  When I use 
the phosphoric acid,  the common air is first phlogistieated, 
and then is increased by an addition of inflammable air.  I 
shall pursue these experiments much farther. 

I have been measuring heats in this town by your excellent 
method.  My usual white heats,  1 find have been 136,  that of 
the heat when east-iron nails are made is 139,  and the greatest 
we can ever raise on purpose being 142.     Twice the clay and 

1 Priestley at first confounded hydrogen and carbon-monoxide,  l>"tli 
being for him  "  inflammable air."      It was not until 1 799,  when living in 

Northumberland,  Pennsylvania,  that he recognized carbon in xide as a 

distinct gas.     (Kopp,  Geschichte der Chemie,  I.,  241.) 

2 Hydrochloric acid gas. 

40 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

car were both melted and reduced to one shapeless mass; 
luit we could not do it again,  and there imputed it to some- 
thing it came in contact with in the fire.  I have vet to try 
the heat used in casting steel.  I wish much to know how 
you ever reached 160.3 I am told that your clay melts in the 
focus of Mr.  Parker's lens;'  and that for such heats as these 
magnesia will probably be better.  I cannot melt the smallest 
bit of your clay with my lens. 

I have much enlarged my apparatus,  and should be par- 
ticularly happy to show you my laboratory in its present state. 

With my best res] ts to Mrs.  Wedgwood,  I am,  Dear Sir, 

with gratitude and esteem,  Yours sincerely, 

J.  PRIESTLEY. 

!'•  s- — 1 have made a pretty remarkable experiment in the 
melting of malleable iron in pure air.  Many circumstances 
arc curious.  I can only say here,  that the iron is afterwards a 
perfect glass,  not affected by acid-. 

Mr.  Wedgwood,  Etruria,  near Newcastle-under-Liue,  Staffordshire. 

3  \\  edgwood's pyrometer had a scale divided into 240 decrees,  each of 
which In-  calculated to be equal to I3(f of Fahrenheit's scale,  and the 
zero of his scale indicating a red heat corresponded according to his ex- 
periments to 1.077 l-'ah.  But Wedgwood's instrument enormously 
exaggerated temperatures,  giving figures  (when referred to Fahrenheit) 
nearlj ten times higher than those of Daniell. 

It was not until May 13,  1784,  however,  that Wedgwood sent to the 
Royal Society his second paper entitled  :  "An Attempt to compare and 
connect the Thermometer for Strong Fire described in vol.ilxxii.  of the 
Philosophical Transactions with the common Mercurial ones."  (Phil. 
Trans.  1 7X4.)  Two years later Wedgwood read a third paper under the 
title:  "Additional Observations on making a Thermometer lor measur- 
ing the higher degrees of Heat."     (Phil.  Trans.  1786,  390.) 

4 Mr.  \\  .  Parker,  manufacturer of cutglass and maker of philosophical 
instruments,  at cm Fleet Street,  generously supplied Priestley with every 
instrument he wanted in class.  One of his lenses was sixteen inches in 
diameter  (Rutt,  I.,  216)  and was in constant use by Priestley,  who 
brought it with him to America.  The lens was deposited for safe-keep- 
ing in the Smithsonian Institution and was unfortunately destroyed when 
a part of the building was ravaged by lire in 1S65. 

Priestley refers tig tin to Mr.  Parker in Letters Nos.  43 and GG. 

LETTER TO WEDGWOOD.  41 

No.  13. 

PKIESTLEY TO WEDGWOOD. 

Birm.  10th Oct.,  L782. 

Pear Sir  :  When I received yourfavor I wasjusi about to 
try the dephhgisticated marine add,1 and I find thai the elec- 
tric matter transmitted through it affects the air in the very 
same manner as when metal wins are employed,  diminishing 
and phlogisticating it;  so that there hardly remains any doubt 
but that the electric matter itself must contain the phlogiston 
with which the air becomes saturated. 

Your observations on zinc,  arsenic and antimony,  are cer- 
tainly verv just,  and account very well fur the failure of my 
experiments with those semi-metals.  I want sunshine for the 
prosecution of my experiments on charcoal.  Pitcoal,  I per- 
ceive will leave more ashes than wood,  and calcined bones a 
much greater proportion still.2 

1 am exceedingly pleased with Mr.  Playfair's3 method of 
reducing the scale of your thermometer to that of Fahrenheit. 
I think it cannot tail to answer,  provided due precautions he 
taken in conducting the experiments,  and those you mention 
are certainlv very important ones.  As the light acts upon one 
surface only,  the pieces should he turned,  and exposed on all 
sides.  I suspect,  however,  that it will he impossible to be 
very accurate if von go very near the focus,  and therefore it 
should be tested with Mr.  Parker's lens.  I have also some- 
times thought that the heat increases in a greater proportion 

i  "  Dephlogisticated marine acid"  is,  in the phlogistic nomenclature, 
the simple body now known as chlorine. 

2 The composition of bones chief!)  calcium phosphate,  was discovered 
by Scheele,  or Gahn,  in 1771.  This must certainly have been known to 
Priestley,  who took  <rreat interest in Schi i le's researches and encouraged 
Dr. -I.  R.  Forster to translate and publish Scheele' s  "  Chemical Obser- 
vations and Experiments on Air and Fire,"  London,  1780.  This work 
is dedicated to Priestley,  and concludes with a letter by him. 

3 Probably John Play fair  (1748-1819),  afterw irds Professor of Mathe- 
matics and of Natural Philosophy at the University of Edinburgh.      For 
the correspondence between Wedgwood's and Fahrenheit's scali 
note 2 to Letter No.  12. 

12 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

than the increase of the square of the diameter of the pencil. 
But that should be ascertained by common thermometers in 
the first place,  and then it would be as easy to compute on one 
proportion of increase as another. 

I have heard that magnesia,  pressed into a  (•nine form,  was 
diminished in bulk by Mr.  Parker's lens more than any sub- 
stance whatever,  and it retained its form without fusion. 

You have heard of a pretended transmutation of quick- 
silver into gold by Dr.  Price.'  Yesterday I had a letter from 
Mr.  Kirwan,  who,  alter some account of it,  adds:  "But I 
have lately seen him and he lias owned,  that he believes that 
he was deceived,  and that his mercury previously contained 
gold  :  that he bought it from the makers of Or moulu,  &c.  I 
said so much to him,  that he is now satisfied to pass only for a 
mere able extractor of gold,  and says he uses a preparation of 
arsenic,  of which 1 persuaded him to promise he would give a 
paper to the Royal Society." 

If you have not heard this before you will like to have the 
information. 

I beg my respects to Mrs.  Wedgwood and your sons, 
and am,  Dear Sir, 

Yours sincerely, 

J.   PRIESTLEY. 

1 James Price.  M.D.,  F.R.S.,  a wealthy and learned physician of 
Guilford  (1752-1783),  greatly surprised the world of science by announc- 
ing in 1 781 he had discovered a powder capable of transmuting quick- 
silver into gold.  In 1782 he gave public exhibitions of the operation in 
his laboratory,  and published a volume with the title  :  "  An Account of 
some Experiments on Mercury,  Silver and Gold made at Guilford in May 
1782,  in the Laboratory of James Price,  M.D.,  F.R.S.,  Oxford.  1782." 
Many learned and influential men testified to the alleged transmutations, 
and the Royal Societ}  became interested to examine Dr.  Price's preten- 
sions. The Society appointed the well-known chemists Kirwan  (see note 
4 to Letter No.  9)  and Higgins to investigate.  To the results of Kirwan's 
study Dr.  Priestley here refers.  In August of the following year Dr. 
Price,  being pushed to diselose his methods or to confess his fraud,  com- 
mitted suicide by drinking cherry-laurel water in his laboratory,  to which 
certain members of the Royal Society had come to witness experiments. 
(Gentleman's Magazine,  1791,  894. ) 

LETTER TO WEDGWOOD.  43 

I have just scon an American gentleman,  who left I>r. 
Franklin three weeks ago.  He says he breaks very fast,  and 
thinks he will not survive many months.5 He says he only 
wishes to see a peace concluded before he dies.  Mr.  Laurence 
told this gentleman that he hoped there would be a peace in 
the course of this winter.6 

Me.  J.  Wedgwood,  Newcastle-under-Line. 

No.  14. 

PRIESTLEY TO WEDGWOOD. 

Biem.  Dec.  8,  1782. 

Dear Sir  :  I have had considerable success in my experi- 
ments since I had the pleasure to write to you last ;  but I 
was unwilling to trouble you with an account of details,  or 
things of small consequence.  I think,  however,  it will give 
pleasure to be informed that I have succeeded in converting 
pure water into permara nt air1 by previously combining it 
with quicklime,  and then subjecting it to a strong heat.  This 
air has a small proportion of fixed air in it,  but the bulk of 
[it]  is air a little worse than that of the atmosphere. 

I had no certain expectation of this event  ;  but was led 
from various considerations to try the result of exposing to a 

5 The  "American gentleman"  who reported Dr.  Franklin as seriousl) 
ill was,  however,  mistaken as to the result,  for Franklin survived this 
attack eight years. 

6 The preliminary articles of a treaty of peace were signed at Paris on 
November 30th,  about seven weeks after the date of Priestley's letter. 

1 This seeming conversion of water into air,  which was due to the 
porosity of the earthen retorts,  occupied much of Priestley's time during 
the succeeding months.  (See Letter Xo.  2G,  note 2.)  In justice t" 
Priestley it should lie borne in mind that in corresponding with his friend 
he gives,  impulsively,  almost his first impressions before In-  had time for 
reflections and corroborative experiments,  which eventually led him to 
very ditl'erent conclusions.  Moreover,  his brother philosophers did not 
regard his deductions as improbable.  He wrote briefly of this experi- 
ment on the same day to James Watt  (see next letter). 

44 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

strong heat such volatile substances as are held in firm com- 
bination with others,  so as,  in that state,  to bear the heat. 

J had also a general idea that if the parts of any bodies be 
rarefied beyond the sphere of attraction they will be in a 
sphere of repulsion to each other. 

Knowing your readiness to promote all philosophical in- 
vestigations, I make no scruple to inform you that a fresh 
supply of such small retorts as the last you favored me with 
will be very acceptable.  I must inform you,  however,  that 
tiny often crack after they have been exposed to a strong heat 
(about 140)  about an hour,  but some of them are perfect;  the 
mass will seldom serve twice. 

With my best respects to Mrs.  Wedgwood I am,  Dear Sir. 

Yours sincerely, 

.1.  PRIESTLEY. 

P.  S.  I wish the retorts may be directed to myself and not 
to Mr.  Russell.2 

Mr.  J.Wedgwood,  Hetruria,  near Newcastle-under-Line.3 

No.  15. 

PRIESTLEY TO JAMES WATT. 

Faikhill,  Birmingham,  8th Dee.  1TX_. 
Dear Sir  :  1 have the pleasure to inform you that I readily 
convert water into a permanent air by first combining it with 
quicklime and then exposing it to a red heat.  This,  1 believe, 
agrees with your idea on the subject.  I have not though, 
much merit,  as I had only random expectations from exposing 
volatile substances in general to a red heat,  when combined 
with other substances,  in imitation of the method of converting 
the acids into air,  when combined with the calces of metals or 

2 Compare these directions with those in Letter No.  7. 

3 The endorsement on the tolded letter is in the handwriting of Mr. 
Chisholm. 

LETTER TO WATT.  45 

with alkaline bodies.  When I have the pleasure of seeing 
vmi.  I will inform you what kind of air I get,  and what 
quantity,  &c.] 

Yours sincerely, 

J.  PRIESTLEY. 

Xo.  16. 

PRIESTLEY TO JAMES WATT. 

Faikiiiu.,  26th Dec.  1782. 
Pear Sir  :    I have the pleasure to inform you that I now 
convert water into air without combining it with lime or any- 
thing else,  with less than a boiling heat,  in the greatest quan- 
tity and with the least possible trouble and expense.     The air 

1 Two days after the date of this letter,  which was perhaps the day of 
its receipt,  Watt wrote to Matthew Boulton as follows: — 

December loth.  1782.  "You may remember that I have often said 
that if water could be heated red hot or something more,  it would prob- 
ably be converted into some kind of air.  because strain would in that 
case have lost all its latent heat and that it would have been turned solely 
into sensible heat,  and probably a total change of the nature of the 
fluid would ensue.  Dr.  Priestley has proved this ln experiment."  Watt 
then describes the experiment much as in this letter,  and adds :  ••'lie' 
Doctor does me justice as to the theory."  (Muirhead's Mechanical 
Inventions of Watt,  II.,  167.) 

Watt wrote also to Wedgwood in the same strain,  and  « ived a reply 

of the same date as the above  :    "  I thank you,"  says Wedgw 1.  "for 

the communication of Dr.  Priestley's wonderful discovery of the con- 
version of water into air weight for in ight.  The Doctor had obliged me 
with a short account of the discovery but had omitted this last circum- 
stance,"    (Muirhead's Mech.  Inv.  of Watt,  II.,  169.) 

On December 13th,  Watt wrote to Mr.  De Luc,  informing him of  "Dr. 
Priestley's most surprising discovery,"  and,  after describing the experi- 
ment, remarks  :  "  If this process contains no deception,  here is an effect- 
ual account of many phenomena,  and one element dismissed from the 
list." 

On this very same day Watt also wrote to Dr.  Joseph Black a long 
letter in which he again describes Priestley's experiment.  (Muirhead's 
Corresp.  Watt,  pp.  4 to 5.) 

4(j CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

is of the purity of thai of the atmosphere,  and,  I think,  with- 
out any admixture of fixed air. 

The method will surprize you more than theeffect,  but thai 
I may give you the pleasure of speculating on the subject,  I 

shall liefer the i munication of the hocus-pocus of it,  till you 

give me the pleasure of your company at Fairhill. 

1 have other curious things to show you. 
Yours sincerely, 

J.   PRIESTLEY. 

No.  17. 
PRIESTLEY TO SIR JOSEPH BANKS. 

Birmingham,  2S Dec.  17-2. 

Deab Sib  :  I think myself much honored by your sending 
me the Derbyshire mineral,1 and shall endeavor,  in due time, 
to give you the best account that 1 can of it.  At present i 
have made only one experiment upon it,  but this seems to afford 
sufficient data for explaining the phenomenon you mention. 

Jt yields,  I find,  a considerable quantity of very pure or 
dephlogisticated air by heat.  Supposing,  therefore,  that the 
air incorporates with it,  and thereby loses its fluidity,  heat 
will lie generated,  as when water incorporates with lime, 
and the pure air,  which that heat expels from it,  will contri- 
bute to promote the escape of its phlogiston,  and so produce a 
proper ascension,2 as is the ease with substances that contain 
nitre,  or anything else that yields pure air with heat.  I 
should think it is very possible to make artificial mixtures of 
this kind,  that should have the same property in any required 
degree,  and it is very easy to conceive that a most dangerous 
use might be made of them.  But whatever is capable of doing 
mischief,  is likewise of doing e,ood. 

1 This mineral,  judging by the results of the experiments made with it 
and here reported,  must have been pyrolusite. 

2 Philosophers,  to explain the increase in weight of metals on the escape 
of phlogiston,  had endowed the latter imaginary body with the principle 
of levity,  as opposed to gravity ;  to this Priestley apparently refers. 

LETTER TO BANKS.  47 

I should have answered your obliging letter sooner,  bul 
that I have been much intent ou the prosecution of a sin- 
gular kind of experiment,  which seems to show that water 
i-  convertible into permanent air even without combination 
with any other substance,  and with a very moderate heat. 

Endeavoring to distill water in an earthen retort,  very little 
of it comes over in the form of steam,  but a most astonishing 
quantity of air is always produced.  An ounce of water has 
just given me ninety-five ounces measure of air,  and this,  the 
second time,  that I have used the same retort for the purpose. 
The air has no mixture of fixed air in it,  and is such that a 
candle will easily burn in it. 

When I incorporate the water with quicklime,  and expel 
it again by heat.  I get no water at all,  but sometimes the whole 
weight  "f permanent air of the quality above mentioned,  but 
with a mixture of fixed air.  The most difficult circumstance 
attending these experiments is that they do not succeed with 
glass retorts.3 Some other curious facts have occurred in the 
investigation of this business,  which I am far from having 
completed.  You are at liberty,  however,  to mention what I 
have observed to whom you please,  and I shall be particularly 
obliged to von if voii would mention these things to our com- 
mon friend.  Mr.  Kirwan/  as it will save me the trouble of 
writing to him till I have done something farther. 

I rejoice that we have so zealous and so able a promoter 
of philosophical researches at the head of the Royal Society,5 
and am, 

Dear Sir,  your obliged humble servant, 

.1.  PRIESTLEY. 

To Sir Josei>h Banks,  Bart.,  Soho Square,  London. 

3 At this distance in time,  it seems truly astonishing that the fact that 
Priestley did not succeed with his conversion of water into air when 
operating in glass vessels,  was not at once perceived to lie the key to the 
problem?  He repeats this statement in the letter to Wedgwood written 
a few days later.      Compare Letter No.  5,  note 1. 

*  See Letter No.  10. 

5 In this and subsequent complimentary phrases used in addressing Sir 
Toseph Banks,  we see something of the courtier's policy. 

48 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

No.  18. 

PRIESTLEY TO WEDGWOOD. 

Birm.  8th Jan.,  1 783. 

Dear Sir  :  Presuming that it will give you some satisfac- 
tion, I shall give you the heads of something that i have 
done farther in the business of converting water into air.  I 
thought I had told you that I get sometimes the full weight 
of the water in the air,  or  .SOU times the bulk,  allowing for 
the fixed air that I get along with the rest. 

It is not necessary to combine the water with lime,  gypsum, 
or even day.  Clay never does very well  ;  and what will 
surprise you more,  it is sufficient to put water only into one 
of your earthen retorts.1 It soaks into the pores,  and is,  I 
suppose,  so entangled,  though not perhaps combined with it, 
that when I attempt to distil it,  and manage the tire carefully, 
no part of it conies over in the form of steam  ;  but 1 get a 
great quantity of air,  generally 100 ounce measures from an 
ounce of water.  I am now  (for I write in my laboratory) 
using the same retort the fifth time,  with the same success; 
and which proves that it is the water,  and not the earth of the 
retort,  that furnishes the air.  I find that when I had not 
half an ounce weight of air from this retort,  it did not weigh 
a grain less than it did before. 

It is remarkable that this experiment does not succeed in a 
glass retort;  the water,  though combined with lime,  comes 
over in steam.  In a gnu-barrel the result is peculiar,  too 
long to explaiu in a letter.2 

Mr.  Watt tells me you were so obliging as to favor him 
with an instrument to levigate substances and reduce them to 
an impalpable powder.     As I have had abundant experience 

1 Priestley now finds that it is not necessary to combine the water with 
lime or clay,  and that Wedgwood's  (porous)  retorts alone have the mar- 
vellous power of transmuting water into air.      (See Letter Xo.  26,  note 2.) 

s In a gun-barrel the oxidation of the iron and production of hydrogen 
were the results  "too long to explain in a letter"  in the prevailing termi- 
nology. 

LETTER TO WEDGWOOD.  49 

of your former readiness to serve me,  I shall only say that 
such an instrument would often he of great use to me. 

With my best respects to Mrs.  Wedgwood,    I am,  with 
great gratitude and esteem.  Dear Sir, 

Yours]  sincerely. 

J.  PRIESTLEY. 
Mr J.  Wedgwood,  near Hetruria,  Neweastle-under-Line. 

No.  19. 

PRIESTLEY TO WEDGWOOD. 

Birm.,  1G Jan.,  1783.' 
Dear Sir  :  I thank von for the three retorts you have been 
so srood as to send me.  I have tried one of them,  and the 
part that was exposed to the greatest heat  (which I found was 
143 of your excellent scale)  was melted into one mass,  while 
pieces of the former retorts  (No.  5)  stood very well.  1 there- 
fore think the latter to be made of the better materials for my 
use;  but I shall  [test]  the other two in less hint,  which,  in- 
deed, I generally use,  viz.,  about 130.  I frequently coat these 
retorts,  but I do not mid that it makes much difference,  for 
they generally stand very well till they have been exposed to 
a great heat about an hour or more,  and then if they fail 
(which they sometimes do not),  it is by au opening at the junc- 
ture of the stem to the bulb  ;  though sometimes I find them 
cracked at the bottom,  where the heat has been the greatest ; 
but this happens in cooling.  I believe I have generally used 
a heat greater than was necessary,  and shall avoid it for the 
future,  so that your No.  5,  extra carefully made,  will do for 
me exceedingly well. 

I hope you have received a letter I wrote to you a few days 
ago,2 giving you a farther account of my converting water into 

1 In the year 178o Wedgwood was elected Fellow of Hie Royal 
Society.     Priestley had been a Fellow since 1766. 

2 See preceding letter dated eight days earlier. 

4 

50 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

air.  Tt would aid me much in the prosecution of this experi- 
ment if you could send me a i'vw retorts completely well glazed 
mi the outside.3 

With the greatest gratitude,  I am,  Dear Sir, 

Yours sincerely, 

J.  PRIESTLEY. 
Ms.  Wedgwood,  Hetruria,  Newcastle-under-Liue. 

No.  20. 

PRIESTLEY TO WEDGWOOD. 

Bibm.  23 Jan..  11-?,. 

Dear Sir  :  I am much obliged to you for all your queries, 
and shall be happy to give you all the satisfaction in my 
[lower.  I have a tolerably good habit of circumspection witli 
respect to facts;  but as to conclusions from them,  I am not 
apt to be very confident,  ['in.  What becomes of 7-8 of the 
water not converted into air?1] 

1.  Part of the water always gets through the retorts,  and is 
seen rising from it in vapour,  though they are absolutely im- 
pervious to air. 

[Qu.  If water passes through the retort outwards,  may not 
air pass inwards  ?2] 

"_'.  As there is a considerable resistance to the escape of the 
air before it can be collected iu my recipients,  it would cer- 
tainly make its escape through the pores of the retort,  if it 
could,  and could never enter that way.  Besides,  why does the 
process stop,  if air could enter by the retort,  and get into the 

3 This request of Dr.  Priestley for retorts will glazed shows lie begins 
to suspect that the seeming conversion of water into air is influenced by 
the porosity of his earthenware vessels. 

1 and 2 The two queries,  being those propounded to Priestley by the 
sagacious Wedgwood,  were written in this letter as an interlineation after 
its receipt by Mr.  Chisholm,  the private secretary of the latter.  For 
evidence of this consult foot-note on page 93 of George Wilson's Life 
of Cavendish. 

LETTER TO WEDGWOOD.  51 

recipient? 1 have frequently tested the empty retorts,  and 

the air they give is a mere trifle. 

3.  Some have said that the air I get is that which is 
attracted by the inside of the retort,  as it cools,  and is con- 
densed in its  [lores.  But after a process I have put the mouth 
of the retort into a basin of water,  while it was all red hot,  on 
the fire,  and letting it cool in that situation have plunged it in 
water,  and filled it,  without even giving its pores an opportu- 
nity of getting any air,  and yet it has always,  after that,  given 
air as usual. 

4.  The retorts certainlv gain nothing in the fire. 

5.  I find great differences in the retorts with respect to 
their property of giving air from the water put into them. 
The three last give very little,  owing perhaps to the texture 
being too compact.  I could wish to have one,  if possible,  of a 
mure porous texture than No.  5,  and thicker,  to prevent th< 

air,  in so spongy a substance,   getting through. 1 could 

also wish to have one or two of a texture the most nearly 
approaching to porcelaine,  but rough in the inside,  that there 
then may be no pores for the water to get into. 

As so much depends upon the materials of which the retorts 
are made,  would you be so good as favour me with an account 
of the composition of Xo.  5 V3 

I shall thank you for a few more thermometer pieces,'  along 

3 This interesting letter shows that Wedgwood had begun to suspect 
the cause of the fallacious results of Priestley,  and had written a series 
of questions calculated to bring out the truth.  Priestley's request for two 
kinds of retorts,  one  "more porous than No.  5,"  and one of a  "texture 
the most nearly approaching to porcelaine,"  shows he too appreciated the 
necessity of making the experiment described in such manner as to pre- 
clude the entrance of air.  In the next letter,  written in March,  Priestlej 
admits obtaining very different results with retorts  "of the porcelain 
texture." 

Priestley's admission in the opening sentence that he observed phe- 
nomena more skilfully than be draws. conclusions is candid,  and seems to 
be confirmed by the disclosures in these letters. 

4  "Thermometer pieces"  refer to the cylinders of baked  (day used in 
Wedgwood's Pyrometer,  by the expansion of which heat was measured. 

•'-  CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

with these retorts.  T have had ample experience of your 
goodness,  and therefore make no apology for so many wants. 

I have heard nothing of late from Paris,  and am much 
rejoiced at the intelligence you send me;  a few days must 
ascertain the truth. 

1 am,  dear Sir,  Yours sincerely, 

J.  PRIESTLEY. 
Mr.  Wedgwood,  Hetruria,  Newcastle-under-Line. 

No.  21. 

PRIESTLEY TO SIR JOSEPH BANKS. 

Birmingham,  6 Feb.  1783. 

Dear Sir  :  I take the liberty to recommend to your notice 
Dr.  Moves,1 who is at the same time an excellent lecturer in 
philosophy,  and himself a phenomenon in philosophy,  being 
quite Mind,  and yet superior to most who see.  He is a man 
of most amiable disposition,  and tho'  he cannot himself make 
many experiments,  he gets them made by an assistant,  so that 
none of his hearers ever complain on that account.  You will 
have no reason to regret any services you can render him,  and 
you will find him very grateful. 

1 am busy in pursuing those experiments from which all 
my friends,  except  .Mr.  Kirwan,  conclude that there is a con- 
version of water into air.2 I hope to have completed them by 
the time that I usually wait upon my friends in Loudon, 
when I shall have the pleasure of submitting them to your 
consideration. 

With much respect,  I am,  Dear Sir, 

Your obliged humble servant, 

J.  PRIESTLEY. 

1 Dr.  Henry Moyes,  a Scotch chemist,  whose affliction is here named 
Sec  "The Lunar Society,"  in APPENDIX. 

2 James Watt,  under date February 3d,  1783,  in a letter to Dr.  Black, 
quotes Priestley's experiments,  and raises no doubt as to the accuracy of 
his conclusions.  (Muirhead's Watt Corresp.,  p.  13.)  And in writing 
to Mr.  Gilbert Hamilton on the 18th February,  Watt again quotes 
Priestley. 

LETTER TO WEDGWOOD.  53 

No.  22. 

PRIESTLEY TO WEDGWOOD. 

Birm.  7 Mar.,  1783. 

Pear Sir:  Your retorts will be very acceptable;  and 1 
shall trouble you also for a few more of the porcelain texture, 
as I find a very remarkable difference in the results of some 
experiments made with them.  In these retorts I have never 
failed to convert whiting,  which is a pure calcareous earth, 
into a flinty substance,  that will neither imbibe water,  nor be 
affected by any acid  ;  or at least very little.1 When I apply 
the same heat to the same whiting in the other retorts,  I only 
calciue it,  after which it will imbibe water,  and become whit- 
ing again,  and this as often as I please. 

I have just ascertained by direct experiment what Mr. 
Kirwan inferred from former ones,  viz.,  that fixed air is a 
compound of dephlogisticated air and phlogiston or inflamma- 
ble air.  I mix red precipitate,  which gives only the purest 
dephlogisticated air,  and iron filings,  which gives only in- 
flammable air,  and the residue is a great quantity of the 
purest fixed air,  almost wholly absorbed by water;  whereas 
neither of the kinds of air of which it i>  composed are 
absorbed by water at all,  except in the smallest quantity.2 

I have nearly finished my present experiments on water, 
and shall soon draw up an account of them for the Royal 
Society.3 

1 Perhaps the whiting calcined strongly in the porcelain-like retorts 
formed quicklime which united with the silica of the retorts. 

8 Impurity of materials will account for these extraordinary results. 

3 See Letter No.  26,  note 2.  This work of Priestley is closely connected 
with the history of the discovery of the composition of water,  for which 
there are three claimants,  Cavendish,  Watt,  and Lavoisier.  Priestley 
was at this time in constant communication with Watt,  who was stimulated 
to experiment on the question by the desire of testing the work of Priestley. 
For the claims of Watt to the discovery of the composition of water,  see 
Muirhead's Life of James Watt,  London,  1858,  chapter xxi.  ;  also Muir- 
liead's Correspondence of tin-  late James Watt on his Discovery of the 
Theory of the Composition of Water,  with a Letter from his Son,  London, 

54 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

With my best respects to Mrs.  Wedgwood,  I am,  Dear Sir, 

Yours sincerely, 

J.  PRIESTLEY. 

P.  S. — I beg my respects to Mr.  Chelsam,4 and wish you 
would mention to him the facts above recited. 

Josiah Wedgwood,  Es<(.,  Hetruria,  Newcastle-under-Line. 

No.  23. 

PRIESTLEY TO JAMES WATT. 

March,  1783. 

Dr.  Priestley has called to inform Mr.  Watt that by an 
improvement in his process he now gets readily 500 ounce 
measures of air,  quite as good as that of the atmosphere,  from 
an ounce of water.  He also collects the water that escapes 
through the pores of the retort,  and finds that the weight of 
this and of the air together,  are very nearly the weight of the 
original water.  The water so collected serves for making 
fresh air as well as fresh water.1 

1 s h;.  Svo.  For the claims of Cavendish,  sec Wilson's Life of Cavendish, 
London 1851,  pp.  265 to 445.  For a critical summary of the relative 
value of the claims of Cavendish,  Watt,  and Lavoisier see Kopp's 
Beitrage ztir Geschichte clcr Chemie,  III.  Stuck,  Die Entdeckung der 
zusanimenzetzung des Wassers,  Braunschweig,  ls7.">. 

4 Of  "Mr.  Chelsam,"  mentioned in this and the succeeding letter,  I 
ran fuel no account,  and conjecture that the gentleman referred to by 
Priestley may have been Mr.  Alexander Chisholm,  who was Wedgwood's 
private secretary and chemical assistant from the Spring of 1781.  C'his- 
holm established a chemical laboratory in Wedgwood's works at Ftruria, 
and tliis was a rendezvous for the chemical philosophers when visiting 
the hospitable potter.  Chisholm served Wedgwood most ably ami faith- 
fully until the deatli of the former.  For an estimate of Chisholm's 
character see Meteyard's Life of Wedgwood,  II.,  4ti6. 

1 This was a note left by Dr.  Priestley at Watt's residence. 

PRIESTLEY TO WEDGWOOD.  00 

No.  24. 

PRIESTLEY TO WEDGWOOD. 

Birmingham.  23 March,  fi 

Dear Sir:  I was much concerned at the Newspaper 
account of the fire in Greek street,  till I was relievi d by a truer 
account from Mr.  Boulton.  Yours makes me still more easy. 
It must,  however,  have disturbed and deranged you much. 

1 have lately made such experiments relating to the con- 
version of water into air as must,  I think,  satisfy evi n 
Mr.  Kirwan.1 

By the electric explosion I decomposed dephlogisticated ami 
inflammable air,  and I find the weight of tin.'  latter in the 
water I get from it.2 

Finding that part of the water escaped through the pores of 
the retort in every stage of the process,  I performed it in one 
of the earthen tubes,  enclosed in an iron vessel,  so that  [  could 
collect all the water that did not make air.  In this water ami 
the air together,  I find the weight of all the water I make use 

1 Kirwan.  see Letter No.  10,  note 4. 

2 The formation of water by the combustion of hydrogen was ap- 
parently first observed by Macquer in 1776— 77,  and i-  described 

the article Inflammable Gas in his Dictionnaire dc chymie,  vol.  ii.. 
p.  314  (Xeuehatel.  1789).  He also mentions the combustion of inflam- 
mable gas and dephlogisticated air  (oxygen). 

Priestley seems to have been the first tn explode this mixture in cli 
glass vessels.     Waltire,  a friend anil correspondent of Priestley,  o    . 
nated the attempt to weigh the products of the combustion.     (Priestley's 
Exp.  &  Obs..  etc..  Birmingham,   1781.  ii..  p.  S95.) 

Dr.  Wilson  (Life of Cavendish,  p.  94)  remarks on this sentei 
■■  By the electric explosion,  .  .  .  water I get from it."  that the wording 
is ambiguous and might seem to imply that only the weight of the inflam- 
mable air burned was found in the water produced by it*  combustion. 
'■  There can be no doubt,  however,  that Priestley signified that the weight 
of both the gases concerned in the combustion,  was equalled by that of 
the water they yielded.  This at least is the proposition which he under- 
takes to prove in his paper of 1783  (Phil.  Trans.  1 7s3.  p.  427),  ami there 
also he informs us that his experiment was a repetition of one previously 
tried by Cavendish." 

56 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

of,  and that the water thus collected has undergone no change, 
is evident from its serving to make more air,  just as well as 
fresh water. 

A.s I shall apply this process of enclosing earthen tubes 
within iron ones to many purposes,  I shall be much obliged 
to you tor a number of them,  of the composition of No.  5; 
ami rather thicker in substance than the former ones.  I shall 
also In'  glad of a few retort*.  No.  10,  such as that which I 
showed you melted.  Another of those,  without any coating, 
bore my common white heat two processes,  the last time five 
or six hours,  and was perfectly sound when cool.  It grieved 
me to break it;  but I was obliged to do it,  as the materials 
had formed a hard stone in the inside. 

I observe that though the retorts often break about the neck, 
it is not at the juncture ;  hut I believe is occasioned by the 
difference of the heat to which the bulb and the neck are 
exposed,  and for this there cannot be any remedy. 

I am pursuing other experiments with considerable success, 
and am,  Dear Sir, 

Yours sincerely, 

J.   PRIESTLEY. 

P.  S. — -This day I complete my half century.3 I beg my 
best respects to Mrs.  Wedgwood and also to Mr.  Chelsum  ;  let 
him kimw the experiments mentioned in this. 

I shall be obliged to you for a lb.  or two of your ground 
flint.  Putting a quantity of this,  mixed with clay,  into the 
retorts,  I get twice as much air from water put into them. 

3 Date of Priestley's Birth. — Usually given as March 13th old styh  : 
so in his Autobiography.  The new style was not adopted in Great 
Britain until 1751  :  in 1 7r»"2 eleven days were loft out of the calendar. 
Chalmer's General Biographical Dictionary gives the  (latent'  Priestley's 
birth as March 18;  Allen's American Biographical ami Historical Dic- 
tionary (Boston),  ami Thomson's History of the Royal Society  (Lon- 
don)  as March 24;  Corry in his Life of Priestley uives March 21  (Birm- 
ingham, 1804);  Hoefer in his Histoire de la chimie,  March 30th,  prob- 
ably following Dumas'  Philosophic de chimie.  Some of the above dis- 
crepancies may be accounted tor by confusion of old and new styles. 

LETTER TO WATT. 

57 

One ounce of water,  in this way.  never fails to give me  -' 10 
ounce measures of air,  as ofteD as 1 please,  in the same retort. 
I long to show you this experiment.4 

Josiah Wedgwood,  Esq.,5 Etruria,  Newcastle-under-Line,  Staffordshire. 

No.  2."). 
PRIESTLEY TO JAMES WATT. 

London,  29th April.  1783. 
Dear Sir:    Behold,   with surprise and indignation,   the 
figure of an apparatus that has utterly ruined your beautiful 

hypothesis,  and has rendered some weeks of my labour in 
working,  thinking and writing,  almost useless.1 

4 This fallacious experiment,  confided to his intimate friend imme- 
diately after its performance,  Priestley revoked in his final publication. 
See Letter No.  2fi,  note 2. 

5 On March 13,  17S3,  Wedgwood read a paper before the Royal So- 
ciety entitled  "Some Experiments upon the Ochrafriah 

of Da Costa,  and called by the miners of Derbyshire.   Black Wadd." 
(Phil.  Trans..   1783,  284.) 

1 Priestley had been almost constantly occupied for five months in his 
experiments on the transformation of water into air  (compare Letter No. 
14,  dated Dec.  8,  1782),  but now admits to his brother philosopher that the 
supposed phenomena were merely due to the porosity of the earthen 
retorts. 

58 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

In order to ascertain the effect of heating the moist clay in 
an earthen retort,  on the external air,  I put the retort within a 
glass receiver standing in a basin of water,  and with good 
luting made the junction air-tight at a.  Then throwing the 
heat of Mr.  Parker's excellent lens upon the bull)  within the 
receiver,  air was collected very copiously at b,  and the water 
ascended within the receiver.  This looked like a phlogistica- 
tion of the internal air ;  but the process went on till more 
than three-quarters of the internal air disappeared,  and I 
believe it would all have gone farther if the water had not 
almost covered the bulb of the retort.  The process then 
stopping,  I found I had got about as much air as was missing 
in the receiver.  It was,  however,  a little better than the air 
of the atmosphere,  and the remainder of the air within the 
receiver was a little worse,  but only a mere trifle.  It is there- 
fore a new hydraulic engine,  but on what principle it act-  I 
know not.  It is more within your province than mine.  You 
must convene the club2 and give me your joint opinion. 

Before this experiment I had fully satisfied Mr.  Kirwan3 
of the reality of the conversion.  He and many others saw 
the simple experiment  (with the retort in the fire)  with 
astonishment. 

"With my best respects to Mrs.  Watt,  and also all our club, 
I am,  Pear Sir, 

Yours sincerely, 

J.  PRIESTLEY.4 

P.  S.     I have just received yours. 

2 Tlic Lunar Society.     See Appendix. 

3 See Letter No.  10,  note 1. 

4 Watt replied to this letter at onee,  writing  (May 2d,  1 783)  thus  : 
"I deny that your experiment ruins my hypothesis,"  and suggests 
various explanations anil modifications.  (For full letter see Muirhead's 
Corr.  Watt,  p.  2G.) 

LETTER TO WEDGWOOD. 

59 

No.  26. 

PRIESTLEY TO WEDGWOOD. 

v.  6 May,  1783. 
Deae Sir:  HaviDg just finished some experiments of a 
pretty extraordinary nature,  I make haste to give you some 
account of them.1 

By means of Mr.  Parker's lens,  I heat an earthen retort, 

filled with moistened clay.  When the neck of it is well luted 
to the upper orifice of a glass receiver,  which is placed in a 
bason of water,  and a glass tulie communicates with the inside 
of the retort.  In consequence of this the water from the clay 
comes into the receiver,  while the air in the receiver passes 
through the retort,  and is delivered at a  ;  the water in the 
bason rising within the receiver and covering the retort.  It' it 
be inflammable air,  it v>*mr~  through inflammable,  if nitrous, 
nitrous.  This must he by the air losing its aerial form while it 
combines with the earth of the retort,  and recovers it-  serial 
form in the inside of it.  If the retort was not perfectly air- 
tight, the water could not rise within the receiver.  Spirit of 
wine comes in through the receiver,  just  :i-  the water doi  -. 

This renders one of my processes of the conversion of water 
into air fallacious,  after I had fully satisfied even Mr.  Kirwan 

1 Priestley repeats here the figure  (rudely drawn)  occurring in tin- 
letter to Watt. 

GO CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

of the reality of that conversion.  Another experiment is not 
so easily explained. 

Making water to boil in a glass retort,  I make the steam go 
through a red-hot tobacco pipe,  when 1 always get much air 
mixed with the steam.  In the same manner,  spirit of wine 
makes inflammable air,  and spirit of nitre the purest dephlo- 
gisticated air.  But if the tobacco pipe be not hot I get only 
vapour,  and no air,  from any of the liquors. 

I cannot in a letter enlarge on all the particulars of these 
experiments,  which excite a good deal of attention here.  I 
shall lay them before the Royal Society,2 and pursue them at 
my leisure as soon as I get home. 

2 Priestley's paper was presented to the Royal Society June 26,  1 783, 
and is entitled  :    "Experiments relating to Phlogiston and the seeming 

Conversion of Water into Air."  (Phil.  Trans.,  1783,  390.)  As we 
believe it is of interest to compare the language of his completed paper 
with that of these hasty letters,  we give long quotations from it.  In the 
first section,  "relating to Phlogiston,"  he narrates his experiments in 
reducing minium and other oxides by various gases,  "two kinds of 
inflammable air,"  "alkaline air,"  etc.  He also thanks Mr.  Parker for 
his excellent burning lens,  twelve inches in diameter.  In the second sec- 
tion Priestley writes  :  "Accordingly,  I took a quantity of well-calcined 
lime,  and mixing with it a little water,  out of which all air had been care- 
fully boiled,  I exposed it gradually to a strong heat in an earthen retort, 
such as I had usually been supplied with by Mr.  Wedgwood  (who is as 
much distinguished by his love and generous encouragement of science,  as 
he is by his improvements in his own curious art),  not imagining that it 
could make any difference whether the lime so prepared should receive 
its heat in an earthen retort or in a vessel of iron or glass.  Proceeding, 
however,  in this manner.  I found that nothing came over in the form of 
steam,  but that there was a great quantity of air,  several hundred times 
more than the bulk of the water."  Priestley supposed that the water was 
transformed into air.  and says  :  "  But I,  as well as all my friends,  was a 
long time utterly disconcerted upon finding that when I put the whiting 
and water into a coated glass retort,  the water came over in the form of 
-team,  and little or no air was produced.  The result was the same when 
I made the process in a gun-barrel,  in a porcelain retort,  or even in an 
earthen retort glazed in the inside." 

Priestley at length discovers that the whiting is quite superfluous, 
give-  details of his numerous trials,  and says:  "Still hearing of many 
objections to the conversion of water into air,   I now gave particular 

LETTER TO BA2TKS.  61 

I thank you for your excellent addr 
and am much disappointed in not meeting with you here. 
With greatest gratitude and respect, 

I am,  Dear Sir.  yours sincerely, 

J.  PRIESTLEY. 
-iah Wedgwood,  Etruria,  Newcastle-under-Line,  Staffordsl. 

X...  27. 
PRIESTLEY TO SIR JOSEPH BANKS. 

Birmingham,  23 June,  ITS 

Dear Sir  :  I certainly meant to submit my paper to the 
Royal Society,  as it contains a series of remarkably new fa its, 
completely ascertained,  whatever deductions  (about which I 

attention to an experiment of Mr.  Cavendish's concerning the re-conver- 
sion of air into water,  by decomposing it in conjunction with inflammable 
air." 

He used inflammable air made from charcoal and  "found a manifest 
deposition of water,"  tried to compare its weight with that of the air by 
weighing the moisture collected by a tared filter-paper,  and as a i 
had a  ■•strong presumption that the air was re-converted into water,  and 
therefore that the origin of it had been water." 

He then describes the experiment given i:i Letter No.  18,  and concludes 
that  ■'  this experiment made it probable that the air on the outside of the 
receiver had actually passed through it."  Finally,  he conies to the con- 
clusion that the  ''clay of the earthen retort,  being thus heated,  destroys 
for a time the aerial form of whatever air i-  exposed to the outside of it  ; 
which aerial form it recovers titter it has been transmitted in combina- 
tion from one part of the clay to another,  till it has reached the inside of 
the retort,  while the water is drawn through it in the contrary direction." 
Priestley's paper i?  dated Birmingham,  April 21,  17*  !. 

3 In the year 1 783 the prevailing disorder in manufacturing districts 
extended to the Potteries,  and riots ensued which were speedily quelled 
by the militia and the execution of one of the aggressors.  As soon as 
tranquillity was restored to the district,  Mr.  Y\  edgwood wrote and pub- 
lished a small pamphlet intended to enlighten the younger employes as to 
the folly of such outbreaks to redress social wrongs.  This was entitled: 
••An Address to the Young Inhabitant-  of the Pottery."  Later in the 
same year W edgwood published another pamphlet. 

(}2 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

am not solicitous)  be drawn from them.  As I have opportu- 
nity, I shall prosecute the experiments farther,  and if any- 
thing materially new should occur to me,  I shall send you a 
supplemental paper on the subject. 

Mr.  Watt wishes to withdraw his paper,1 but he is now 
engaged in a course of experiments,  in which he thinks he 
shall prove the actual conversion of water into air,  tho'  mine 
certainly prove no such thing. 

When I see the young man who made the air-gun,  I shall 
mention to him your desire of having it.  It is very generous 
in you,  and worthy of a President of the Royal Society,  to 
interest yourself,  as you do,  in all scientifical pursuits,  how- 
ever foreign to your own.     It is a wide and noble field that 

1 This letter of James Watt is the famous one on which his friends 
base their claim that lie should be acknowledged as the discoverer of the 
composition of water.  The original letter,  which seems to have been 
written April  -21st,  1 783,  was withdrawn a few days later,  "  on account," 
says Watt,  in a letter to Dr.  Black dated June 23d,  -'of an ugly experi- 
ment the said Dr.  Priestley tried at my desire,  and which renders the 
theory useless in so far as relates to the change,  of water into air by means 
of porous earthern vessels."  Watt revised this letter,  and,  as printed in 
the Philosophical Transactions,  it contains these passages.  After describ- 
ing Priestley's experiment of exploding with the electric spark a mixture 
of pure dry dephlogisticated air and of pure dry inflammable air,  and col- 
lecting moisture nearly equal in weight to the air employed,  Watt write- : 
'•  Let us now consider what obviously happens in the case of the deflagra- 
tion of the inflammable and dephlogisticated air.  These two kinds of air 
unite with violence;  they become red hot,  and upon cooling totally dis- 
appear. When the vessel is cooled a quantity of water is found in it 
equal to the weight of the air employed.  The water is then the only 
remaining product of the process,  and water,  light,  and heat are till the 
products.  Are we not then authorized to conclude that water is com- 
piled of dephlogisticated air and phlogiston deprived of part of their 
latent or elementary heat ;  that dephlogisticated or pure air is composed 
of water deprived of its phlogiston and united to elementary heat and 
light?" 

\\  .ill.  it is scarcely necessary to remark,  uses phlogiston as a synonym 
of inflammable air.  This letter was shown to several members of the 
Royal Society,  and delivered to Sir Joseph Banks for public reading, 
but,  unfortunately for Watt's reputation,  this was not done.  It was finally 
read April 22d,  1784,  a whole year subsequent to its date. 

LETTER TO WEDGWOOD.  63 

we are employed iD,  and the truly liberal will rejoice in,  and 
promote,  each other's success — I thank you for your intelli- 
gence from Paris.  For my own part,  I wish to see either 
Crawford's2 or M.  Lavoisier's facts unexceptionally ascertained 
by competent witnesses. 

I have just heard from Mr.  Kirwan,  and shall write to 
him as soon as I have anything worth communicating.  In 
the meantime I wish you would inform him that I have in a 
glazed earthenware retort got 7S7 ounce measures of dephlo- 
gisticated air from two ounces of purified nitre.3 
With the greatest respect, 

I am,  Dear Sir,  yours sincerely, 

J.  PRIESTLEY. 
Joseph Banks,  Bart.,  Soho Square,  Loudon. 

No.  28. 
PRIESTLEY TO WEDGWOOD. 

Bibmixc.ham,  July 24,  17S3. 
Dear Sir:  I am much obliged to you for the stock of 
Longnecks you have been so good as to send me.  J must 
inform you,  however,  that the necks are too short for the 
principal uses of them,  and that they onght to be as long as 
those of the retorts;  that the mouths maybe handled while 
the bellies are in a white heat. 

1 have lately had a proof of the excellent temper of No.  9. 
In this retort I got,  from two ounces of purified nitre, 
812 ounce measures of dephlogisticated air,  and afterwards 

2 Adair Crawford,  M.D.  (1749-1795),  Professor of Chemistry at the 
Military Academy of Woolwich.  Dr.  Crawford made the first determi- 
nations of the specific heat of gases,  and proposed a much discussed theory 

of heat. 

3 These same data are mentioned in a letter written by Watt to De 
Luc on the 26th June,  1783.  For an analysis of the share borne by 
Watt and Priestley,  in connection with the water controversy,  see  \\  il- 
son's Life of Cavendish,  pp.  295,  296. 

G4 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

exposed it to the fire a second time,  with oil of vitriol put 
to the residuum,  and to appearance it is as sound as ever. 
Such retorts as these will 1»'  considered as invaluable by all 
chemists when their properties are known.  Never before 
could it have been known that anything like this quantity of 
air could begot from nitre.  Mr.  Kirwan owns that he does 
not know what to make of the experiment,  as it does not agree 
with his idea of the constituent parts of nitre nor with that of 
Mr.  Bergman.1 It seems also to puzzle Mr.  Watt,  as hardly 
any nitrous acid  (though there is a little)  left in the residuum. 
What then can become of it,  if it has not been changed into 
air,  which is my idea.  lie,  however,  still thinks that it is 
water that furnisher the air.2 I carry him the residuum,  and 
they cannot be in better hands.  I hope we shall make out 
something among us all.  But without your retort-,  or long- 
necks,  we can do nothing. 

I have got a g 1 deal of light into the black matter that is 

sometimes found in firing inflammable in dephlogisticated air. 
It is altogether from the mercury,  but the circumstances of its 
production requires to be investigated further. 

What the pipe maker calls the dressing of his wares,  and 
which gives them the last polish,  is a mixture of equal parts of 
white wax and soap boiled to the consistence ot paste with watt r. 
When the pipes are completely burnt he puts a little of this 
paste in a piece of flannel,  and only wipes them with it,  and 

1 Sir Torbern Bergman  (1735-1784),  the distinguished Professor of 
Chemistry at the University of Upsala.  His complete works were trans- 
lated by Dr.  Edmund Cnllen,  and entitled  "Physical and Chemical 
Essays;"  London,  1784— '91,  :i vols.,  Svo. 

2 M att's idea was that the air  (oxygen)  was derived from the water, 
supposed to be a constituent of the saltpetre.  He wrote thus  :  ''Xitre, 
besides its water of crystallization,  contains a quantity of water as one of 
its elementary parts,  which water adheres to the other parts of the nitre 
with a force sufficient lor it to sustain a red heat.  When the nitre is 
melted or made red-hot,  the acid acts upon the water and dephlogisticates 
it ;  ami the fire supplies the humor with the due quantity of heat to con- 
stitute it air.  under which form it immediately issues."  (Phil.  Trans. 
1784,  p.  336.) 

LETTER TO WEDGWOOD.  65 

with another piece of flannel rubs them dry again.     He made 
no secret of it.3 

In three weeks,  or a month,  I expect a visit from Mr Bew- 
ley,4 to spend about a week with me.     I should be very happy 
to see you at the same time.     We shall have a meeting of the 
Lunar Society extraordinary on the occasion. 
With the greatest gratitude and esteem, 

I am,  Dear Sir.  yours sincerely, 

J.  PRIESTLEY. 

P.  S.    My wife joins me in respectful compliments to your- 
self and family. 

Josiau Wedgwood,  Esq.,  Etruria,  near Neweastle-under-Line.5 

3 This seems to be a reply to a query by Wedgwood. 

4 William Bewley,  an apothecary and surgeon of Great Massingliam, 
Norfolk.  Bewley's review  (in 1 707)  of Priestley's History of Electri- 
city was the origin of a correspondence which,  says Priestley,  "was 
source of much satisfaction to me as long as he lived.  I instantly com- 
municated to him an account of every new experiment that I made,  and 
in return was favored with his remarks upon them.  All that he pub- 
lished of his own were articles in the Appendices to my volumes on air. 
all of which are ingenious and valuable.  Always publishing in this man- 
ner, he used to call himself my satellite.  There was a vein of pleasant 
wit and humor in all his correspondence,  which added greatly to the 
value of it.  His letters to me would have made several volumes,  anil 
mine to him still more.  When he found himself dangerously ill,  he made 
a point of paying me a visit before he died;  and he made a journey from 
Norfolk to Birmingham,  accompanied by Mrs.  Bewley,  for that purpose  : 
and after spending about a week with me he went to his friend Dr.  Bur- 
iifv,  and at his house he died."  (  Kntt.  I..  7'j.)  Bewley died Sept.  5, 
1 783,  a few weeks after the date of this letter  ;  hence the visit alluded to 
herein is evidently the same with that named in Priestley's Memoirs 
above quoted. 

"'  The endorsement on the folded letter is in the handwriting of Mr. 
Chisholm. 

66 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

No.   29. 

PRIESTLEY TO WEDGWOOD. 
d"1  =  dephlogisticated. 

Bibm.  16th Jan.  17S4.I 
Dear Sir  :  As you are pleased to interest yourself so much 
in the prosecution of iny experiments,  and 1 have made some 
that my friends here think to be of particular consequence,  I 
lake an early opportunity of informing you of them.  But I 
want a lens of greater power to pursue them to advantage. 

The great problem with us aerial philosophers  (not navi- 
gators) <>f late,  has been to find what becomes of dd and inflam- 
mable air when they arc made to unite,  as by explosion,  &c,  : 
some saying that they make water,  others fixed air,  &c.2 The 
following experiments show that,  in different circumstances, 
they make both,  and also that d'1 air incorporates with iron in 
a great proportion. 

Throwing the focus of a burning lens upon some shavings 
of iron,  in d'1 air,  confined by mercury  (both very warm and 
dry),  the air disappeared,  no water was formed,  but some 
fixed air;  and the slag,  to which the iron was reduced,  had 
gained as much weight as that  .if the air that had vanished. 
In the open air 24 grains of iron gained 5 grains,  and the same 

1 This date is as given,  l>ut the letter is endorsed by Josiah Wedg- 

w 1.  June,  1784,  probablj owing to a hasty glance at the indistinctly 

written name of the month.  Beneath the endorsement of Wedgwood,  is a 
pencil memorandum stating  :  "  [This June should be January].  G.  W," 
written by Dr.  George Wilson,  when examining this letter.  According 
tn the latter three unbiassed parties,  including a great grandson of Josiah 
Wedgwood,  all read the word January.  Mr.  Francis Wedgwood sus- 
pects that his grandfather did not always docket his letters when he 
received them,  and urges cogent reasons for this opinion.    (Wilson's Life 

of  (  a\  emlish.  pane 95.  ) 

-  Lavoisier and Cavendish maintained that inflammable air  (hydrogen) 
and dephlogisticated air  (oxygen)  form water only when combined; 
Kirwan.  on the other hand,  held that the product of the union was fixed 
air;  Priestlej in this letter says that both water and fixed air are formed 
under different circumstances. 

LETTER TO WEDGWOOD.  (17 

quantity of steel gained 7}  grains of pure air.  After this my 
lens could not melt it,  nor would any acid,  except the marine, 
dissolve it.  It is the same thing as the scales of iron on a 
smith's forge. 

Throwing the focus of the lens upon iron thus saturated 
with dd air,  in inflammable air,  confined by mercury  (all very 
dry),  the air disappeared and the iron lost as much weight as 
if reduced to dd air would have saturated the inflammable air 
that had d'sappeared  ;  and in this ease as much water yvas pro- 
duced as,  I imagined,  would have been equal to the weight of 
the air. 

Another experiment shows a remarkable difference between 
the inflammable air from metals and that from charcoal.  Hav- 
ing mixed a quantity of each of them with half as much dd air, 
I exploded that from iron,  and found neither water nor fixed 
air;  but exploding the mixture that contained the inflam- 
mable air from charcoal,  '■'•I ounce measures of the mixture 
yielded an evident quantity of water,  and 4-5 of an ounce 
measure of pure fixed air.3 

Resuming my experiments on the seeming conversion of 
water into air,  I find that a vessel of chalk answers as well as 
one of clay,  and mercury answers as well as water,  going thro 
the retort one way,  while the air goes the contrary way,  and 
when,  in the same state of heat,  an air pump  [cannot]  force 
a particle of mercury thro  [MS.  torn]  it comes thro in the 
form of'a black powder.  Also alkaline air is transmitted as 
well as air of any other kind. 

It will save me some trouble,  if you will communicate these 
facts to Mr.  Kirwan.4 You may also ask him,  and Sir Joseph 

3 This paragraph is full of inconsistencies.  Priestley had previously 
affirmed  (in print)  that lie could burn the inflammable air from charcoal 
(a mixture of carbon monoxide,  hydrogen,  etc),  along with oxygen into 
their conjoined weight of water.  Here he states in contradiction to that 
incredible announcement that fixed air,  as well as water,  results from the 
combustion.  At the same time he makes the extraordinary assertion that 
inflammable air from metals  (hydrogen)  unites with oxygen,  and yet 
produced no water.     Cf.  latter No.  SI. 

4 Kirwan,  see Letter Xo.  10,  note 4. 

68 CORRESPONDED  !E OF PRIESTLEY. 

Banks,5 whether they think it worth while to send an account 
of them to the Royal Society before the summer recess. 
I am,  with gratitude and respect. 

Dear Sir,  yours sincerely, 

J.  PRIESTLEY. 

P.  S.  Knowing your goodness I took the liberty to write 
to  .Mr.  Cox6 for some retorts of which I was much in want, 
and I expect them very soon.7 

To Josiau Wedgwood,  Esq.,  Etruria,  Staffordshire. 

Xo.  30. 

PRIESTLEY TO  "WEDGWOOD. 

liiKM.  23d  .Ian.  17S4. 

Dear Sir  :  The pipe-maker is not no much your rival,  but 
that I am happy to employ you both.  Of late,  however,  tin  >'  I 
have been very busy,  it lias not been in a way to require the 
assistance of either of you  ;  but I shall very soon want a good 
many of your retorts,  &c,  and as I have had abundant proof 
of your readiness to supply me,  shall not hesitate to mention 
the whole extent of my wants as I feel them.  At present then 
(to show you that I am in earnest)  I shall be obliged to you 
tor two thr.ti)  of the small-sized retorts,  and of a number higher 
than 5.  For some that I had in the last parcel,  Nos.  t>  and 8 
were excellent.  But I wish to have a dozen of these with 
inclined necks,  about an inch inside,  as they will be better for 
distilling phosphorus,  in the process of which I am endeavor- 
ing to make some improvements.     As to the materials,  I am 

5 Sir Joseph Banks,  see Introduction. 

"  William Cox,  Wedgwood's bookkeeper and manager of the London 
house.  "  Painfully reserved,  procrastinating,  honest,  jet dilatory and 
careless to a fault,"  his character was pronounced by Wedgwood an 
"  enigma." 

7 On Jan.  15,  1784,  the day before this letter was written,  Cavendish 
read a paper to the Royal Society under the title:  "Experiments on 
Air."      (Phil.  Trans.,  1784,  119.) 

LETTER TO WEDGWOOD.  69 

confident that,  with good management,  they will do as well as 
the Hessian.  Please also to send half a dozen long necks,  an 
inch in the inside,  the belly of the long necks no larger than 
those of the retorts,  as they must be coated,  and must not be 
too large for my furnace. 

I have had some curious results in my late experiments  ; 
but none I believe that will much interest you,  tho'  1 am pro- 
jecting some that perhaps may.  In the experiments on nitre, 
I get from it more than half its weight in the purest air,'  and 
vet saw reason to conclude,  that no part of the acid entered 
into the air.  This was in part imbibed by the water in which 
it was received,  and in part was volatilized,  all the air smell- 
ing strongly of it.  This greatly favours Mr.  Watt's hypothe- 
sis that air2 is dephlogisticated water.  In this business I am 
little more than the bellows-blower.3 

I have made a curious discovery on the colouring of spirit 
of nitre by light acting on the vapour of it.  A bottle com- 
pkielyfull of the colourless acid get-  no colour either by light 
or heat.  If it be in part full,  it gets colour by light but not 
bv heat  ;  and it makes no difference whatever kind of air be 
incumbent upon it,  or whether there be a vacuum in the upper 
part of the phial.  With a lens I can presently give it an in- 
tense orange.  This vapour,  imbibed by the acid,  gives colour 
to the whole.  Any phlogiston substance will give it colour 
without light  ;  so that light imparts phlogiston. 

Bv exposing bladders full of air.  in jars containing other 

1 Pure nitre contains 47.5 per cent,  of oxygen,  but it cannot all be ex- 
pelled by heat.  Priestley's rough determination gives too large a pro- 
portion of  •■  purest air."  At a high heat the nitrogen is set live,  and 
perhaps this explains Priestley's vain search for the acid. 

2 Air here evidently means oxygen. 

3 Dr.  Wilson makes the most of this modest avowal,  and says: 
"With characteristic frankness,   Priestley disavows all but a slender 

share in leading to the formation of the opinions of Watt  ■■ terning 

water."  Watt's view was that water consisted of phlogiston,  or inilam- 
mable air,  and dephlogisticated air  (oxygen).  By depriving water' of 
the former oxygen was obtained,  and by such a loss of the phlogiston of 
the water hypothetically present in it nitre was supposed to yield oxygen. 
Priestley published the same views in 17S5  (Phil.  Trans.). 

70 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

kin<ls of air,  I find that,  tho'  they remain sound,  the airs in 
time mix completely  ;4 and sometimes decompose each other, 
which explains the action of air on the blood in the lungs,  &c. 

I have begun to make some experiments on iron,  and have 
just found one curious fact.  Mr.  Francis's cast nails arc with 
great difficulty soluble in acids.  J was near three days in dis- 
solving a I oz.  After lie lias annealed them,  by keeping them 
hot in saw-dust,  they dissolve as well as any iron whatever. 
Steel,  I find,  after Bergman,  docs not yield more inflammable 
air than iron;  but it contains a good deal of matter not soluble 
in oil of vitriol,  which contains much phlogiston. 

I hope to send this by Mr.  Coxe;  but since 1 saw him,  I 
have had a bad accident;  a phial of hot oil of vitriol having 
exploded,  spoiled my clothes,  and burnt my hand  ;  so that I 
shall not be able to do anything in the laboratory for some days. 

With the greatest gratitude ami esteem,  and hoping to meet 
you in London,  1 am,  Dear Sir, 

Yours sincerely, 

J.  PRIESTLEY. 

Mrs.  P.  joins me in compliments to yourself and Mrs.  Wedg- 
wood. 

1*.  S.  1 thank you for excellent Add res.:  to the Potter.?,5 and 
hope it will be of much use.  I am also  [glad]  to hear that you 
have so nearly succeeded in the comparison of your tht rmometer 
with Fahrenheit's.6 

To Josiah Wedgwood,  Esq.,  Etruria,  near Xewrastle-under-Line.7 

4 A very early observation on the osmose of*  gases.  The osmose of 
li(]iiiils hail been remarked by Abbe Nollet in 17 is. 

5  '•  An Address to the Workmen in the Pottery on the subject of 
entering into the service of Foreign Manufacturers."  This was intended 
to arrest the emigration of his workmen to America anil to France  ;  from 
the latter place emissaries ami spies had endeavored to seduce the potters 
of Etruria to desert.     (Meteyard,  II.,  -176.)     Cf.  Letter No.  2G,  note 3. 

6 See Letter Xo.  1 2,  note 3. 

7 The endorsement is in the handwriting of Mr.  Chisholm.  In the 
interim between the date of this letter anil that of the next in this series 
James Watt published two papers,  entitled:  "Thoughts on the Con- 
stituent Parts of Water ami of Uephlogisticated Air;"  the first being 
read April 29,  and the second May 6,  1784. 

LETTER TO WILKINSON.  71 

No.  31.| 

PRIESTLEY TO WILKINSON. 

Birm.  16 June,  1784. 
Dear Sir:  Though I do not know that such experiments 
as mine are very interesting to yon,  yet as I am desirous of 
giving you any satisfaction that may be in my power,  I wish 
to communicate the result of some that I have lately made, 
and that my friends think to be of importance.  You may gel 
Joseph1 to transcribe this account for M.  Senebier2 or any 
philosophical persons that he may meet with. 

A very interesting problem with us of late has been to 
determine what Peonies of dephlogisticated ami inflammable 
air when they are made to unite,  as by exploding them with 
the electric spark,  &c.  ;  some saying that they make water, 
others fixed air.  &c.  The following experiments  -how that in 
different circumstances they make both  ;  ami also that dephlo- 
gisticated air incorporates with iron in a great proportion. 

Throwing the focus of a burning lens upon some  -mall 
pieces of malleable iron in dephlogisticated air,  confined by 
mercury  (botli very warm ami dry),  the air disappeared,  no 
water was formed,  lint some fixed air,  and the slag to which 
the iron was reduced had gained a-  much weight as that of 
the air that had been absorbed.  Melting the iron in the open 
air  "24 grains gained five grains,  and the same quantity of 
steel gained 7i-  grains of pure air.  After this my lens could 
not melt it,  nor would any acid except the marine dissolve it. 
It appeared to lie the same thine-  a-  the scales of iron from a 
smith's forge. 

Throwing the focus of the lens upon iron thus saturated 
with dephlogisticated air,  in inflammable air,  confined by mer- 
cury (all very dry),  the air disappeared,  and the iron losl as 

1 Priestley's son,  then in Paris with Mr.  Wilkinson. 

2 Jean Senebier  (1742-1809),  a Swiss naturalist and man of letters, 
residing in Geneva.  A clergyman,  like Priestley,  he was devoted to 
researches in natural philosophy,  and had published in 1782 ami 

two memoirs on the influence of the sunlight in changing fixed air into 
pure air by the agency of plants. 

72 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

much weight as,  if reduced to dephlogisticated air,  would have 
saturated the inflammable air that had disappeared,  and in 
this case,  as much water was produced as I imagined would 
have been equal to the weight of the air. 

Another experiment that I have made shows a remarkable 
difference between inflammable air from metals and that from 
charcoal.  Having mixed a quantity of each of them with 
half as much dephlogisticated air,  T exploded that from iron 
by means of the electric spark,  and found neither water nor 
fixed air  ;  but firing the mixture that contained the inflammable 
air from charcoal  (which showed no sign of its containing fixed 
air),  •'!',  ounce measures of the mixture yielded an evident 
quantity of water,  and likewise almost an ounce measure of 
pure fixed n'tr.3 

Resuming my experiments on the seeming conversion of 
water into air,  I find that a vessel of chalk answers as well as 
one of clay,  and mercury,  as well as water,  passing thro' the 
retort one way in the form of a black powder,  while the air 

passes tin ntrary way,  and when,  in the same degree of heat, 

an air-pump cannot force a particle of mercury thro'  it.  Also 
alkaline air is transmitted as well as air of any other kind. 

As it will save some expence of postage,  I also wish that 
Joseph would transcribe this account,  and send it with my 
compliments to Sig.  Marsiglio Landriani,  at Milan.4 

We are all well except Sally,  who has been confined to her 

3 Chemical philosophers of the day generally confounded the different 
kind-*  of inflammable air.  an oversight which greatly hampered their 
researches.  Here Priestley clearly recognizes the difference between 
the  "inflammable air from metals"  (hydrogen),  and that  "from char- 
coal" (carbon monoxide),  but incorrectly interprets the results of their 
union with dephlogisticated air  (oxygen),  by overlooking the production 
of water in the first case.  (Compare Wilson's Life of Cavendish,  pp. 
2r»7-.T13.) 

*  Marsiglio Landriani,  attached to the Court of Albert of Sachsen- 
Teschen at Vienna,  and a correspondent of the French Academy of Sci- 
ences,  was favorably known as a physicist and chemist.  Before visiting 
England he had published researches on the physics of air and on 
chemical subjects.  He had hail correspondence with Priestley as early 
a>  177(5,  who mentions him several times in his Experiments and Ob- 

LETTER TO KEIR.  73 

room by  :i rheumatic fever,  ami is indeed very far from being re- 
covered. She joins with your sister and all ofusin besl wishes 
to you both.  Mr.  and Mrs.  Barbauld5 are now with us,  and 
are to take William6 with them,  and Harry is expected from 
school to-morrow or the next day.  I shall be dad to bear of 
you,  and hope that Joseph will behave to your satisfaction. 

I am,  Dear Sir,  with gratitude and respect, 

Yours affectionately, 

J.  PRIESTLEY. 

A Moxsiei'k Wilkinson,  a Montcenis,  en Bourgogne,  France. 

Paid to Loudon. 

No.  32. 

PRIESTLEY TO KEIR. 

Fair Hill,  Tuesday 18th August,  1784. 
Peak Sir:  I send for your general inspection,  not for your 
reading,  the first book of my work,  and also the introduction.1 
I have to peruse it once more before it goes to the press.      1 be 

servations on Different Kinds of Air.  The dates of Landriani's birth and 
death are uncertain  ;  they were unknown to Poggendorff.  Landriani 
seems to have been the first to use the name eudiometer for the well- 
known instrument  (Black's Lectures,  Philadelphia.  1806,  vol.  iii.,  p. 
•2-2.3),  one of which he sent to Priestley,  accompanied by a letter dated 
Nov.  17,  177G.  (Priestley's Obs.  and Exp.  on Air,  vol.  iii..  Appen- 
dix 4.)     Compare Letter No.  46. 

6 Anna Lastitia  (Aiken)  Barbauld  (1743-182:.).  the poet and essayist, 
had long been a friend of Dr.  and Mrs.  Priestley,  their acquaintance 
beginning in Warrington,  where her father was a teacher.  Of her 
Priestlev says in his Memoirs:  -'Mrs.  Barbauld has told me that if was 
the perusal of some verses of mine that first induced her to write anything 
inverse,  so that this country is in some measure indebted to me for one 
of the best poets it can boast of."  And he alludes to her visits to his 
house elsewhere.      (Butt's Life,  I.,  54.) 

6 William and Harry.  Priestley's younger sons. 

i This brief and unimportant letter i>  introduced merely to show the 
constant friendly intercourse maintained by Priestley with his philosophi- 
cal neighbors and correspondents.  We are unable to say to what volume 
Priestley here refers. 

74 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

last article  (MS.)  contains the result of the experiments von 
saw going on in my laboratory. 

I wish to see you before we begin to print,  which may be in 

a week or ten days. 

^  ours sincerely, 

J.  PRIESTLEY. 
To James Keik,  Esq.,  Smethwick. 

No.  33. 

PRIESTLEY Ti WEDGWOOD. 

Birm.  8th Nov'br,  17-4. 

Dear Sir:  I know you will not be displeased with my 
telling you.  that I was never more impatient for anything, 
than I now-  am to receive the earthen tubes you have been so 
obliging as to promise me,  especially when I give von the 
reasons for it. 

Hitherto I have used a copper tube,  because water did not 
act upon it.  But sending thro'  it spirit of wine in vapour,  it 
was totally dissolved,  ami actually fell in pieces in a very 
short time.  1 was astonished at the production of inflam- 
mable air in the process,  which resembled the blowing with a 
pair of bellows.  Four ounces of spirit of wine did the busi- 
ness for this tube which was about  \  of an inch thick.  What 
was condensed by the warm tuli was mere water.  The inflam- 
mable aii-  which had no fixed air in it had come from the 
copper.     The inside was reduced to a black powder. 

Iron,  I find,  gained one-third in weight in this process,  and 
gives one-half more inflammable air than it does when dis- 
solved in acids,  the reason of which I believe to lie that much 
of the phlogiston is always retained in the solution of metals 
in acids.  On comparing the experiments,  I now think that 
the inflammable air is furnished by the iron,  and that there is 
no decomposition of the water.     Mr.  Watt thinks so too.1 

1 Priestley is still at sea in attempts to explain the phenomena he so 
industriously and minutely observed.  The view that the  "inflammable 
air is furnished by the iron"  is in accordance with the-  doctrine of the 
phlogistians. 

LETTEB TO WEDGWOOD.  75 

Iron that is thus increased in weight,  and 1ms yielded so 
much air  (which,  by the way,  has not the least offensivt smell 
which has been so much complained of in filling balloons)  is 
reduced to its former state l>v heating in charcoal.  In this 
process,  instead of yielding water,  as we all imagined it would, 
it yielded a prodigious quantity of inflammabh air,  but of a 
peculiar kind,  for it is about as heavy a-  common air,  owing, 
as I found,  to its containing a great quantity of fixed air com- 
bined with it,  so as not to be separated by lime water,  but only 
by decomposition with pure air,  by the electric spark.2 

Mr.  More3 of the Adelphi4 was with me when he observed, 
by his stop watch,  that,  heating about one foot of my copper 
tube  (not quite  :t;  of an inch in diameter)  filled with iron 
shavings I always tilled a vessel containing 30 ounce measures 
of air in 50 seconds.  There can be no doubt,  therefore,  but 
that this process must be abundantly the best for filling 
balloons. 

"With our best respects to all your family,  I am, 

1 tear Sir,  Yours sincerely, 

J.  PRIESTLEY. 
To Josiah Wedgwood,  Esq.,  Etruria,  near Newcastle-nnder-Line, 

Staffordshire.5 

2 Tins heavy inflammable air was probably chiefly carbon monoxide, 
and the carbon dioxide which he imagined to 1«-  combined with it was 
produced by the union of the carbon monoxide and the oxj gen,  when the 
two were exploded. 

*  Probably Mr.  Samuel More  (1724-1799),  Secretary of the Society 
of Arts.      He was a man of wealth and taste and appears to have dealt in 

objects of vertu.     He obtained samples of minerals for  ^  edgw 1 on 

various occasions;  in 177:;  he sent him petunse and kaolin from China. 
See Tetter No.  41. 

4  "Adelphi"  was the name of the building in whirl)  were the London 
showrooms of Wedgwood and Bentley,  opened in 1772. 

5 The endorsement on the folded letter is in the handwriting of 
Mr.  Chisholm. 

76 CORRESPONDENCE OF PKIESTLEY. 

No.  34. 
PKIESTLEY TO WEDGWOOD. 

May,  1785. 

Dear Sir  :'  About the time that this comes to hand I hope 
you will receive three copies of my paper of experiments2 
printed fur the Philosophical Transactions,  of which one is for 
yourself,  another for Dr.  Darwin,  and the third for the gentle- 
man who was so obliging as to join von in contributing to the 
expence of my experiments,  but wished to be unknown. 

I am making the most of the fine sunshine we now enjoy  ; 
and have lately discovered some very remarkable new facts, 
which promise to throw much new light ou the doctrine of air, 
&c.  They could not be made but by means of a burning 
lens. 

I have been just trying a new process for procuring the 
charcoals of the several metals,  some of which I shewed von, 
hut it has not yet succeeded  ;  but I do not despair,  and I hope 
to do this and much more,  when I get a larger lens.  As soon 
as I can get a tolerable assortment of these new modifications 
of the metals,  I shall send them to yon,  either in London,  or 
at Etruria. 

I wish your business of application to Parliament3 was in as 
good a train as my experiments are at present.  Your exer- 
tion, however,  tin/  unsuccessful,  will do you the greatest 
honour. 

With my respectful compliments to Mrs.  Wedgwood and 
your sou,  I am,  Dear Sir, 

Yours sincerely, 

J.  PRIESTLEY. 

1 Tliis and the following letter,  written in 1785,  were not known to Dr. 
George Wilson.  (See Introduction.)  The originals are in possession of 
Sam:  Timmins,  Esq.,  Birmingham. 

2 The title of this paper was :  "  Experiments and Observations relating 
to Air and Water,"  read to the Royal Society,  Feb.  24,  1785. 

3 Priestley alludes to the attempt made by the English Government to 
free Ireland from commercial restrictions,  a measure which Wedgwood 
opposed.      Sec Wedgwood's reply,  ill next letter. 

WEDGWOOD TO PEIESTLEY.  77 

P.  S.  I have not yet received the tubes,  etc.,  for which I 
wrote before 1 went to London;  but while the sun shines so 
bright I cannot attend to anything else. 

To Josiah Wedgwood,  Esq.,  Great George Street,  Westminster. 

No.  35. 

WEDGWOOD TO I'KIKSTLEY. 

May 21,  17S5. 

Dear Sir  :  I take the first vacant moment to thank you 
for the favor of vour letter received a day or two aeo,  and tin- 
the three copies of your paper of experiments,  which have not 
yet come to hand,  but when they do shall be disposed of as 
yon desire. 

I congratulate yon on the fine weather,  and the important 
discoveries it has enabled you to make;  but after so long 
and so close application I hope a few days'  respite1 will be 
agreeable to you  ;  and that you will be contented for our sakes 
to  -pare the sun for a little time and let some more rain fall. 

I shall be happy in receiving specimens of your new modi- 
fications of metals,  not in London,  but at Etruria — for here I 
can look at nothing and think of nothing but Irish affairs,  and 
if I do think of anything,  and if I had them here,  I should 
certainly commit some Irish blunder about them.  I thank 
you for your good wishes in respect to that business,  and 
assure you that you are mistaken if you think I have been 
successful. 

We have already convinced the minister of 16 capital errors 
in the arrangement,  and he has now brought into the house a 
system so much altered,  and with so many additions that it 
may be called a new one.  The first consisted of 11 proposi- 
tions: the present of 18,  which 18 are passing the house one 
by one,  and in every one of these new alterations and amend- 
ments are made before it passes.  Only 3 of them have yet 
passed,  and the debates upon each of these have been long 
indeed.     If they do at length get through the house,  Ireland 

78 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

cannot acknowledge or know them  ;  and as she declared she 
would not admit an alteration of a single iota,  she must 
certainly herself reject what one party is laboring so hard to 
provide for her,  and the other to keep from her.1 

I am sorry lor your disappointment in respect to the tubes, 
but as the sun bas been so favorable as to prevent the want of 
them from being much felt hitherto,  I will do what 1 can to 
prevent that want from continuing much longer,  so that be- 
tween us both I hope we shall be able to keep you easy  ;  that 
is to say,  usefully employed. 

[No superscription.] 

[Signature wanting.] 

PRIESTLEY TO MATTHEW BOULTON. 

Fair Hill,  Wednesday  [June,  1785]. 

Dear Sir:  I enclose another letter from Dr.  Elliot which 
I hope will be the last that he will trouble you with. 

I hope you will excuse the liberty 1 take in asking a favour 
for one I.  Maddocks who works at Soho,  and is one of our 
Society.2 He is fearful of speaking to you himself tho his 

1 The propositions,  increased in number to 20,  passed through the 
Commons and the House of Lords,  but failed to pass the Irish House of 
Commons by a majority of nineteen.  The Government then abandoned 
the bill.  Miss Meteyard says in this connection:  " The defeat of this 
measure to free Ireland from the commercial restrictions,  so cruelly im- 
posed upon her since the Restoration,  was not without effects of a most 
beneficial character.  The contest awakened attention to commercial 
rights and duties:  and the result made clear to the apprehension of both 
the ministry ami the governing classes that England and Ireland must be 
united tor an unfettered commerce to flourish between them.  Wedg- 
wood lost largely by the part he took against the Irish Resolutions;  his 
indirect trade may have not suffered so much,  but the agencies known to 
be his perished literally tor some years."  (Meteyard's Wedgwood, 
II.,  548.) 

2 The religious society worshiping at the New Meeting-House,  of 
which Dr.  Priestley was the pastor. 

LETTER TO JOHNSON.  79 

request seem?  to be so reasonable thai an old servant,  as he 
says he is,  might not,  1 think have thought it much presump- 
tion to speak to you on the subject.  JI<'  says that his eyes 
have suffered exceedingly l>y his employment as a chaser,  so 
that he cannot continue much longer and therefore he wishes 
to exchange it for some other that shall be less hurtful to him. 
I have seen a good deal of the man.  and have a good opinion 
of him.  He seems to be sensible,  modest and conscientious. 
Confident that you are always ready to do what is right,  and 
ever generous, 

I am.  Dear Sir, 

Yours sincerely, 

J.  PRIESTLEY. 
Matthew Boultox,  Esq.,  Solio.     Himself. 

hrsed"]  Dr.  Priestley with papers from Mr.  Elliot con- 
cerning his various scheme-.     June 1785.     Ans'd Aug.  17th. 

No.  37. 

PRIESTLEY TO ME.  .1.  JOHNSON.1 

Jan.  21.  1786. 
Deae Sir::  I am really sorry to give you so much trouble, 
but in the absence of Mr.  Lindsey2 1 cannot so well avoid it.  I 
have lately seen a catalogue of Lowndes,3 tho'  I cannot just 
now lay my hands on it,  in which there is a Francais Con- 
cordant, '-'  vols,  at 12  .  I wish you would endeavor to get it 
for me. 

1  "  Joseph Johnson,  No.  72 in St.  Paul's Church Yard,"  was the pub- 
lisher of Dr.  Priestley,  who frequently refers to him in corres] lence. 

An allusion to him in another Letter  -how-  he also acted occasionally as 
Priestley's banker.  Mr.  Johnson  (b.  1738,  '1.  I-":1!  had the highest 
character for industry,  integrity and unselfishness.     (Timperle 

1 See Letter No.  40,  note 3. 

3 William Thomas Lowndes  (died in 1843),  the English bibliograp 

80 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

If Dr.  Hclioi'dcn, '  Mr.  Lee5 and Mrs.  Rayner's names were 
not in my list of presents,  of my last letter to Mr.  Moseley, 
I shall be obliged to you if yon will add them.  The books 
for Hays are come very  [safe].  I am obliged to you for your 
care of them. 

With all our good wishes,  I am,  Dear Sir, 

Yours sincerely, 

J.   PRIESTLEY. 

I'.  S.  My daughter was married ou Tuesday to a son  ,,t' 
Mi-.  Finch and are now at Cambridge where his Father lives. 

No.  38. 

PRIESTLEY TO MRS.  CROUCH. 

Birm.  3 Apr.  1786. 

Dear Sister  :  Not pretending to lie a judge in matters ni' 
business,  I cannot tell what to think of Mr.  Hope's scheme  ; 
hut as lie is very confident of its success I see no reason why 
[I]  should nut accepl of it.  As you and Mrs.  Priestley know 
one another,  and have been happy together,  there is the better 
prospect of our doing well.  I sincerely wish it may answer 
for you both,  and should be glad to contribute to it if I knew 
how  ;  I doubt not,   however,   but that my friends at Leeds 

1 See Letter Xo.  49,  note 3,  ami Letter No.  4,  note 1. 

5 Mr.  John Lee of Lincoln's Inn;  he became Solicitor-General in 
1782,  and died in 1793,  aged 60.  Priestley made hi-  acquaintance at 
Leeds,  of which place he was a native.  He was  "exactly one week 
older than myself,"  says Priestley,  who further writes  :  ••  Mr.  Lie shewed 
himself particularly my friend at the time that I left Lord Shelburne, 
assisting mo in the difficulties with which I was then pressed and con- 
tinuing to liefriend me afterwards by seasonable benefactions."  Mr.  Lee 
hinted to Dr.  Priestley that he might have a pension from the Govern- 
ment, but he  "declined the overture,  wishing to preserve myself inde- 
pendent of everything connected with the court,  and preferring the 
assistance of generous and opulent individuals,  lovers of science,  and also 
lovers of liberty."      (Rutt,  L,  '21(j.)      See Letter No.  74. 

LETTER TO EEIE.  81 

would give you any assistance in their power.  Bi sides Fi<  Id- 
head must now be disagreeable to you,  and you will have 
agreeable society at Leeds.1 

When you write next,  as I hope you will as s i as you 

have settled your plan,  I wish you would _ tell me the exact 
age of my uncle,"  I imagine he must have been turned ninety. 
He was a remarkable man,  and of a singularly happy consti- 
tution, both of body and mind.  All that generation is now 
gone,  and we who succeed them shall soon follow. 

I suppose you did very well in giving the money to my 
brother as yon did,  I mean to do the same everv vear as long 
as they want it,  and 1 can afford it. 

M ith all our respects to yourself and to Mrs.  Priestley,  1 
am,  Dear Sister, 

Your-  affectionately, 

J.  PRIESTLEY. 
Mbs.  Cr.orcii,  Fieldhead,  near Leeds. 

Xo.  39. 

PRIESTLEY TO KEIR. 

Fair Hill,  Wednesday Morning  [17S6  '  j 

Dear Sir.:  I write to apprize you that time is,  hut that 
very soon time will be past.  Hut to speak without allusions, 
my volume1 will be nearly printed oil'  this week  ;  and if the 

1 This letter apparently alludes to a proposition of Mrs.  Crouch to 
remove from Fieldhead,  Priestley's birthplace,  to Leeds. 

2 Doctor Priestley's lather,  donas,  married the only daughter of Joseph 
Swift,  of Shafton,  a farmer and malster,  and the Doctor was their first 
born.  Jonas had seven older brothers ami sisters,  and reference i>  here 
made to John who died February 28th,  17-';.  aged ninety-two.  A small 
portrait of John is in the possession of William O.  Priestley,  M.D., 
LL.D.,  of London.  For some curious details of Dr.  Priestley's earlv 
life,  see  "  Authentic Anecdotes of the Life of my Brother,  Dr.  Prii srlev." 
in the  "  Funeral Sermon occasioned by the Death of the late Rev.  Joseph 
Priestley,"  ....   by the Rev.  Timothy Priestley,  London,  1804. 

1 This probably refers to Priestley's sixth volume of  "Experiments 
and Observations on Different Kinds of Air,"  published in 1  (86. 
6 

82 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

article you were so Lr<»>d as to promise,  and by which I shall 
think my work much honoured,  does not come the end of this 
week or the beginning of the next,  it will be too late.  1 earn- 
estly beg therefore that you will be as expeditions as possible. 
If yon should happen to have it now ready,  and could come 
and spend an hour or two with me,  I should like to read to 
you a section I have composed on the theory of the experi- 
ments on air,  but it will be in the hands of the printer on 
Friday or Saturday.  I have also made several new experi- 
ments since I saw yon,  which I wish to talk to you about. 

At all events I must,  if possible,  have your article,  and I 
should think you might write it without repeating the experi- 
ment, if you have no doubt with respect to the general fact. 
Hoping to see or hear from you very soon, 

1 am,  dear Sir,  yours sincerely, 

J.  PRIESTLEY. 
.Iames Keir,  Esq.,  Winson Green. 

No.   40. 
PRIESTLEY TO BENJ.  VAUGHAN. 

Bibm.  2 March,  1787. 

Dear Sir  :  I thank you for the political intelligence you 
have sent me.  I take very little interest in anything of this 
kind,  and do not pretend to have any opinion,  but I like to 
hear what is passing,  and what is thought of public measures 
by those of my friends whose opinions have weight with me. 

As I find there is a considerable number of books which you 
are so obliging as to intend to send me,  for the purpose ot 
revising my Lectures on History,1  &c,  and the period of my 

1  "  Lectures on History and General Policy,  to which is prefixed an 
Essay on a Course of Liberal Education for Civil and Active Life." 
London,  1788.  These lectures are dedicated to Benjamin Vaughan, 
Esq.,  over the date Jan.  1,  1788.  Priestley writes :  "These Lectures 
were formerly addressed to you as a pupil  .  .  .  .,"  refers to his  "obliga- 
tions to your father,"  and signs himself  "your affectionate friend." 

LETTER TO VAUGHAN.  83 

journey to London is at hand,  yon had better leave the selec- 
tion of*  them till I come.  It is very possible that I may not 
want quite as many as you will imagine.  It is only an de- 
rm ntary book that I propose to make. 

Three times I think I have informed you,  that Dr.  Franklin 
-aid he had sent me by Mr.  Vaughan  (I suppose he meant 
your lather)  the new volume of their Transactions}  [f you 
have received it,  I wish you would send it as soon as may be. 

I hope you have received the copy I sent you by Mr. 
Lindsey3 of my Letter*  to  <i Philosophical Unbelu re,-.  Part II.4 
I shall be obliged to you if you will transmit another to  !>,-. 
Frank/in and take it of Mr.  Lindsey. 

In about a fortnight I shall have finished all the printing I 
have at hand for this season,  and then shall be looking toward 
London,  before I engage in anything nor,  so that I shall 
probably be with yon rather sooner than usual this year. 

Mr.  Vaughan is very obliging to invite my wife to come 
with me,  but she cannot leave town at present.  She will 
probably see London about midsummer. 

We are all very well,  and desire to be remembered to ail 

the family. 

Yours sincerely, 

J.  PRIESTLEY. 
Benjamih Vaughan,  Es<i.,  Jefferson Square. 

2 Transactions of the American Philosophical Society,  Philadelphia. 
Six volumes of Transactions were published between 1769 ami 1809. 
After Priestley went to America lie frequently contributed to its  [ 
and attended the meetings of the Society. 

8 Rev.  Theophilus Lindsey  (born 1723,  died lSe-s),  a Unitarian divine 
of prominence,  and a life-long friend of Priestley,  who wrote of him: 
"Our correspondence and intimacy has been the source of men'  real 
satisfaction to me than any other circumstance in my whole life." 
(Rutt,  I..  82.) 

Rutt's Life and Correspondence of Priestley contains hundreds of 
letters written to Lindsey.      See note,  page  -. 

4 See Letter Xo.  1,  note 2. 

84 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

No.  41. 
PRIESTLEY TO WEDGWOOD. 

Birm.  26 Aug.  1787, 

Deae Sin  :  Since my last I have discovered,  or rather re- 
discovered, the true regulus of manganese.  For many years 
ago Dr.  Withering procured it,  but tho5 lie made many trials 
he was never able to succeed a second time.  It is as soft a- 
lead and most white.  Dr.  A\  ithering says that his calcined 
and disappeared in the open air.  1 have five pennyweights  <>f 
it,  ami shall preserve part of it tin-  you,  though I should not 
gel any more.  But 1 think I shall easily get it again.  I got 
this by sending steam over some manganese red hot,  and 
partly reduced in a former process.1 

To complete the discovery may require a considerable con- 
sumption of your earthen tubes and retorts,  lint,  in return, 
the repetition of the experiment by others will make a demand 
for them.  Like a bnrning lens your tubes are capable of 
infinite uses in chymistry. 

1 want tubes in a different form from any that I have had 
yet.  in order to make the vapour of different substances meet 
in a red heat  ;  thus,  from a to h should be 21 inches.  If I 
could have a dozen or two of them to meet me on my return 

1 Tlii>  process described by Priestley could not possibly yield metallic 
manganese,  which moreover is by nomeans  "  soft as lead and most white." 
The metal was first isolated l>\  J.  F.  John,  in 1807.  For Dr.  Withering 
see Introduction. 

LETTER TO PRIESTLEY.  85 

to Castlehead,'  about a month from this time,  I should be 
very happy. 

I have made some curious experiments on the terra pon- 
*<i aerata,3 which is a scarce substance,  tho'  I hear there 
is plenty of it in Scotland.  If you should happen to have 
anv quantity of it by you,  a pound or two of it would lie very 
useful to me,  as also would a piece or two of calk,4 which is 
common enough. 

Mr.  More,  who is with you.  and is a kind of necessary man 
to all philosophers,  may perhaps 1»'  able to procure the speci- 
mens for me.  If any man can come at them hv can.  and I 
have often experienced hi-  readiness to oblige me.  I beg 
my compliments to him,  and am,  with much gratitude,  and 

respects to Mrs.  Wedgw 1,  and your son,  Dear Sir, 

Yours,  sincerely, 

J.   PRIESTLEY. 

No.  42. 

WEDGWOOD TO PRIESTLEY. 

[No place or date.]1 

Dear Sir  :  I thank you for the account of the very curious 
fact?  you have lately discovered,  and am very happy in having 

2 The residence of Mr.  John Wilkinson  (see Introduction).  On 
the very same day,  Aug.  :.'<;.  17n7.  Priestley wrote another letter 
v<  liis friend the Rev.  Theophilus Lindsey,  ami  -,i;s concerning his visit 
to Castlehead:  "To-morrow I and my wife set out on a journey to 
Castlehead.  where 1 spent a month about this time last year,  and from 
which I returned so much recruited."     (Rutt,  I..  4b;.) 

*  The contemporary name for witherite or barium carbonate. 

4 Calk is the early name for the mineral heavy spar,  or baiite.  barium 
sulphate.  The early base of these minerals had been recognized as a 
distinct earth by Scheele,  in 1774.  Dr.  Withering had published his 
"Experiments and Observations on the Terra Ponderosa,"  April 22, 
1784.  Wedgwood had secretly used these barium minerals in his manu- 
factures since 1775.      (Meteyard,  II.,  319.) 

1 Although this letter bears no date and no signature,  it is obviously 
the reply of Wedgwood to Priestley's letter of August 2uth  ;  the writer 
complies with the request of the chemist for tubes with three ends,  and 

86 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

it in my power to assist the progress of your experiments by 
my manufactures.  The tubes you desire with three ends are 
in the workman's hands,  and I hope that they will meet you 
on your return from Castlehead,  and I am to-day sending you 
the retorts and tubes you asked fur some time  ;il:". 

I am very glad in that I am able to send you a little calk 
(all I have),  which may possibly serve you until you can be 
supplied liv sinne friend who has more of it than 1 have.  Mr. 
Mure will inform you where you may procure some terra pon- 
derosa aerated,  as I have none in my possession.  I congratu- 
late vim on your discovery of an easier method of getting the 
regulus of manganese,  and shall be thankful for a small speci- 
men of it,  if you can spare it. 

[Xo signature.] 

[Endorsed]  Dr.  Pkiestley,  Aug.  25,  17*7. 2 

No.  43. 

PRIESTLEY TO WEDGWOOD. 

[Nn month  ;  endorsed 1787. ]• 

Dear SiPi :  Having been engaged in courses of experi- 
ments that did not require the use of earthen retorts,  &c,  I 
have not troubled you for a long time.  But now,  having 
many things in view which I cannot do without your assist- 
ance, I am obliged to have recourse to it.  I shall thank you, 
therefore,  for about two dozen of such small retorts,  as you have 
hitherto supplied me,  glazed on the outside only,  and also as 
many tubes,  22 inches long,  open at both ends,  glazed in the 

for a specimen of calk,  and congratulates liini on the isolation of metallic 
manganese.  Perhaps the copy before us is a rough draft of the letter 
prepared for the private secretary to copy. 

2 The endorsement is apparently in Wedgwood's handwriting,  but the 
date Aug.  L',">  is clearly an accidental error,  for it antedates by one day 
the date of the letter to which this is a reply.  The date should be the 
28th or 29th of August. 

1 The endorsement is in the handwriting of Josiah Wedgwood as veri- 
fied by his grandson Francis.      (Wilson,  p.  99.) 

LETTER TO PRIESTLEY.  8 t 

same manner.     But I could wish them to have a slight 1 lend- 
ing in the middle,  thus — 

D 

to prevent metals in fusion from running to the ends of the 
tube. 

Having had the misfortune to break the two larger mortars 
I must beg the favor of two more. 

The last sunshine that I had I made some experiment-. 
which tend greatly to clear up the greatest difficulties I have 
laboured under when I published my last volume,  viz:  why 
pyrophorus should take fire with equal readiness in nitrous 
and depMogisticated air.  I find that iron heated in nitrous air 
becomes a fiery cinder,  the same that it does in depMogisticated 
air,  and steam,  so that they all contain the same common prin- 
ciple ;  and nitrous air appears to be a compound of pure air 
and phlogisticated air.2 For this remains after the iron has 
become fiery cinder in it.  I make the same change in nitrous 
air and iron,  on a larger scale,  by putting the iron into one of 
your earthen tubes,  and sending the nitrous air thro'  it red-hot 
by bladders at each end of the tube,  pressing each of them 
alternately. 

I am still greatly in want of a burning lens,  and Mr. 
Parker is very dilatory in supplying me with one.3 

On Monday next the Lunar Society is at my house.  We 
expect Mr.  Wilkinson,  and should be happy if you could now 
and then be of the party.4 

I am,  Dear Sir,  yours sincerely. 

J.  PRIESTLEY. 
To Josiau Wedgwood,  Esq.,  Etruria,  near Xeweastle-uuder-Line. 

8 Priestley's deductions from his experiments accord perfectly with 
present views,  but the obsolete nomenclature nearly smothers his mean- 
ing. From the behavior of iron in nitric oxide,  oxygen gas,  and steam 
he concludes they all contain the same common principle  (oxygen)  ;  and 
nitric oxide appears,  he says,  to be a compound of oxygen and nitrogen. 

8 Compare Letter No.  12,  note 4. 

*  Probably John Wilkinson,  Priestley's brother-in-law.  See Intro- 
duction. 

88 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

No.  44. 

PRIESTLEY TO WEDGWOOD. 

Birmingham,  S Jan.  1788. 
da  =  deplilogisticated.1 

Dear Sir:  As the experiments in which I am now en- 
gaged promise to be of some consequence with respect to what 
has of late been the subject of philosophical discussion,  I 
give you the earliest account of the probable issue of them. 

They completely refute the hypothesis of d'1 and inflam- 
mable air composing only water.  The decomposition of them 
always produces acid,  and Dr.  Withering finds it to be as yet 
in all eases the nitrous.  They give reason to think that the 
great quantity of water that has been found in this case is 
nothing more than was diffused through the airs or was neces- 
sary to their aerial form.  I almost conclude that water is the 
basis of all kinds of air.  One of my experiments  (on terra 
ponderosa)  proves that it is a considerable part of fixed air, 
nut less than one-third of its weight ;  tho'  it has been thought 
to consist of nothing but d'1 and inflammable air.2 

My experiments seem to render doubtful the conclusion 
that Mr.   Cavendish3 draws from his,  as I get nitrous aeid 

1  'I'll'1 abbreviation and explanation are given here exactly as in the 
original — at the head of the first page. 

-  This is a brief summary of the conclusions reached by Priestley, 
and soon after  (February 7)  embodied in an article which he read to the 
Royal Society under the following title:  "Experiments and Observa- 
tions relating to the Principles of Acidity,  the Composition of Water 
and Phlogiston."  (Phil.  Trans.  1 7ss.  147.)  In this lie records the 
formation of nitrons  (nitric)  acid,  and acknowledges the a-sist:  nee of 
I ir.  Withering ami of James Keir.  Unfortunately for his reputation, 
Priestley's conclusions were quite erroneous  ;  he never receded from his 
opinion that water is present in all gases,  and that oxygen and hydrogen 
\  ield by their combustion nitrous  (nitric)  acid.  "  Priestley thus dissented 
alike from Cavendish,  Watt,  an I Lavoisier,  and totally abandoned his 
original doctrine,  that inflammable and deplilogisticated air were entirely 
convertible into water."     (Wilson.) 

3 Henry Cavendish  (born October 10,  1731,  did February 24,  1810), 
the illustrious English physicist and chemist,  who has been frequently 

LETTER TO WEDGWOOD.  89 

from fld air without any that is phlogisticated.  This is the 
case whether the dd air be got  (Vina manganese,  red precipitate 
or red lead. 

I should he happy if you could find time to give me a call 
as von go thro'  Birmingham to show you my apparatus for 
these experiments.  They arc not yet completed,  and they are 
very laborious as well as expensive.  I shall soon proceed to 
diversity my process by the use of the excellent tubes you 
sent me,  and shall not fail to give you an account of the 
result.4 

Truly sensible of my manifold obligations to you,  I am, 

Yours sincerely, 

J.   PRIESTLEY. 
Ji  -i mi Wedgwood,  Esg  ,  Etruria,  near Newcastle-under-Line. 

[The wax seal bearing Priestley's crest and motto,  is in an 
almost perfect state of preservation.] 

named in the notes.  For his part in the discovery of the composition of 
water,  see Letter No.  2'2,  note 3.  For details of his life and labor-,  see 
Dr.  Geo.  Wilson's  "  Life of Henry Cavendish,"  London,  1851  (published 
by the Cavendish Society)  ;  also J.  Clerk  "Maxwell's  "  Electrical Re- 
searches of Henry Cavendish,"  Cambridge,   1879. 

Cavendish's views on the question at issue were communicated to the 
Royal Society,  April 17,  1788,  but since tl xperiments therein de- 
scribed were actually made in December.  17s7.  it is possible that Priestley 
was cognizant of them.  Cavendish's paper is entitled:  "On the  ( 
version of a Mixture of Dephlogisticated and Phlogisticated Air into 
Xitrous Acid by the Electric Spark." 

4 In corresponding with his literary and theological friends Dr. 
Priestley seldom intrudes scientific topics,  but in a letter written to lb-. 
Price  (Richard Price,  b.  172:!.  d.  1791),  the eminent dissenter ami 
philosopher,  and dated about a month earlier than the e under con- 
sideration, the chemist gives an account of his latest work  : 

December 4,  17s7  ....  "  I forget what experiments I gave you an 
account of in my last.  I have lately determined two tilings of consider- 
able consequence;  one is that a very great proportion of the weight of 
fixed air is water.  This I have ascertained by the loss of water in the 
production of fixed air from terra punderosa,  which will not give any 
without water.     The other which is of more consequence is that by the 

90 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

No.  45. 
PRIESTLEY TO KEIR. 

Birmingham,  10th January,  1788. 
Dear Sir:  Doctor Withering finds the acid I have lately 
procured to be,  in all cases,  nitrous,1 even when the air was 
procured from the red lead.  With what you were so oblig- 
ing as to furnish nic with formerly,  and the stock I found I 
had of other red lead,  I have now made a fresh and very 
large quantity of air,*  which I am decomposing in a tin tube. 
The liquor is colorless,  but the quantity of dark,  colorless 
matter it brings off from the tin would astonish you.  I wish 
much to see you,  and am,  Dear Sir, 

Yours sincerely, 

J.   PRIESTLEY. 
To James Keir,   Esq.,  Smethwick. 

decomposition of dephlogisticated ami inflammable air  (tin-  former from 
manganese ami the latter from iron with water)  I get very little water, 
but a considerable quantity of aeid which appears to be the vitriolic.  1 
shall next use other kinds of pure and inflammable air"  ....  (Rutt, 
I.,  41-:;.) 

It appears that,  in December,  Priestley thought the acid obtained by 
the union of oxygen and hydrogen was the  "vitriolic"  (sulphuric),  but 
on January 8th,  lie writes to Wedgwood  :  "  Dr.  Withering finds it to be 
.  .  .  .  the nitrons."  And two days later he writes the same to Mr. 
Keir.  It is possible that the word  "vitriolic"  is a slip of the pen. 
though it is evident that Priestley depended in some measure on Dr. 
Withering for analytical determinations. 

1 See preceding letter. 

2 Here  "air"  signifies oxygen. 

LETTER TO WEDGWOOD.  91 

No.  46. 

PRIESTLKY TO WEDGWOOD. 

[Sept. ,  1788.]" 

Dear Sir,:  I have the pleasure to introduce to you the 
Chevalier Landriani,  with whose name and merits as a phil- 
osopher you cannot be unacquainted.' 

I have desired Mr.  Johnson3 to send you a copy of my 
second paper on phlogiston,  just printed for the P.  Transac- 
tions.4 The only objection that was made to my conclusions 
was that the acid I got was from the phlogisticated air,  which 
I could not exclude But tho'  I have the same result with 
common air,  in which the phlogisticated air was in much greater 
abundance,  the acid I got was much less.  I have many thiugs 
now on hand,  but nothing has occurred of much consequence. 
I have,  however,  completely ascertained that spirit of nitre 
acquires colour by heat without light,  and by simply giving 
out pure air,  without imbibing anything,  and I have made 
the experiment in all the kinds of air. 

I have lately had a robbery in my laboratory,  by which 1 
have suffered,  though to no great amount,  and the thieves 

1 This letter is endorsed  "Sept.  178N,"  in the handwriting of Chis- 
holni  [  ?  ],  but again erroneously,  tor a comparison of this and the next 
succeeding letter,  dated August 18th,  shows that the letter dated  "  Sept." 
should be July,  or,  perhaps,  early in August  ;  this is proved by the words 
"since my last by Air.  Landriani,"  in Letter No.  47. 

Dr.  Georire  'Wilson,  -who had a few of these letters under review when 
writing his Life of Cavendish,  refers to a letter dated March 18th,  1788, 
which is not found in the package as loaned to us.  Dr.  Wilson quotes one 
brief passage from the missing letter:  "These experiments I cannot help 
thinking prove the decomposition of water to be a fallacy,  ami establish 
the doctrine of phlogiston." 

While the letter of March 18th is missing,  Letter No.  46  (erroneously 
dated Sept.)  is at hand,  but was evidently not in the collection examined 
by Dr.  Wilson  ;  at least no mention is made of it.  ami the biographer 
was particular to name the sequence of the series. 

*  Marsiglio Landriani.     See Letter No.  31,  note 4. 
3 See Letter No.  37,  note 1. 

*  See Letter No.  47,  note 5. 

92 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

have gained nothing.  My chief expense lias been in guarding 
the place against a similar attack. 

( >n my journey to London,  when I meant to have paid the 
bill I owe you,  I unfortunately lost it,  together with seme 
other papers,  and though I went even-  place where I thought 
I might have left them,  I could not secure them.  I must 
therefore trouble your servants for a second copy,  and Mr. 
Johnson shall discharge it immediately. 

With my best respects to Mrs.  Wedgwood and your son, 

I am.  Dear Sir, 

Yours,  sincerely, 

J.  PRIESTLEY. 

P.S.  I hope that the next time you come through Birm- 
ingham I shall not miss the pleasure of seeing you. 

Mr.  Wedgwood,  Etruria,  near Newcastle-under-Liue,s 
Bv the Chevalier Lasdkiam. 

No.   47. 
PRIESTLEY TO WEDGWOOD. 

Birm.  18th August,  IT--. 

Dear Sir:  Such is the interest you take in philosophical 
discoveries,  and such are my numerous obligations to you with 
respect to those that 1 had in this business,  that I cannot help 
giving you an early account of everything 1 do that I think 
will give you any pleasure. 

Since my last,  by Mr.  Landriani,  I have greatly diversified 
my process for the decomposition of the different kinds of air, 
and see clearly the cause of the fallacy in Mr.  Lavoisier's 
experiments and my own,  in which we found pun watt r,  when 
1 now always find some acid.  This was the small quantity, 
and the extreme volatility of the acid,  owing to its high phlo- 
gistication.  I can procure either pun-  water or a dry and 
condensed vapour at pleasure. 

5 Endorsed bv Mr.  Chisholra. 

LETTER TO WEDGWOOD.  93 

Mr.  Berthollet,1 suspecting the purity of my precipitaU po- 
se, desired I would send him a specimen of it.  This I did, 
and he has sent me some in return,  and with this J have a 
result mueh more favorable to my conclusion than I had 
imagined it would be.  For,  heating it in inflammable air, 
I find a considerable quantity of fixed air in the vessel.2 This 
I had overlooked before,  and ascribed the acidity of the drop 
of water to nitrous acid.  I have the same result from using 
minium,  which is a substance quite a-  unexceptionable as the 
precipitate,  since it yields only pure air with heat.  This 
process is therefore similar to that in which iron is heated in 
pure air.  In this case the inflammable air from the iron 
uniting with the pure air in the vessel forms fixed air,  ami the 
same is formed by the union of the pure air from the precipi- 
tate or minium,  and the inflammable air of the vessel. 

The objection that Mr.  Cavendish and Dr.  Blagden3 made 
to my experiments was that the acid I procured was from 
phlogistieated air;  but this I have abundantly obviated, for in 
all the processes the more there is of this air  (or of any other 
kind that cannot be decomposed by it)  the less air I find. 

1 Claude Louis Berthollet,  born Nov.  ?.  174s.  died Nov.  6,  1S2.'.  the 
eminent French chemist.  With Lavoisier.  Ue Morveau and others,  the 
author of the new system of chemical nomenclature  (publ.  1787),  based 

on the antiphlogistic theory.  The exchange of specimens between 
Priestley and Berthollet shows their rivalry was friendly,  each seeking 
for the truth. 

It appears that Watt and Berthollet also exchanged views on this q 
tion.  for the Frenchman wrote to his friend on August 6 of this year an 
interesting letter in which he distinctly states that the acid formed was 
undoubtedly due to the  "azote"  of the atmosphere,  or of the manganese 
ore used in preparing the oxygen.  (Muirhead's Meeh.  Inv.  Watt.  II., 
•2-24.) 

£  How Berthollet's specimen of oxide of mercury could yield carl 
acid gas,   provided the material was really pure,    is incomprehensible. 
The way in which the result misleads Priestley is evident. 

3 Sir Charles Blagden  (b.  174s.  d.  L820),  physician in the Royal 
Navy  ;  Secretary of the Royal Society from May 5,  1 7S4.  For his part 
in the Water-Controversy,  see Muirhead's Life of James Watt,  London, 
1858,  pp.  343-355. 

94 CORRESPONDENCE   <  IF PRIESTLEY. 

<  >n Monday I set out on a visit to Mr.  Galton4 at the sea- 
side, near Exeter,  having some little occasion for it on account 
of my health.      Hoping to hear a good account of yours, 
I am,  Dear Sir,  yours sincerely, 

J.  PRIESTLEY. 

P.  S.     I desired Mr.  Johnson to send you a copy of my 
Additional Observations,5 with one for Mr.  Darwin. 

To Josiah Wedgwood,  Esq.,  Etruria,  near Newcastle-under-Line.1 

No.  48. 

PRIESTLEY TO BANKS. 

Birmingham,  Aug.  18,  17S8. 

Dear Sir:  As you were so obliging as to transmit to me 
the precipitate perse,  sent to me from Paris by Mr.  Berthollet, 
I take the liberty to inform you,  that the experiment 1 have 
made with it is decidedly in favour of my former conclusion, 
that water is not a composition of pure and inflammable air, 
but,  as far as we yet know,  a simple substance.1 

I bating it in inflammable air did not,  however,  produce 
nitrous acid,  as I had conjectured,  butted air,  in a consider- 
able cjuautity. 

The same was also the case when I used minium,  a sub- 
stance as unexceptionable as precipitate per se,  since it yields 
nothing but the purest air by heat. 

4 Samuel Galton,  see Lunar Society in Appendix.  Of him Priestley 
writes  :  "  Seldom,  it'  ever,  have I known two persons of such cultivated 
minds as Mr.  and Mrs.  Galton.  The latter had the greatest attachment 
imaginable to my wife."      (Rutt,  I.,  217.) 

5  "Additional Experiments and Observations relating to the Principle 
of Acidity,  the Decomposition of Water and Phlogiston.  With let- 
ters to him  [Priestley]  on the subject by Dr.  Withering and James 
Keir.      Head  .May 1,  1788.      (Phil.  Trans.  1 788,  313.) 

s The endorsement is in the hand of Mr.  Chisholm. 

1 This letter,  bearing the same date as the preceding to Wedgwood, 
treats of the same facts and views.  Priestley here takes pains to reaffirm 
that which we now know to be erroneous. 

LETTER Tii WEDGWOOD.  95 

I have also made a variety of other experiments which, 
in my opinion,  leave no room to doubt of the doctrine of 
phlogiston,  and also clearly prove that the acid 1 produced 
before did not come from phlogisticated air as Dr.  Blagden, 
and I believe Mr.  Cavendish,  supposed;  but from the union 
of dephlogisticated and inflammable air. 

These I shall digest into a paper,  which T shall lay before 
the Royal Society,  the affairs of which arc superintended by 
you,  Sir,  with the greatest impartiality,  ami in a manner that, 
in all respects,  does you the greatest honour. 

I am,  Dear Sir,  your obliged humble servant. 

J.  PRIESTLEY. 

Xo.  49. 

PRIESTLEY TO WEDGWOOD. 

Birmingham,  Oct.  9,  1788. 
Dear Sir  :  I should have written to you before this time 
to acknowledge the continuance of your generous benefactions' 
notwithstanding my wish to decline it but that when your son 
called upon me I had just written to you and had sealed the 
letter.  That I did not persist in declining your subscription 
was owing to my not having as yet heard anything mure from 
Mr.  Wilkinson on the subject which I mentioned to you and 
to some others withdrawing their contributions,  at the same 
time that my experiments were considerably expensive to me. 
I have also to acknowledge my receiving yesterday a quantity 
of porcelain tubes and other vessels fur the purpose of experi- 
ments.    I hope I shall make good use of them. 

Since my last I have particularly attended to all the ob- 
jections I could collect to my late experiments and have made 
many others which my friends think particularly deceive;  and 

1 Wedgwood's annual subscription to Priestley for scientific experi- 
ments was 25 guineas.     See Letter Xo.  4,  uote 1. 

96 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

I have drawn up n third paper to send to the Royal Society,2 

but as their sittings arc not yei  < unenced,  and several of my 

friends will wish to sec what I have done in a business so 
much agitated as the doctrine of phlogiston,  I shall take a 
separate copy which I shall read to you in the first place if I 
knew when it will soonest find von.  If you be in London I 
will  -end you the copy for the Society and shall bee-  the favor 
of your sending ii to Dr.  Heberden.3 

1 shall be happy to hear of the re-establishment of your 
health.  J have lately suffered a good deal from  .  .  .  .  ,  but 
at present,  1 thank God,  I am well as ever I was in my life. 
I am just returned from Dawlish near Exeter where]  spent 
a fortnight with  .Mr.  Galton and the next week I plan a visit 
to Mr.  Tayleur at Shrewsbury and after that I shall sit down 
to business for the winter.4 

With my best respects to  .Mrs.  Wedgw 1 and your sou, 

I am,  Dear Sir, 

Yours sincerely, 

J.   PRIESTLEY.* 
.Iosiaii Wedgwood,  Esq.,  Etruria,  near Neweastle-under-Line.6 

2  "  Objections to the Experiments and Observations relating to the 
Principle nf Acidity,  the Composition of Water ami Phlogiston,  consid- 
ered ;  with further Experiments anil Observations on the same subject." 
Head to the Royal  .Society,  November 27,  1788.  (Phil.  Trans. 
lxxix.,  7.) 

3 William Heberden,  M.D.,  F.R.S.,  practising physician in Cam- 
bridge and London.      Born 1710,  died 1801.      A medical author of note. 

4 Concerning this visit to  .Mr.  Tayleur,  Priestley wrote to his friend, 
Rev.  T.  Lindscy,  under date of October  -Jo,  1 788  :  "  1 have been to pay 
Mr.  Tayleur a visit at Shrewsbury ;    ....    My wife accompanied me ; 

....   we found the old gentleman quite as well as we expected 

Mr.  Tayleur's generosity knows no bounds.  He insisted on my accepting 
another hundred pounds."      (Uiitt,  11.,   12.) 

'•  Wedgwood's reply to this letter exists,  or did exist in 1855,  and we 
are able to give a few extracts from it,  taken at second-hand.  The letter 
was in the possession of  .Mr.  Francis Wedgwood,  of Barlaston;  it is in 
the handwriting of  .Mr.  Chisholm and unsigned,  yet internal evidence of 
its authenticity is abundant.      The writer refers to  "  your good letter of 

6 The endorsement is in the handwriting of Chisholm. 

LETTER TO KEIIL It? 

No.   50. 
PRIESTLEY TO KEIR. 

Faik Hill,  Thursday  [17S9]. 
I)eai!  Sir:    I have always forgot to tell you that I have 
not the account of the Due d'AyenV experiments that you 
once asked for,  my Memoirs not reaching further than 177S.3 

I send a letter I have just received from Mr.  Kirwan,  by 
which you will see that he is about to publish before he is suf- 
ficiently master of tacts. 

I am working like a horse at the new arrangement of mv 
6 vols,  of Expi liim nts.     It is a tedious business.3 

the 9th"  (No.  49),  and declines his friend's offer to send him a separate 
copy of his paper.  The following passages then oeeur  :  "  I must,  there- 
fore, once for all,  beg your acceptance of my best thanks for the early 
communications,  from time to time,  of your valuable discoveries,  which 
now become more and more interesting;  and I most sincerely wish you 
health with every convenience fur the prosecution of them.  I cannot 
forbear expressing my particular satisfaction to find that my old favorite, 
phlogiston,   is likely to be restored to its former rank in the chemical 

world Mr.  Watt's conjecture of nitrous acid being contained in 

inflammable air,  as the vitriolic is in sulphur,  pleases me much,  though I 
confess there is one circumstance which appears rather unfavorable to it; 
for I understand it to be by combustion that the acid is detached from the 
phlogiston,  and one would expect the nitrous acid to be rather decom- 
posed than developed by that process." 

Dr.  Wilson,  to whom we are indebted for the above,  remarks  :  "  This 
letter is the only one from Wedgwood to Priestley of which I have any 
knowledge;  the MS.  from which I have quoted was probably a copy of 
the original."  It is evident that Letter No.  63 was not in the collection 
examined by Ur.  Wilson. 

1 Jean Paul Francois,  due de Noailles,  and due d'Ayen  (1739-1824), 
was a colonel in the French army,  who consecrated the leisure afforded by 
peace to the pursuit of science.  His memoirs on chemistry and physics 
brought him admission to the Academy of Sciences  ;  his map of Germany 
was long the best extant.  After the events of 1791 he retired to Switzer- 
land, where he resided thirty years,  esteemed by all for his public and 
private virtues. 

2 This refers to the Memoires de l'academie des sciences,  published 
annually. 

3 Priestley's revision bears the title  :  "Experiments and Observations 
on Different Kinds of Air and other branches of Natural Philosophy eon- 

7 

98 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

What do von think of an attempt to dedicate this work to 
the Prince of Wales'.'  The King I shall never think of in 
any such light,  nor the Prince,  unless it be possible that he 
will In'  a real patron of science,  and could look upon it in 
-nine other light than that of an honour to myself. 

Yours sincerely, 

,1.  PRIESTLEY. 

No.  51. 

PRIESTLEY TO KEIR. 

Tuesday  [1790  ?]. 
Dear Sir  :  I enclose a letter from Doctor Blagden,  which 
von will be glad to see.  ]  here send a corrected copy of my 
paper,  in which I enlarge a little on the subject of phlogiston. 
I think the doubts concerning it cannot subsist a year longer. 
The question will be determined one way or the other. 
Yours sincerely, 

J.   PRIESTLEY. 

To James Keir,  Esq.,  Smethwick. 

X...  52. 

KEIR TO PRIESTLEY. 

[No date or place]  1790   [  ?]. 

Dear Sir  :  I return you Dr.  Blaerden's letter with thanks 
tin-  the pleasure of reading it.  When you write to him,  be so 
kind as to give him my thanks for his obliging communica- 
tioii respecting the freezing of the vitriolic acid.1 

nivled with the subject.  In three volumes,  being the former six 
abridged and methodized,  with many Additions."  London,  1790, 
:i vols.  svo.  His reference to this task gives us the probable date of this 
letter. 

1 Keir had published a paper on the congelation of vitriolic acid in the 
Philosophical Transactions for 1787. 

KEIK TO PKTTSTLEY. 

The more we discover of Nature,  the further we  :r 
moved from the conceit of our being able to nnderstand her 
operati'  ■:  - 

I wish M.  Berthollet and his     --  ■    rould relate their 

facts in plain prose,  that all men might understand them, 
and reserve their poetry of the new nomenclature for their 
theoretical commentaries on the facts.3 

I have wished much to call on you to hear  <<(  the p a  -- 
of your experiment-,  but have been much indisposed with the 
rheumatism.  I long to know what acid-  you get with the 
other inflammable airs.  If you get different acids from the 
inflammable air made from sulphur and water,  that made from 
marine acid and copper  ( for I would avoid iron on account of 
its plumbago and carbon),  and that made from charcoal and 
water  : — I say,  if these acids are different  (suppose,  according 
to my notions,  vitriolic,  marine,  and fixed air  .  then will you 
not be obliged to admit that there is not one inflammable but 
many inflammables,  which  < 'pinion you now think    -  dox 

as the Athanasian system.3 

However,  there are wonderful resources in the dispute about 
phlogiston,  by which either party can evade,  so that I am 
sanguine than you are in my hopes of seeing it terminated. 
One consolation remains,  that in your experiments youicannot 
fail of discovering something perhaps oi  -  great or greater 
importance for us to know. 

-  .nature not given.] 

-  This refers to the new French nomenclature propose'!  thi 
before by De Horvean,   Lavoisier,  and others,  and already in common 
use on the Continent,   but which was  ■■  poetical"'    to t! 
phlogiston. 

Nine years later Priestley discovered carbon mono.  -an- 

guished from hydrogen,  thus confirming Keir's views. 

100 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLF.Y. 

No.  53. 

PRIESTLEY TO SIR JOSEPH HANKS. 

72 St.  Pauls,  25 April,  1790. 

Dear Sir  :  As I wish always to act with openness,  and to 
avow the motives of my conduct,  I cannot forbear to express 
my great dissatisfaction at the conduct of the Royal Society 
in the rejection of Mr.  Cooper,1 recommended by myself and 
four other members,  all men of science,  and of respectable 
character.  There is not,  I believe,  another example of a cer- 
tificate so signed,  and so slighted  ;  the votes,  as I hear,  being 
twenty-four against him,  and twenty for him. 

My mortification is the greater,  because it was in conse- 
quence of my proposal that Mr.  Cooper became a candidate ; 
and as J was known to interest myself in the business,  l>v 
writing in his favour to both the secretaries,  and to my other 
friends in the Society,  I consider the proceeding as including 
in it an intended affront to myself. 

Mr.  Cooper,  who was introduced to yourself,  and whose 
merit,  independent of his certificate,  was attested by persons 
who have lung known him,  is a man equally distinguished for 
his knowledge,  ability,  and activity,  and of all the persons 
that I know,  I think him the most likely to do honour to any 
societv  < if which he shall become a member. 

I consider this business as the effort of party spirit,  political 

1 Thomas Cooper,  born October 22,  1759,  died in South Carolina, 
May lltli,  1840,  was an eminent natural philosopher,  and later a poli- 
tician. He sympathized with the liberal party in England,  and after the 
outbreak in Birmingham in 1791 emigrated to the United States.  There 
he filled successively the chair of chemistry at Dickinson College,  Carlisle; 
the chair of mineralogy and chemistry at the University of Pennsylvania  ; 
and the chair of chemistry in the College at Columbia,  S.  C.  Of the 
latter institution he became president in 1820.  In 1834 he represented 
the people in tin-  State Legislature.  Though not eminent as a man of 
science,  he was possessed of an active and comprehensive intellect.  In 
this and the following rather sharp letters.  Dr.  Priestley takes it much 
to heart that Mr.  Cooper was rejected by the Royal Society.  (Compare 
Letter No.  93.) 

LETTER TO BANKS.  101 

or religions,  highly unworthy of tin Society,  injurious to i he 
interests of philosophy,  and arising from principles which 
would equally lead to my own exclusion from the Society. 
But as I conceive it to be a matter in which you,  Sir,  had no 
concern,  it does not,  I assure yon,  diminish my respect for 
yourself,  thinking,  as I have always professed to do,  that the 
Society is honored by your being its President. 
I am,  Dear Sir, 

Yours sincerel) , 

J.   PRIESTLEY. 
To Sir Joseph Banks,  Bart.,  Soko Square. 

No.  54. 

PRIESTLEY TO SIR JOSEPH BANKS. 

72 St.  Pauls,  27 April,  1790. 

Dear Sir:  I am far from having-  anv design of bringing- 
the rejection of Mr.  Cooper by the Royal Society  "before the 
Public,"  or even of drawing you into a correspondence on the 
subject.  I do not desire any answer to this letter.  But for 
my own vindication with respect to the firmer,  I would ob- 
serve that I have known Mr.  Cooper eight or nine years  ; 
Air.  Kirwan and some others,  who sigued his certificate,  have 
known him,  I believe,  longer,  and we all consider him in the 
same light,  as also do many others in and out of the Society. 
It is acknowledged that other persons may have known him 
longer and better.  But then civility,  I think,  required that 
some of us should have been informed of their objections to 
him before the day of balloting,  that they might either have 
been removed,  or the certificate withdrawn  ;  since the rejection 
of a candidate is an unpleasant thing,  both to the person 
recommended and the persons recommending him. 

Dr.  Crawford tells me that he had some conversation witli 
yourself on the subject of Mr.  Cooper not long before the bal- 
loting, and that he entertained no suspicion of any difficulty in 
the way of his election.     Had the objections occurred on the 

102 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

very day of balloting,  the Society,  I doubt not,  would have 
deferred the ballot till proper enquiry could have been made 
concerning them. 

But none of us having had the least intimation given us of 
any objection to Mr.  ( looper,  and having the highest opinion of 
liis merit as a philosopher,  naturally  (tho'  perhaps not justly) 
concluded that the objection to him rose from some other 
source",  and therefore,  whatever it was,  it was unworthy of 
philosophers. 

You say that  "no token of Mr.  Cooper's scientific merit 
has hitherto been brought forward to the Society."  But is 
this the case of more than perhaps one in ten of the members, 
especially of gentlemen of fortune,  and liberal education,  like 
Mr.  Cooper?  lie lias,  however,  in bis volume of Essays 
given proof of the greatest mental ability,  and of his knowl- 
edge of chemistry,  and how few are there in the Society whose 
merit of any kind,  especially previous to their election,  is 
known to the Society,  or to the Public?1 
I am with greal respect,  Dear Sir, 

Yours sincerely, 

J.  PRIESTLEY. 
Sir Joseph Banks,  Bart.,  Soho Square. 

1 In consequence of the rejection of Mr.  ( looper by the Royal Society, 
Dr.  Priestley ceased sending his philosophical papers to that Institution. 
The disturbances in Birmingham intensified the growing distrust of the 
members of the Society,  and their rejection of another candidate 
"merely on account of his supposed political principles,"  as Priestley 
claims,  decided him  "not to trouble the Society"  with his scientific 
psipers.  Accordingly,  he issued his  "  Experiments on the Generation of 
Air from Water"  in pamphlet form,  preceded by a dedication to the 
Members of the Lunar Society,  and dated Clapton,  Nov.  10,  1793. 

LETTER TO WEDGWOOD.  103 

Xo.  55. 

PRIESTLEY TO WEDGWOOD. 

[Oct.,  1700.1] 

Deab Sir:  I am sorry that it was not in my power,  during 
mv late excursion,  to execute your commission respecting your 
relative at Scarborough.  Mr.  Russel2 had left that place and 
the coasl before 1 reached Leeds,  so that I did not proceed 
any farther as I intended to have done when I had the 
pleasure of seeing you at my house. 

My chymical persuits have been directed to the great ques- 
tion now depending on the decomposition of water,  &c.  But 
still,  whether I decompose the two kinds of air by cue explo- 
sion in a copper tube,  or by a slow burning as the manner of 
the French,  I never fail to produce acid,  though they now say 
they find none at all,  ami even have made ounces of water 
perfectly pure.  The air I use is not so pure as theirs,  but the 
purer my air is,  the more acid I always get.3 

Please to tell your son4 that tho'  my journey and other 
avocations have made me seem to forget the obliging request 
lie made me respecting;  the catalogue of books,  he shall soon 
hear from me on the subject. 

In the meantime,  with my best wishes to him,  and all your 
family,  I am,  Dear Sir, 

Yours sincerely, 

.1.  PRIESTLEY.5 
Josiah Wedgwood,  Etruria,  Newcastle-under-Line,  Staffordshire. 

1 This date was added by Mr.  Chisholm,  Wedgwood's private secretary. 

2 See Letter No.  7,  note  -t. 

3 Priestley reiterates the erroneous doctrine,  although Cavendish had 
shown in 17S4 that the conditions for the production of nitric acid were 
excess of oxygen,  a moderate proportion of hydrogen and a very  -mall 
one of nitrogen. 

4 Josiah Wedgwood hail three sons  :  John,  born 17G6,  Josiah,  b.  1769, 
Thomas,  b.  1771.  It does not appear to whirl,  of the<e Priestley refers, 
but he corresponded at a later date with Thomas.  (See Letters Nos.  59, 
G6,  73,   75,  76.) 

5 Between the dates of Letters X..-.  55 and  :>:  Priestley published  : 
•■  F.xperiments on the Phlogistication of Spirits of Nitre."      Read to the 

L04 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

No.  56. 

PRIESTLEY TO KEIR. 

Faik Hill,  Friday  [1791  ?]• 

Dear Sir:    I wish very much to see you,  having  <rot  :i 

quantity of green liquor,  by air from the lead ore,  which I 

wish you to examine with me.     I have also other things to 

show and to tell you,  especially what I think a coup de graa 

to the new doctrines. 

Yours sincerely, 

J.  PRIESTLEY. 
James Keik,  Esq.,  Smethwick Grove. 

No.  57. 

PRIESTLEY TO WEDGWOOD. 

Birm.,  Feby.  16,  1791. ' 
Dear Sir  :   I informed your son that I was planning some 
experiments,  and shall soon acquaint you with the result of 
them.      I have completed these,  and they have abundantly 
answered my expectations. 

It was objected,  tho'  on insufficient grounds,  to my former 
experiments,  that the acid I produced came from phlogisticated 

Royal Society,  March 2G,  1789.  Also:  "Experiments on the Trans- 
mission of the Vapour of Acids through an hot earthen tube,  and further 
Observations relating to Phlogiston."  Read July 2,  1789.  Also:  "Ob- 
servations on Respiration."  Read Feb.  25,  1790.  And Wedgwood 
published:  "On the Analysis of a Mineral Substance from New South 
Wales."      Read April 15,   1790. 

1 On the same day that this letter was written Priestley wrote to his 
friend Dr.  Price  :  '•  I shall soon send to the Royal Society,  through your 
hands,  or those of Dr.  Heberden,  a paper of new experiments in which 
I produce acid by the explosion of dephlogisticated air,  without any 
mixture of phlogisticated air whatever."  (Rutt,  II.,  103.)  And on the 
13th of February he writes to Rev.  T.  Lindsey  :  "  I have just made an 
experiment of great consequence,  ....  it proves that water and the 
nitrous acid consist of the same elements.  I shall lay it before,  our Lunar 
Society on Monday."     (Rutt,  II.,  102.) 

LETTER TO WEDGWOOD.  105 

air that was necessarily mixed with the dephlogisticated that 
I made use of.  I5nt I now,  with great certainty,  make air so 
pure,  that I am confident it contains no mixed phlogisticated 
air whatever,  and yet the explosion  < >t"  t his air with a due pro- 
portion of inflammable air,  produces more aeid than when the 
air I used was less pure.  I also use no air pump,  tilling my 
copper vessel with water,  and displacing it by the mixture of 
air to be exploded. 

Admitting therefore,  what I am not disposed In dispute, 
that the slow combustion of the two kinds  (if air by the 
French philosophers2 produces nothing but the purest water,  it 
must be admitted that a different mode of combining the same 
elements,  in my process,  makes nitrous acid.  A comparison 
of the two results will give rise to much important speculation. 

I procure the pure air by dissolving mercury in nitrous 
acid,  and heating the yellow mass formed by it,  without even 
suffering the red precipitate to come in contact with the com- 
mon atmosphere,  from which I suppose it attracts phlogiston.3 
Whereas the French experiment makes nothing against the 
doctrine of phlogiston,  as it only proves that it enters into the 
composition of water. 

With my best respects to your son and all your family,  I 
am,  Dear Sir, 

Yours sincerely, 

J.  PRIESTLEY. 

P.  S.  You will be glad to be informed that my eldest son 
has found a promising situation in Manchester.4 

Josiah Wedgwood,  Esq.,  Hetruria,  near Newcastle-under-Line.5 

2 Memoire sur la combustion  'hi gaz hydrogfene dans des vaissaux i-los, 
par Fourcroy,  Vauquelin el Seguin.  Lue  'Jl Mai,  1790;  Ann.  de chim. 
viii.  230,  and ix.  30.  These chemists announced that when tin'  com- 
bustion of hydrogen proceeded slowly no nitrous acid was formed. 

3 If the  "yellow mass"  obtained by dissolving mercury in nitric aeid 
retained any basic nitrate,  or any of the aeiil itself,  the existence  '>t 
nitrogen in the  "pure air"  (oxygen)  is easily explained. 

4 Joseph,  who afterwards emigrated with his brother to Pennsylvania. 
6 The endorsement is in the handwriting of Air.  Chisholm, 

106 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

No.  58. 
PRIESTLEY TO WEDGWOOD. 

Bikh.,  Feb.  26,  1791. 

Dear Sir:  Knowing the interest you take in matters of 
philosophy,  I thought it would not be displeasing to you to 
know the late results of ray late experiments,  especially what 
is really curious.  I can at pleasure make either nitrons acid, 
or pure water,  with the same materials,  viz.,  dephlogistieated 
air and inflammable air.  If there be a surplus of the dd air, 
the result is always acid,  if of the inflammable air,  it is mere 
water.  Extraordinary as this is,  it is uniform,  so that both 
Mr.  Lavoisier1 and myself have been right.  The doctrine of 
'phlogiston,  however,  stands firm  ;  as it only appears that it is 
one element in the composition of water. 

I shall send a paper on this subject to the Royal Society in 
the beginning of next week.2 It will decide this long contest. 

With my best respects to Mrs.  Wedgwood,  and your sons, 
I am,  Dear Sir, 

Yours sincerely, 

J.  PRIESTLEY. 

1*.  S.  My eldest son is at length fixed at Manchester,  and 
I hope to advantage. 

Have you seen Mr.  Paine's answer3 to Mr.  Burke'.'*     It is 

1 See Letter No.  .",  note 4. 

2  "Farther Experiments relating to the Decomposition of dephlogisti- 
eated and inflammable Air."  Read April 7.  1791.  In this Priestley 
concludes that Cavendish is wrong in supposing the nitrons  (nitric)  acid 
comes from the oxygen anil nitrogen,  ami asserts it comes from the oxygen 
and hydrogen,  "which makes it doubtful if these two kinds of air form 
pure water."  (Phil.  Trans.  1791.)  This paper was sent to the Rev. 
Th.  Lindsey on February 28th,  with a request to deliver it to Dr.  Heber- 
den.      (Putt,  II.,  103.) 

3 This refers to Thomas Paine's Essay on the  "  Rights of Man,"  pub- 
lished in London in 1791,  in reply to Burke's  "  Reflexions on the French 
Revolution." 

4 Edmund Burke,  1730—1797,  the English orator,  statesman and phil- 
anthropist. His  "  Reflexions on the French Revolution"  was published 
in November,  I 790.  Priestley himself issued a pamphlet in reply,  iind in 
consequence was attacked by Burke in a speech in the House of Commons. 

LETTER TO WEDGWOOD.  107 

most excellent,  and the boldest publication that I have ever 
seen. 

Josiah Wedgwood,  Etruria,  near Newcastle-under-Line. 

No.  59. 

PRIESTLEY TO THOMAS WEDGWOOD.1 

Birm.,  .Tune 20,  1701. 

Dear Sir  :  I like very much the plan of experiments that 
vim mention,  as they will very probably throw some new light 
on a very important subject,  about which we as yet know very 
little.  Indeed Light and Heat are little known,  and yet I 
I think they arc as open to investigation as air.  The experi- 
ments will no doubt be labourious,  but nothing of value is to 
be had without labour,2 and in that long attention to our sub- 
ject which they oblige as to new views will often arise,  relating 
not only to that but to other tilings.  I shall be very glad to 
hear of the progress you make. 

You are very kind in inquiring after the subscription to 
the expense of my experiments.  It is,  of course,  variable, 
both on account of deaths and caprice,  but I am tar from 
having reason to complain,  and your father's uncommon  <rene- 
rosity makes it impossible tor me to receive anything more 
from the same family.3 

I should on several a tints be very happy In sec you,  and 

I hope if you can continue to come this way,  you will be so 
good as to spend some time with me. 

I am,  Dear Sir,  yours sincerely, 

J.   PRIESTLEY. 
To Mr.  Thomas Wedgwood,  Etruria,  near Newcastle-under-Line,  Stafford- 
shire. 

1 This letter to  .TosiaVs son Thomas  (born 1771).  is evidently in 
reply to one communicating a plan of experiments on light.  They re- 
sulted in two papers published by Wedgwood in the following year. 

2 Priestley's motto was,   "  Ars longa,  vita brevis." 

3 Josiah Wedgwood gave 25 guineas annually to aid Priestlej in carry- 
ing on his investigations.     (See Letter No.  4,  note 1.) 

108 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

No.  60. 

TRIESTLEY TO KEIR. 

London,  July 22d,  1791.' 

Dear Sir  :  1 am very happy to see a copy of your letter 
to the printer of the Birmingham  (  hronicle,2 and in return 
enclose eopies of my Address to the Tnhabitards of Birming- 
ham,3 and of Mr.  Russell's Account of the Proceedings on July 
\Ath.A Both these have been in the London papers,  and I have 
just sent yours to the printer of the Morning Chronicle. 

I am happy to hear that all is quiet with you now,  but 
when it will be proper for me to come to you I cannot tell. 
I fear not before the next Lunar Society.  Whether I shall 
ever have it in my power to collect another apparatus for ex- 
periments is quite uncertain,  as indeed is,  in a great measure, 
my settling again at Birmingham,  though there is no place in 
the world that I should prefer to it. 

The extra copies of my last paper5 for the Philosophical 
Transactions are printed,  and I shall soon send some to Mr. 
Galton to be presented to each of the members of the Lunar 
Society. 

1 On the 14tli July,  1791,  a storm of popular rage against the party of 
Liberals who supported political and religious freedom broke with unex- 
pected violence,  and Priestley was one of the early victims of the 
"  dreadful riots in Birmingham."  We shall not here undertake to repeat 
the familiar story of the disgraceful and disastrous affair,  but merely state 
that an enraged mob destroyed Priestley's house and contents,  driving him 
from the town,  which they sacked,  almost unrestrained,  for four  .lavs,  in- 
flicting damages to the extent of nearly one hundred thousand pounds. 
An interesting account by an eye-witness will be found in  "The Life of 
William Hutton by Llewellynn Jewitt,"  London,  n.  tl.,  pp.  215-249. 
(See also Rutt's Life,  II. ,  115 cl so/.) 

2 For Keir's letter see Appendix V.,  to I)r.  Priestley's  "Appeal to 
the Public,"  Birmingham,  1791. 

3 Priestley's Address was dated London,  July 19th,  1791,  and will be 
found in:  Authentic Account of the Dreadful Riots in Birmingham, 
London,  1791.  Republished with  .s views of the ruined houses,  Birming- 
ham, 1863.     Long Svo. 

1 Mr.  Russell's letter will be found in the work last cited. 
6 See Letter No.  58,  note 2. 

LETTER TO WEDGWOOD.  L09 

I beg my compliments to them,  and as long as I live 1 
shall,  with much satisfaction,  think of our many happy meet- 
ings. 

I am,  in haste,  Dear Sir,  yours sincerely, 

J.  PRIESTLEY. 

To James Keik,  Esq. 

Xo.  61. 

PRIESTLEY TO WEDGWOOD. 

London-,  July 26,  1791. 

DeAJR Sir  :  With this you will receive two copies of my 
Paper for the Philosophical Transactions, }  one for yourself and 
the other for Mr.  Moseley.3 I fear I shall not soon be able to 
furnish materials for another.  Indeed,  what I shall do,  or 
where I shall settle,  is uncertain.  I shall,  however,  continue 
at Birmingham if possible,  and resume all my persuits,  in 
which case I must thank you for a fresh stock of retorts,  tubes, 
&c.  &c.  &c.  This invasion of the Goths and Vandals I little 
foresaw,  and hope it will never be repeated,  as I fancy the 
experiment will not be found to answer. 

I also enclose a few copies of Mr.  Keii-'s letter3 and mine on 

the subject,  and am,  with my best respects to all your family, 

Dear Sir, 

Yours sincerely, 

J.  PRIESTLEY. 

Xo.  62. 

PRIESTLEY TO KEIR. 

London,  29th July,  1791. 
Dear Sir:    I thank you for your kind letter-.      One 
Quaker at least,  I find,  did attend the Revolution dinner in 

1 See Letter No.  58,  note 2. 

2 One of Priestley's benefactors.     Cf.  Letter No.  4.  note 1 . 

3 See Letter No.  60,  note 2. 

HO CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

London.1 One of the company told me there were more. 
This,  however,  I did not hear till I had got the correction you 
sent inserted in the Horning Chronicle. 

1 never thought of returning to Birmingham till my friends 
there should think it safe,  and on their accounts advisable; 
and this,  I now begin to fear,  will not be so soon as you inti- 
mate. However,  I am ready to attend the first summons,  and 
earnestly wish it may be before the next Lunar Society.  But 
your meeting must not depend upon this event. 

With this I send each of yon a copy of my late,  and I fear 
last paper for the Philosophical Transactions.8 I shall always 
recollect,  with peculiar satisfaction and regret,  our many cheer- 
ful and improving meetings;  and if not a constant,  shall 
indulge the hope of being an occasional attendant. 

Yon were certainly a better judge than I was of the spirit of 
flir time*.  But even yon could not have expected such brutal 
excesses as have taken place;  and yet I am willing to hope 
much from time,  from your seasonable letter,  and the repre- 
sentations of the more calm and reasonable members of the 
Church of England,  if not from the interposition of govern- 
ment and tin'  execution of the laws,  in which I wish for 
moderation. 

I lately dined with Mr.  Sheridan,3 who said I should meet 
Mr.  Fox.4 He,  however,  was prevented from attending,  but 
desired Mr.  Sheridan to say that he wished to take the matter 
up in whatever manner we should think proper,  by motion in 
the House on the subject.     They conceive that the encourage- 

1 The Birmingham rioters began by attacking a party of eighty gentle- 
men assembled tor dinner at tin-  Royal Until in Birmingham,  in com- 
memoration of the tall of the Bastile.  Captain Keir was chairman on 
that occasion,  Imt Priestley himself did not attend.  It appears that 
another dinner was held the same day in London. 

-'   See Letter No.  58,    note  ■_>. 

3 The celebrated Irish orator and dramatist  (1751-1816)  at this time 
represented Stafford in Parliament. 

4 Charles James Fox,  the distinguished English orator ami statesman, 
approved the French Revolution,  at least in its first stages.  He and 
Sheridan sympathized with Priestley in his losses,  and supported him in 
his efforts to obtain compensation. 

'/t •*// n A  ■  '  f/ff.fs**. 

WEDGWOOD TO PRIESTLEY.  Ill 

ment given to this High Church spirit by the Court arises 
from their willingness to crush Mr.  Fox,  who has taken our 
part,  and that they hoped by these measures to intimidate us into 
silence.  This I can hardly think to he the case,  and 1 am tin- 
willing to connect our cause with that of any political party; 
since upon the face of it,  as y..u have clearly shown,  it is 
wholly of a religious nature.  However,  I said there would 
be time enough to take our measures before the next meeting 
of Parliament. 

I am,  with my best respects to Mrs.  Keir,  Dear Sir, 

Yours sincerely, 

J.  PRIESTLEY. 
To James Keik,  Esi).,  West Bromwich. 

No.  63. 

WEDGWOOD TO PRIESTLEY. 

Pr.  Sk.  :'  I do not know where this will find you,  but can 
no longer forbear to ask you how you doAafter the severe 

1 This letter is written on the back of the blank page of an old and 
torn letter addressed to Miss Wedgwood,  Weymouth,  ami bearing also the 
words,  "July twenty-tilth."  and  "  W.  dive."     It has a postmark,  partly 

torn,  with the distinctly legible date Jy 27 91.     The letter sheet has 1. n 

twice folded for filing and endorsed,  first:  "Miss Wedgwood,  Wey- 
mouth." and secondly:    "Dr.  Priestley,  30th July,  Kill." 

The letter is obviously the first rough draft of Wedgwood's kind com- 
munication to Priestley immediately after hearing the news of the terrible 
riots in Birmingham.  It bears the marks of much study in the choice of 
words,  aboundim:  in erasures,  interlineations,  substitutions,  ami additions, 
which we have attempted faithfully to show in our copy.  Carets indi- 
cate the interlineations and words erased are denoted by being printed in 
smaller type. 

The lower edge of the sheet on which this rough draft is written is torn 
in a verv irregular way,  but this was done prior to the writing,  as i-  seen 
by the way in which the author wrote close to the crooked margin. 

The place of writing is not given,  but there is evidence that it was 
Weymouth  ;  the letter of which the sheet is a part had been received in 
Weymouth July 27th.  three days before Josiah Wedgwood used it  ;  and 
the reply of Priestley  (Letter No.  6-t)  was addressed to Weymouth. 

112 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

trials you have lately been expos'd to,Aand to condole with 
vou on the irreparable loss you have soiateiy sustained from the 
brutality or rather,  let us hope the fcemporaryAinsanity of your 
late aeighbours.  You will have occasion for all your philoso- 
phy, and for all your xity*  too to bear upAsupportAyour mind 
under theAhighly aggravated injuries you have received.  If 
it theyAhad arisen merely from the ungovern'd madness of a 
mol>,  from the lowest order of our species,  one would naveA 
thenAlamented itsAall itsAeffects as one wou'dAlikeAthose of a storm 
or hurricane,  but wnenAifAthere is reason to believe that bhe 
rabble were acted upon and emPioyedAencouraged to such pro- 
oeedingsAby those who should be their superiors,  one cannot 

help lamenting as well as despising theAbut perceive the too evideiltA 

spiritAof the times or of the place at leastAby which you and 
so many of yourA worthy Aneighbours have suffered. 

If vou can think of anything in which 1 can serve or com- 
fort vou,  vou will oblige me in pointing out the way in which 
I can do it,  &  1 hope you will believe me to be what I really 
am most desirous of most desirous of rendering you any aid,  assist- 
ance or comfort in my power.  Believe this of me,  act accord- 
ingly &  I shall esteem it as one of the strongest instances of 
your friendship.  [In the original,  this entire paragraph is 
erased by a vertical pen-stroke,  and is followed by this sub- 
stitute :— ] 

Can I be of any use or service to you upon the present 
occasion?  Assure yourself,  my good friend,  that I most earn- 
estly wish to do so it.  Believe this of me — act accordingly,  in- 
struct me in the means of doing it  &  I shall esteem it as one 
of the strongest instances of your friendship.  I shall be 
thankful to have a line from you whilst we continue here, 
which will probably be ten days or a fortnight longer,  to tell 
me how you,  Mrs.  Priestley and any of your suffering friends 
who may be near you do.  After the ingratitude as well as 
madness which the workmen of Birmm,  for I wish to believe 

*  Christianity. 

LETTER TO WEDGWOOD.  Il-'S 

that it readies no higher,  have shown toAMr.  Taylor,2 Athe son 
of him who raised,  ]  may say created,  the manufactures by 
which they and their familys are have so long been  &  arc  : —  till 
support'd,  one cannot wonder at any other enormities they may 
commit.  Pray God preserve you in safety — let me hear from 
you soon,  &  believe me most sincerely iV:  affectionately yours, 

JOS. 

P.  S. — I read your letter in one of the papers  «nii to the 
people of Birmm,  and was highly pleas'd with it. 

No.  64. 
PRIESTLEY TO WEDGWOOD. 

[No place or date.]  [July,  1791. ]l 
Dear Sir.  :  Your very kind and sympathizing letter was 
very acceptable to me.  The shock was no doubt verv great, 
lmt I thank God I have been able to bear it without any loss 
of health,  or,  indeed,  of spirits.  I begin to suffer most from 
want of employment and absence from my family,  which in- 
deed is irksome to me.  My wife behaved with the greatest 
heroism at the time,  but continuing in the neighborhood,  and 
hearing continually of the bad spirit that prevails in the place, 
I perceived that her mind began to be affected by it.  She 
cannot remove,  tor,  as my daughter expects to be brought to 
bed in about a month,  and she cannot bear that her mother 
should be absent at the time.  This circumstance adds much 
to my difficulty.  Could we go together to some distant place 
for a month,  we should be much more comfortable.  (  hie 
good thing has already come out of this evil,  I have a kind 
letter from Mr.  John Wilkinson inviting us to any house of 

2 Moseley Hall,  the property of John Taylor.  Esq.,  was burned by the 
rioters,  causing him a less of  £22,600.    (Jewitt's Life of llutton,  p.  '_'.'..">.) 

1 This reply to Wedgwood's letter has been furnished the editor by 
Dr.  Win.  O.   Priestley,    of London.     The original is preserved in the 
Cambridge Free Library,  to whom it was given by Swann Hurrell,  Esq., 
of the same place. 
8 

114 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

liis,  and bidding me not to regard any losses that money can 

repair.2 I wmte to you on my arrival here,  with two copies 

of a paper of mine that is lately printed for the Philosophical 

Transactions,  one for yourself and the other for Mr.  Moseley.3 

I fear it will be long before I produce another.    With my best 

respects to Mrs.  Wedgwood, 

I am,  dear sir,  yours sincerely, 

J.   PRIESTLEY. 
.Ins i a ii WEDGWooD,Weymouth. 

[\\  ritten from the house of his son-in-law,   Mr.  William 
Finch,4 Heath Forge,  Birmingham.] 

No.  65. 
PRIESTLEY TO WEDGWOOD. 

Lohdok,  Sept.  7,  17P1. 
Dear Sir:  I am much obliged,  and honored,  by the at- 
tention that has been paid to me both at home and abroad.1 
My answer to the Address of the Academy of Sciences was 
first published in a very awkward garb from a double trans- 
lation, but yesterday a friend of mine got it inserted as 1 wrote 
it in the Morning Chronicle.2 

2 Besides giving Priestley shelter,  Mr.  Wilkinson without solicitation 
sent him  !i\c hundred pounds immediately after the disastrous riots,  and 
afterwards transferred to him ten thousand pounds which were in French 
funds;  the latter being,  however,  non-productive at that period,  Mr. 
Wilkinson further cave his brother-in-law an annuity of two hundred 
pounds.      (Priestley's Memoirs,  P.utt,  II..  121.) 

3 Sec Letter No.   t.  note 1 . 

4 Mrs.  William Finch,  nri  .Sarah Priestley,  was the Doctor's only 
daughter. 

1 Dr.  Priestley received immediately after the riots a large number of 
addresses and testimonials of esteem from his theological and philosophi- 
cal admirers.      In his Me irs    (London,    1806,   vol.   ii.,  9),    a list of 

twenty-six such addresses is given;  some of these with Priestley's replies 
arc printed in Putt's Life,  vol.  ii. 

2 The address of the French Academy of Sciences was dated July 30th, 
1791,  and was transmitted by Condorcet.  This address and Priestley's 
reply are printed in Putt,  II.,  127. 

LETTER TO WEDGWOOD.  1 1 5 

I am glad to hear of the intended experiment at Paris,  but 
am not able to give them any particular assistance,  from any 
experience that I have had of the kind.  I know nothing so 
likely to stand the action of their fire as magnesia.  Every- 
thing else I think has been melted.  I forget the greatest 
degree of heat that I ever produced  ;  but it did nut much ex- 
ceed what you have mentioned,  except when the clay ami case 
were so melted,  that I could not take any measure. 

Your thermometer can no more give the degree of real heat 
than any other,  if by heat be meant the fluid that is supposed to 
be the cause of heat.  But all causes are ascertained by their 
effects.  On this subject I had intended to make some experi- 
ments, though with no great expectation of discovering any- 
thing, and had provided myself with Dr.  Crawford's appa- 
ratus3 for the purpose,  part of which you were so obliging as 
to supply me with,  (viz.,  4 vessels to heat acids in)  when my 
laboratory was destroyed. 

As what yon generously gave to me,  I am not obliged to 
give to the country,  I shall lie glad to know what I am to 
charge for the several articles you have furnished me witli  ; 
viz. ,  retorts,  tubes,  mortars,  evaporating vessels,  levigators,  Dr. 
( 'rawforcPs vessels,  and vessels 12 inches deep,  witli ground 
stoppers for a sand heat. 

No attempt,  I believe has been made to melt iron without 
the contact of air or steam.  It is done with steel,  but the 
fusion of iron converts it into finery cinder. 

About the middle of next week 1 shall probably have the 
pleasure of calling on you at Etruria,  if you will be at home, 
on my way to Castlehead,  when I shall have much to say to 
you.      My wife and son  \  hope will be with me. 

"\\~th my best respects to Mrs.  Wedgwood,  and your family, 

I am,  Dear Sir, 

Yours sincerely, 

.1.  l'UIESTLEY. 

Josiah Wedgwood,  Esq.,  Etruria,  near Newcastle- tinder-Line, 

Staffordshire. 

3 Dr.  Crawford,  see Letter No.  27,  note 2. 

116 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

No.  66. 

PRIESTLEY TO THOMAS WEDGWOOD. 

London,  Oct.  18th,  1791. 

Peak Sik  :  I do not know that any experiments have been 
made on the curious and important subjects that you mention, 
and I have little  <1< >ul>t but your labours in so new a field will 
be crowned with considerable success.  All that is known of 
the kind is the great aptness of the more frangible rays to be 
reflected in Mich media as water,  and the atmosphere. 

Please to give my compliments to your father and brother, 
and tell them that I did not go the journey 1 proposed to do 
when I wrote before,  or I certainly should have called upon 
you.  I have taken a house at Hackney,1 and am building a 
laboratory,  and as sunn as convenient shall be obliged to your 
father it'  he will supply me,  as usual,  with such retorts as you 
make,  viz.,  earthen tubes closed at the end and open,  and same 
with two necks.  Small retorts,  eraporating-dishes,  inn, -furs, 
and levigators.  Perhaps your servants here can tell me the 
price at which I must estimate those that were destroyed l>y 
tlie riot.  I must soon give in an account of my losses,  and I 
tear that some person on your part must attend at Warwick 
to attest the value.  Mr.  Nairne,2 Mr.  Parker,3 and others have 
promised to attend.  But I have prepared a conference between 
my appraiser,  and those for the County in London,  which,  if 
they be disposed to do justice,  will save much trouble and 
expense.4 

1 Formerly the favorite surburban residence of London citizens  ;  now 
in the heart of the East End of the town. 

2 Mr.  Nairne,  a philosophical instrument-maker;  be constructed the 
largest electrical machines of the period on plans formed by Dr.  Priestley. 
(Rutt,  I.,  79.) 

3 See Litter No.  12,  note 3. 

4 Dr.  Priestley's claim for damages amounted to  £3628 8s.  9d.,  and of 
this iinU  £2502 18s.  were finally allowed by the court.  Hutton says 
Priestley's real loss was upward of  £4500.  (.lewitt's Life of Hutton, 
p.  255.)      In the town of Birmingham property to the value of'  £50,000 

LETTEB TO WEDGWOOD.  117 

Whether T shall be invited to succeed Dr.  Price,5 is uncer- 
tain.6 Many apprehend public disturbance in consequent 
my coming.  I could not get a house lot in my own Dame. 
A friend took it in his.  I have,  however,  very handsome 
proposals from France,  particularly the offer of a house com- 
pletely furnished two miles from Paris,  and another polite 
invitation from Toulouse,  to take up my residence in the 
South of France in  "a monastery which reason has recover I 
from superstition."7 

I am,  Dear Sir,  with my respects to all the family, 

Yours sincerely, 

J.   PRIESTLEY. 

P.  S.     I shall leave for your father a new publication of 
mine,  but only on account of the Preface? 

Mk.  Thomas Wedgwood,  Etruria,  near Newcastle-under-Line, 

Staffordshire. 

was destroyed,  of which sum   £26,961 2s.  3d.  was finally paid by a rate 
on the  "Hundred,"   in which Birmingham is inclm Sam:   Tim- 

mins,  Trans.  Midi.  Inst.  1875.) 

5 Richard Price.   D.D.,  F.R.S.,  an eminent dissenting minister and 
speculative philosopher,    bom 172:!.    died 1791.      He was an intimate 
friend and correspondent of Priestley,  as well as of Franklin, 
deeply interested in natural philosophy.      Priestley preached his funeral 
sermon at the Gravel-pit Meeting House,  Hackney,  on  .May 1,  1791. 

6 Priestley was invited to succeed Dr.  Price in a letter from a Com- 
mittee of the congregation,  dated Nov.  7,  1791.  Of his new situation 
he wrote  :  "  On the whole I spent my time even more happily than ever 
I had done before,  having every advantage for my philosophical and 
theological studies,  in some respects superior to what I enjoyed at Bir- 
mingham." (Putt.  II.,  118.)  Aided by friends,  his apparatus was in a 
great measure replaced,  and some months later lie resumed hi-  experi- 
ments. 

7 See Letter Xo.  75.  note 1. 

8 This refers to one of the chemist's theological writings which flowed 
from his pen as rapidly as if he gave all his time to the study of divinity. 
Since he issued six theological essays and two political ones in 1791,  we 
are uncertain to which he here allude?. 

118 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

No.  67. 
PRIESTLEY TO DR.  WITHERING. 

I.oMic.n,   Nov.    5,   1791. 

Dear Sir:  L thought mvself much obliged to you for 
your former letter,  and should have written to you when I 
was a little more at leisure,  and could have given you a better 
account than I am yet able to do of my probable future 
destination. 

Yiuir generous contribution towards the re-establishment of 
my philosophical apparatus cannot but give me satisfaction, 
tho'  I am sorry to be so burdensome to my friends,  especially 
my fellow-sufferers,  among whom you are ranked.  J Jut what 
the country will do towards indemnifying us appears very 
distant and uncertain,  and my claims will be liable to the 
greatest uncertainty,  as the proof that may be required of my 
losses cannot be given. 

I am happy to find that your alarms and sufferings have no 
more affected your spirit and health than my own did mine, 
and that we may so soon expect your third volume. 

It will be a considerable time,  with every assistance that 
money can afford,  before I can be at work again,  and hardly 
ever to so much advantage as at Birmingham.  Such assist- 
ance from philosophical friends I should in vain look for here, 
and as long as I live I shall look back with pleasure and 
regret to our Lunar meetings,  which I always enjoyed so much 
and from which I derived so much solid advantage.  If I 
could find the same intelligence in any club of Philosophers 
lure,  I could not find the same frankness,  which is the charm 
of all society. 

I have nearly printed An Appeal to the Public,1 on the sub- 
ject of the late riot,  and shall direct the printer to deliver you 
a copy. 

1 am sensible that it will more exasperate my enemies,  but 

1  "An Appeal to the Public on the subject of the Riots in Birming- 
ham," [etc.]  Birmingham,  17!U.  181 pp.  8vo.  Another edition, 
London,  1792.  Cf.  Letter to Captain Keir,  Letter No.  72. 

LETTER TO WEDGWOOD.  1 1 'J 

it is addressed to our common judges,  and may conciliate them, 
at Least in a course of time. 

I have lately written to Mr.  Watt,  and desired him,  or the 
Lunar Society2 as a body,  to make a proposal to those who acl 
for the country.  I hope you will see the propriety of it,  and 
contribute to its effect. 

Still hoping t<>  have the satisfaction of seeing you,  and the 
res!  of my friends of the Lunar Society,  some time hence,  and 
always to hear of your proceedings,  I am,  Dear Sir. 

Yours sincerely, 

J.   PRIESTLEY. 

P.  S.  Mrs.  Priestley join-  me in best respects to yourself 
and Mrs.  Withering. 

Dr.  Withering,  Birmingham. 

No.  68. 

PRIESTLEY TO WEDGWOOD. 

Clapton,  November 2'2,  1791. 

Dear Sir  :  I have desired the printer to send you a copy 
of my AppeaP on the subject of the riots,  in order to have 

2 See the Lunar Society in Appendix to this volume. 

1 See Letter No.  (J7,  note 1.  Dr.  Priestle)  had sent part of bis 
"  Appeal"  in sheets to his intimate friends in Birmingham,  among 
others.  Mr.  Galton,  Dr.  Withering,  and Mr.  Russel.  These conferred 
with each other and with Mr.  Keir and resulted in a communication to 
Priestley recommending suspension of its publication and alteration of 
some of the passages.  Capt.  Keir in particular wrote to Priestle)  on 
November 18th,  1791,  firmly endeavoring to dissuade him from publish- 
ing the  "Appeal"  in its proposed form,  stating that it would  "irritate 
his professed enemies,  and furnish them with a new source of abuse  ;" 
he also feared that  "government would become more remiss in prose- 
cuting the magistrates and in protecting the dissenters in future if they 
should meet with any passage that should i_rivc them offence."  These 
remonstrances of his friends had the effect of causing Priestle)  to cancel 
eleven leaves of his  "  Appeal." 

120 CORRESPONDENCE OP PRIESTLEY. 

your opinion and advice with respect to publishing of it. 
Several of my friends in Birmingham,  viz.,  Dr.  Withering, 
Mr.  Keir and Mr.  Galton think that it had better be sup- 
pressed, or published with many alterations by way of soften- 
ing. ( )thers and especially my friend-  here,  are for its speedy 
publication,  or about the time of the meeting of parliament. 
Tn this state of suspense I beg your perusal of it and your free 
opinion.  I think that if I write at all it should not be with 
li ss spirit than I have usually shown and that there is nothing 
more violent or offensive in this than in several of my pre- 
ceding publications.  I>ut as others are interested in the event 
of this publication I am willing to be advised by them. 
W hen yon have read the work please to return to me at Mr. 
Johnson's No.  72 St,  Paul's. 

( )n Sunday sen'  night 1 began to preach at Hackney.  I 
have begnn to build,  and am preparing to furnish,  another 
laboratory,  and the house I have,  tho on other accounts too 
expensive for me,  is very convenient for my purpose. 

With my best respects to all the family I am,  Hear Sir, 

Yours sincerely, 

J.  PRIESTLEY. 

Josiab Wedgwood,  Esq.,  Etruria,  near Newcastle-under-Line, 

Staffordshire. 

No.  G9. 

PRIESTLEY TO DR.  WITHERING. 

Clapton,  Dec.  2,  1791. 

Dear Sir:  I feel myself much obliged by the interest von 
kindly take in my affairs,  and the advice which you anil my 
friends have given me with respect to my  .  ly//«-'/. 

Yon were not,  however,  aware that I stood pledged to pub- 
lish something under that title in the Preface to my letter to 
the Swedenborgians,  so that the only question is what I should 
publish,  and as the present Appeal,  with your corrections,  at 
one time gave you sufficient satisfaction,  1 am willing to think 

LETTER TO CROUCH.  121 

that when thus corrected it may do.     Mr.  Russell has promised 
to read nver the copy you corrected,  which I much wish to  ->  e. 

This publication of mine will,  by n<>  means,  interfere either 
with yours,  which will certainly be highly useful as Mr. 
Keir's.  ami you may take or abridge as much of my Narrative 
as you think proper,  and on any idea that you like.  On such 
an occasion as this,  it will be expected that all parties will 
speak,  and it would he extraordinary,  indeed,  if the suffi 
were silent.  This silence in my case would be open to a more 
unfavorable construction than any publication  :  tor conditions 
exist which in my circumstances might lie an apology. 

lam much obliged to Mr.  Johnson,1 and hope that his kind 
interference will be of essential service.  I had begun to des- 
pair of anything like justice.  If the opposite party will hear 
reason,  they will certainly save themselves much expense,  as 
well as do themselves credit. 

I am,  Dear Sir.  yours sincerely and gratefully, 

J.  PRIESTLEY. 

Dk.  Withering,  Birmingham. 

No.  7". 

PRIESTLEY TO MRS.  CROUCH. 

Clapton,  Deer.  29,  1791. 

Dear Sister  :  I must trouble you this year to get a stamp 
and draw  (or Mr.  Hudson for you)  on Wm.  Vaughan,  Esq.,1 
Mincing Lane,  London,  for the fifteen pounds,  which I lmpe I 
shall as long as I live be able to remit to you at tlii-  time of 
the year.  Draw at ten day-'  after the receipt of 1 1 1 i -,  and I 
will take care to apprize Mr.  Vaughan ni'it.2 

1 Probably the Rev.  R.  A.  Johnson,  F.R.S..  of Kenilwortli.  a member 
of the Lunar Society. 

1 William Vaughan,  to whom Letter Xo.  90 is addressed.      Si e Intro- 
duction. 

2 Dr.  Priestley has been charged with meanness or greed in accepting 
the pecuniary assistance of his opulent friends,  but this is unjust to the 

122 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

I wrote to you immediately after the riots in Birmingham, 
I think it was the next day while I was at my daughter's  ;3 
and I am sorry to find you did not receive the letter.  It was 
a very  [suddjen and very calamitous event,  but it pro[mises] 
to ter[minate]  better than we could  [have expec]ted.  [Here the 
bottom of the letteris roughly torn off,  which causes the preced- 
ing sentence and the following paragraph to be incomplete.] 

....  and a house,  which,  after some repairs,  will,  I hope, 
lie all we ean wish.  It is in a very good situation and has 
every convenience for my experiments.  I am very near the 
New College at Hackney,  and I have undertaken to give 
lectures in experimental philosophy gratis.4 Mr.  Jones,5 who 
gave those lectures before is gone to succeed meat Birmingham. 
I have not seen much of my brother,6 and the measures he 

modest and poor philosopher,  who was unceasing in his grateful acknowl- 
edgments. In this and the following letter we learn that he was generous 
to his relations,  poorer than himself,  remembering his sister with an 
annual New Year's gift. 

3 Mrs.  William Finch:   compare Letter Xo.  64. 

1 Dr.  Priestley's lectures on  "Experimental Philosophy,  particularly 
including Chemistry,"  of which he drew up  "  Iliads."  were published in 
1 7 f » 4 ,  with a dedication to the students of the Xew College.  He also 
lectured on  "  History and General Policy,"  being the course he had com- 
posed at Warrington.  All this work was voluntary,  and of it Priestley 
himself writes  :  "  In being useful to this Institution,  I found a sounr of 
considerable satisfaction to myself;  indeed.  I have always had a high 
degree of enjoyment in lecturing to young persons,  though more on theo- 
logical subjects than on any other."     (Run.  II..  120.) 

5 Rev.  David Jones,  afterwards a lawyer of distinction,  gave lectures 
on the philosophy of the human mind,  as connected with education,  the 
theory of morals,  and on general history,  while fulfilling his Christian 
ministry at Birmingham,  where he was successor to Dr.  Priestley.  (Rutt, 
II..  177.) 

6 The Rev.  Timothy Priestley,  "  minister of the Gospel,"  Jewin Street, 
London,  as he styled himself,  was a dissenting minister,  whose theological 
views were radically opposed to Dr.  Joseph,  and occasioned friction. 
Timothy's portrait,  by J.  Bowring.  was engraved by R.  Clamp,  and 
published by G.  Thompson,  June IS,  1792.  He was the author of 
several theological works.  For his opinion of Joseph,  see the Sermon 
referred to in note 2,  Letter No.  38. 

LETTER TO BANKS.  1 23 

takes are not calculated to promote much intercourse betwi 
us.  Sometime ago he put an advertisement into the Public 
papers to inform the world that the author of his Votes on tin 
Biblt was not I>r.  Priestley,  but his brother,  and  [the res!  of 
the sentence is torn off].  I shall not despair of sometime or 
other seeing you here,  and it will give both me and my wife 
much pleasure. 

( rive our besl respects to Mr.  Hudson,  and believe me t<>  In-. 
Dear Sister,  your affectionate brother, 

J.  PRIESTLEY. 

Mrs.  Cbocch,  at Mr.  Hudson's,  Gildersome,  near Leeds. 

No.  71. 

PRIESTLEY TO SIR JOSEPH BANKS. 

Clapton,  Jan.  10,  1792. 

Dear Sib  :  Having lost my whole stock of substances,  ores, 

minerals,  earth-,  etc.  etc.,  fur the purpose of experiments,  and 
being willing to replace them a-  expeditiously as possible,  I 
shall In'  obliged to you if you will mention my situation to 
any of your friends who-,-  laboratories are furnished,  and 
who may have any thing to spare to set up a broken philoso- 
pher.' 

I shall take the first opportunity of doing myself the pleasure 
of waiting upon you,  and am.  Dear Sir, 

Your very humble servant, 

J.  PRIESTLEY. 
Sib Joseph Banks,  Bart.,  Solio Square. 

1 On the back of this letter is a memorandum by Sir Joseph,  as fol- 
lows: "  Offered him black lead,  menecanite,  sand and clay from Sidney 
Cove,  Adamantine Spar,  green sand,  garnet sand from India,  do.  do. 
from Greeee,  earth of Borax.  Tabasheer." 

I 2 f CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

No.  72. 

PRIESTLEY TO KEIR. 

Clapton,  12th January,  1792. 

Dear Sir  :  Though I have not before found leisure to 
write to you.  I was not insensible to your kindness and friend- 
ship in giving me your opinion with respect to my Appeal? 
Had I not been actually pledged to publish,  it would have 
had considerable weight with me  ;  but this was a circumstance 
of which you wore not apprized.  I have,  however,  cancelled 
eleven  /runs,  in order to strike out passages that were thought 
to Ke unnecessarily offensive,  and I am willing to hope that 
you will not find much to object to at present,  especially as 
some other publications will have preceded it and made way 
for it,  particularly T.  Sobersides2 in the humorous,  and High 
Church Politics2 in the serious way.  Both these publications 
J greatly admire,  and when tiny are read they must do much 
good.  With respect to myself,  I cannot help thinking that 
my silence,  considering my aptness to write,  would have borne 
an unfavorable construction,  as would my writing with less 
spirit,  or in any other manner than I had been used to do. 
You will receive a copy of the corrected Appeal about the 
same time that you receive this. 

An ingenious young man,   Mr. Jones,3 who lectured 

on Experimental Philosophy in the New College,  is at Birm- 
ingham as my successor,  and,  I hear,  gives great satisfaction. 
He will think himself happy in being noticed by any of my 
philosophical friends.  I have undertaken to give his lectures, 
and some others,  grot is ;  and this will be of some use to nivself 
in obliging me to attend to the whole course of chemistry, 
with several branches of which I was but little acquainted. 
But having no substances to exhibit or to work upon,  I shall 
lonu'  be at a loss and disabled from appearing to advantage. 
May 1 trouble you to furnish me with small quantities of the 

1 See Letter No.  68,  note 1. 

2 These were political pamphlets by Captain Keir. 

3 See Letter No.  70,  note 5. 

LETTER TO WEDGWOOD.  125 

articles you used to supply me with,  as fossil alkali,  minium, 
etc.,  etc.,  or anything else that you can conveniently spare.4 I 
now want evei~ything,  and wish to get to work again as soon 
as I can. 

I shall soon send you a copy of what I can recollect of the 
contents of my laboratory,'  etc.,  and shall beg the favour of 
some of you to attend as witnesses of what you remember of 
them.  But if strict proof be required I must go without 
indemnification.6 

I am,  Dear Sir, 

Yours sincerely, 

J.  PRIESTLEY. 

No.  73. 

PRIESTLEY TO THOMAS WEDGWOOD. 

London,  Feb.  25,  1792. 
Dear Sir  :  There is nothing more within the field of ran- 
dom speculation and less within that of experiment than the 
subject of light and heat.1 Their connection is evident,  but 
which is the element of the other is unknown,  and there have 
been other possible conjectures with respect to them and 
phlogiston too.  I do not recollect anything worth pointing 
out to you on the subject except something,  I do not know 
what,  in Scheele's treatise on air and fire.2 This 1 hope is a 
business reserved for you.     It is a ground unopened. 

4 It should be remembered that Keir had a chemical manufactory at 
West Bromwich. 

6 See the Inventory in the Appendix. 

6 In a letter,  dated January 11th.  1792,  addressed to Mr.  Russell,  l>r. 
Priestley says:  "  I shall write to-morrow to Mr.  Keir to satisfy him that 
I took nothing amiss in his letter."      (Rutt,  II.,  177.) 

1 In writing to Thomas Wedgwood,  Priestley resumes the subject 
alluded to in his letter of June 20,   1791  (No.  59). 

2 Seheele's  "Chemical Observations and Experiments on Air and 
Fire"  was translated from the German by Dr.  J.  R.  Forster,  and pub- 
lished in London in 1 780.  The volume is dedicated to Dr.  Priestley by 
the translator,  who acknowdedges the encouragement and assistance of 
Priestley in prosecuting the work. 

126 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

As T am under the necessity of being obliged to my friends 
in re-establishing my apparatus,  I cannot have any objection 
In your assistance except the great and manifold obligation I 
am already under to your father. 

I hope you have received the tubes that wanted glazing,  and 
that 1 shall soon have them again with the other articles I 
took the liberty to request of you. 

I am,  with my best respects to all the family.  Dear Sir, 

Yours sincerely, 

J.  PRIESTLEY. 

1*.  S.     I rejoice in the prospect of seeing you so soon. 

[No superscription.] 

No.   74. 

PRIESTLEY TO MR.   LEE.' 

Claptox,  March 13th,  L792. 

Dear Sii:  :  Mr.  Galton and Miss Judith Mansell,2 having 
written tu us to recommend several persons as evidence at the 
approaching Assizes,  I cannot help wishing that you would 
see them,  and all the persons they recommend,  that you may 
judge for yourself of the amount of their evidence,  and select 
from among them whom you  -hall think the most proper,  both 
with respect tu their household goods,  and my books ami in- 
struments. I am unwilling,  on the one hand,  tu give mv 
friends unnecessary trouble,  and em the other,  1 would not 
neglect what may lie really useful for enforcing my claims, and 
in the most respectable manner. 

I am.  Dear Sir.  yours sincerely, 

J.  PRIESTLEY. 
Mr.  Lee,  Attorney-at-law,  Birmingham. 

1 Probably Mr.  John Lee,  a long-time friend of Dr.  Priestley.  See 
Letter Xo.  37,  note  ... 

2 An intimate friend of Dr.  Priestley:  for notice of the Mansell por- 
trait of the chemist,  see The Likenesses of Priestley in Appendix to this 
volume. 

LETTER TO WEDGWOOD.  127 

Xo.    75. 
PRIESTLEY TO THOMAS WEDGWOOD. 

Clapton.  13 Mar.  Ii,  1792. 

Deak Sir:  I thank you for your generous,  indeed,  too 
generous,  opulence towards replacing my philosophical appa- 
ratus. I hope now to be at work again very soon,  at least to 
have everything in readiness against the conclusion of the 
assize?  at Warwick,  which I must attend. 

I forgot to tell you that 1  '1"  not know of any better kind 
of Bohgnia Phosphorous than that described by Mr.  <  lanton.1 
That this phosphorous emits the very light it receives,  I have 
not myself any doubt,  though it has been questioned by some. 
But the particulars of the objection and answers I have now 
forgotten.  The objections were made,  I think,  by Mr.  Wil- 
son.2 

Since I wrote the above I recollected that I had mentioned 
this subject in some of my publications,  and I find it in the 
preface to my second volume of Experiments on Air.  as first 
published.3 

I am,  Dear Sir.  yours sincerely, 

J.  PRIESTLEY. 

Mr.  Thomas Wedgwood,  Etruria,  Dear Newcastle-under-Line, 

Staffordshire.4 

1 John Canton  (1718-177'-')  was a teacher at an academy in London. 
His researches and published papers on electricity and natural philosophy 
are numerous.  The phosphorescent compound named after him is de- 
scribed in  "  An ra-i method of making a phosphorous that will imbibe 
and emit light,  like the Bolognian stone."      (Phil.  Trans.,   Li    - 

2 Benjamin Wilson 1708 1788),  member of the Royal Society and 
author of scientific essays.    In his  "Treatise on Phosphori,"  hecril 
Priestley for a statement which was a mere clerical error. 

8  "  Experiments and Observations on Different Kinds of Air.  Second 
Edition."     London,  1776.     Vol.  ii..  Preface,  pp.  xiv-xviii. 

'  The endorsement is apparently in the hand of Thomas Wedgwood. 

128 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

No.  76. 

PRIESTLEY TO THOMAS WEDGWOOD. 

Clapton,  May 5,  1702. 
Dear Sir  :  My journey to Warwick,  and many other en- 
gagements, prevented my giving due attention to your paper1 
so soon as I should otherwise have dune.  But I have perused 
it with attention and pleasure,  and think it a very proper ad- 
dition to your former paper.  I admire the ingenuity you have 
discovered in contriving to execute your purposes,  and have 
no doubt but that by continuing to attend to your object,  you 
will make considerable progress in the investigation of it, 
little a-  we at present know of it.  I think,  however,  it might 
not he amiss to recompose some parts of your paper,  in order 
to make the correction-  of the observations in the former 
part of it unnecessary.  But of this you will be the b si 
judge yourself. 

1 am particularly obliged to you for your care to send me 
the articles I wanted.  I have now everything;  that I imagine 
Etruria can furnish me with except some vessels in the fol- 
lowinij'  form 

1  "Experiments ami Observations on the Production of Light from 
Different Bodies by Heat and Attrition."  Thomas Wedgwood published 
two papers under the above title in the Philosophical Transactions for 

1792.     Wcdgw I's experiments in photography made in 1791-93,  were 

not published until 1802,  and then under the name of Sir Humphry 

LETTER TO LAVOISIER. 

129 

the neck about nine inches ami the bulb about three,  some 
glazed and others unglazed  ;  and a few tubes with twin necks 
thus,  unglazed. 

If,  at your leisure,  you will please to furnish me with some, 
it will add to the many obligations I am already under to 
you,  and your father.  Mortars,  and some other things,  1 
understand I can have in Greek Street. 

I am.  Dear Sir. 

Yours sincerely, 

.T.  PRIESTLEY. 

No.  77. 
PRIESTLEY TO LAVOISIER. 

[Hackney],  June 2d,  1792. 

Pear Sir:  I take the liberty to introduce to you Mr.  Jones,1 
who was lecturer in chemistry at the New  <  !ollege in Hackney, 
in which employment I now succeed him,  and who is to be my 
successor at Birmingham.  You will find him to be equally 
modest and sensible,  and,  as a philosopher,  more inclined,  1 
believe,  to your system than to mine;  but open,  as we ought 
all to be,  to conviction as new facts present themselves to n>. 

The late riots have interrupted my experiments near a whole 
year,  but I am now refitting my apparatus and about to re- 
Davy.  The article is entitled  :  "  An Account of the Method of copying 
Paintings upon Glass,  and of making profiles by the agency of Light upon 
the Nitrate of Silver.  Invented by Thomas Wedgwood,  Esq.,  with Ob- 
servations bv H.  Davy."  (Journal of the Royal Institution,  June,  1802.  ! 
A facsimile of Wedgwood's heliotype taken at Etruria,  in 1791-93, 
forms a frontispiece in Mis<  Meteyard's  "  (iroup of Englishmen." 

1 See Letter No.  70,  note 5,  and Letter No.  72. 
9 

130 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

sume niv usual pursuits,  and I shall not fail to  <rive due atten- 
tion to what you may advance in reply to my last memoir on 
tin subject,  a copy of which I sent you  :  and for this purpose 
i shall be glad to be informed concerning them.  Mr.  Jones 
will convey your sentiments to me. 

In case of more riots,  of which we arc not without appre- 
hension, I shall be glad to take refuge in your country,2 the 
liberties of which I hope will be established notwithstanding 
the present combination against you.  I also hope the issue 
will be as favourable to science as to liberty. 
1 am,  Dear Sir, 

Yours sincerely, 

J.   PRIESTLEY. 

No.  78. 

PRIESTLEY TO DR.  WITHERING. 

Clapton,  Oct.  2,  1792. 

Dear Sir:  I thank yon for the third volume of your 
excellent Botanical work.1 I should now have the whole 
complete,  but that the rioters have deprived me of the first 
volume.  <  >ne of' the most disagreeable circumstances attending 
the riot,  with respect to my books,  is that the sets are almost 
all broken,  so that if they consisted of three volumes or more, 
hardly any of them are complete. 

I have been much concerned to hear of the alarming return 
of your disorder,  but I hope that report has magnified the 
danger.  It was said that you would be under the necessity of 
removing to a warmer climate. 

<  hie of the things that I regret the most,  in being expelled 
from Birmingham,  is the loss of your company,  and that of the 
rest of the Lunar Society.  I feel I want the spur to constant 
exertion which I had with you.     My philosophical friends 

Si  >    Letter No.  79,  note 1. 
1 This refers to the second edition of his:   "Botanical Arrangement." 
See Introduction. 

LETTER TO WITHERING.  131 

here are cold and distant.  Mr.  Cavendish2 n.  v.  r expressed 
the leas!  concern on account of anything J had  .-uttered,  tho'  I 
joined a party with which he was,  and talked with them some 
time.  I do not expect to have much intercourse with any of 
them. 

I have,  however,  nearly replaced my apparatus,  and intend 
not to be idle.  I have already made some experiments re- 
lating to the doctrint  <•/  t>!t/oi/i.</<,i:,  and when I have made a 
few mure shall probably write something on the subject.  I 
am surprised at the confidence with which the French chi mists 
write;  but I cannot yet learn what they have to object to my 
last Taper in the Philosophical Transactions.  A friend at 
Paris,  at my request,  applied to M.  Lavoisier,  and others,  but 
got no satisfactory answer,  but since the tenth of August he 
ha-  absconded,  and where he now is I cannot learn. 

I was in hopes to have been able to pay my friends of Birm. 
a visit lone-  before this time,  but was always discouraged,  so 
that I have now given up the thoughts of it,  and must con- 
tent myself with seeing as many of them as I can here.  I 
should be very happy to see yon,  but fear I must despair of 
that satisfaction.  I do not,  however,  think 1 shall continue 
here long.  Tho'  unwillingly I shall some time hence follow 
my son to France.  But as I can do nothing there I will stay 
here as Jong as I can.  I shall be very happy to hear from 
von,  and with every good wish to yourself and Mrs.  AA ithering, 
in which my wife joins me,  am 

Yours sincerely, 

J.  PRIESTLEY. 
Db.  Withering,  Birmingham. 

-  See Letter Xo.  44,  note 3. 

132 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

No.   7!'. 

PRIESTLEY TO MRS.  CROUCH. 

Clapton,  Dec.  31,  1792. 

Dear Sister  :  T write1 to remind you of drawing upon Jir. 
Win.  Vaiiffhan,  'ilincing Lane,  for l">i'  :i.^  usual,  and at ten 
days.  This is rather more convenient than any other method. 
Give our kind regards to our brother and sister,  and let me 
know how they do. 

\\Y have lived very quietly and comfortably here,  ami hope 

i ntinue so,  though the country is in a great ferment,  and 

the Dissenters in general,  and myself in particular,  are some- 
times threatened.  Many I hear talk of going to France or 
America.  One of my sons is in France,  and I think it not 
unlikely that another may go thither,  tho'  not at present,  and 
if so,  and especially if there should be any disturbance in this 
country,  I shall probably follow them  ;'  but not if I can help 
it,  while I am capable of doing anything.  Fur there I must 
be in a great measure idle.  There is much talk of a war with 
France,  but 1 hardly think it will take place;  we have so 
much to lose and so little t i by war. 

- 

My wife,  on the whole,  enjoys pretty good health;  but 
Harry2 has been daugerouslj ill of a nervous fever,  but is now 

r ivered.     They join with me in respects to you and Mr. 

Hudson.     1 hope that whenever he comes to London he will 

1 Priestley often thought of going to reside in France,  where his sci- 
entific abilities were highly appreciated,  his liberal views concerning gov- 
ernment were admired,  and his theological tenets would at least be better 
tolerated than in England.  After the riots in 1791,  he received some of 
the warmest tributes ol esteem from France;  he was invited to become a 
member of the National Convention,  to accept a furnished house near 
Paris,  and even to reside in a monastery in the neighborhood of Tou- 
louse.     (See Knt t.   II.,   121,   and Letter No.   66;   and compare Letter 

\  ,.  77.) 

-  Priestley had a daughter Sarah  (afterwards Mrs.  Win.  Finch),  and 
three sons,  Joseph,  William,  and Henry.  Henry died at Northumber- 
land, Pa.,  in 1795,  just after his father had  "fixed him in a farm and 
built hi in a house." 

LETTER TO WITHERING.  133 

not fail to call upon me,  and whenever it shall be convenient 
to von to come this way,  we shall be happy to receive you as 
long as shall be agreeable to yourself. 

I am concerned that I do not sec my brother as I used to 
do.  But after his advertising,  as he did,  against me,  and 
making no apology for it,  T don't think I can be blamed for 
not going to him first.  I am told that he says it was the 
bookseller who did it.  But it appears in his name,  and he 
should have prevented it.  or have disclaimed it afterwards. 
I am.  Dear Sister,  your affectionate Brother, 

J.   PRIESTLEY.3 

No.  80. 

PRIESTLEY TO DR.  WITHERING. 

Claptox,  April 15,  1703. 

Dear Sir:  I take the opportunity of Mr.  Skey and 
Mr.  Russell's1 visit to Lisbon to congratulate you on the iron.) 
accounts I have of your health.2 I hone now that with care 
it will be thoroughly established,  so as to bear your native 
climate.  Many times have your friends been alarmed for you, 
but vou have always understood your own disorder,  and have 
happily hit upon the proper remedy. 

I wish the country was in a better state to invite your re- 
turn to it,  but it is far otherwise,  at least with respect to myself 
and those who have generally passed for the friends of liberty. 
Such is the spirit of bigotry encouraged by the Court party, 
that great numbers are going to America,  and among others 

3 This letter has no superscription,  but is obviously addressed to Mrs. 
Crouch. 

1 See Letter No.  7,  note 4. 

2 Dr.  Withering being an invalid sought the benefits of a warmer 
climate,  and set sail for Portugal,  October 24,  1792,  returning on the 
third of June,  17:':;.  Hi-  life was prolonged in spite of great debility 
until October 6,  179!).      (Sec Introduction.) 

134 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

all my sons,  and my intention is,  (hat when they are settled 
to follow them and end my days there.  This will be a great 
mortification to me,  after having replaced my apparatus,  and 
recommenced my experiments,  as I now have done.  Indeed, 
to appearance,  I have everything very comfortable about me, 
but I cannot get so much time to myself as I wish,  and I have 
little intercourse with the members of the Royal Society."  ( )n 
both these accounts 1 do less in my laboratory than I wish to 
do.  The Lunar Society4 was an unspeakable advantage to 
me,  and I am unable to replace it lure.  I am not,  however, 
quite idle,  and somethings that I have dime tend to confirm 
the doctrine of phlogiston.  I cannot yet learn what the 
French philosophers object to in my last paper,  and I have 
repeatedly applied to them for the purpose,  so that I think 
with you that their charbon or hydrogene will prove to be 
nothing more than another name for phlogiston.  Still,  how- 
ever, the question will lie w h ether either of them be contained 
in metals,  or make an essential part of water} 

Living in the neighbourhood of New College,  1 have given 
a course of lectures in chemistry,  and have some thoughts of 
publishing the heads of my course for the students,  and if I 
do,  I shall add some observations on the new theory.6 

1 send you a second part of my appeal to the public on the 

3 Priestley,  in his Memoirs,  writing of his life at Hackney,  says:  "I 
found my society much restricted with respect to my philosophical ac- 
quaintance, most of the members of the Royal Society shunning me on 
account of my religious or political opinions,  so that 1 at length withdrew 
myself from them."     (Rutt,  II.,  1 19. ) 

4 Sec Appendix. 

'  Priestley steadfastly adheres to his old views,  and yet Lavoisier's ad- 
mirable and clear  "  l'i<ut£  6t4ment(iire  <lt chimie ]>r£$ent4 dans un ordre 
nmiveau,"  published four years In. tore the date of this letter,  contains a 
section,  pp.  506-512,  "on tin-  combustion of hydrogen gas and of the 
formation of water."  with quantitative results,  which should have been 
convincing to any one not blinded by prejudice. 

6 This plan Priestley carried out.  The volume bears the title  : 
"Heads of Lectures on a Course of Experimental Philosophy,  particu- 
larly including Chemistry  ;  delivered at the New College in Hackney." 
London.   1 7:<  t,    svo. 

LETTER TO WITHERING.  135 

subject of the Riots,7 and some letters I have addressed to the 
Philosophers and Politicians of France.8 Neither of them, 
however,  I fear,  will have much effect.  We have nut yet re- 
ceived any indemnification for our losses.  A petition is before 
Parliament for leave to borrow the money and raise it at dif- 
ferent times,  as it is found to be impracticable to collect the 
whole at once,  as the law requires,  but Mr.  Fox9 will oppose 
it as contrary to the intention of the law,  and what will be 
done I cannot tell. 

We have no intercourse now with France,  and whether my 
sun William lias been able to leave it and go to America I 
cannot learn.  Indeed,  the prospect is very melancholy.  The 
conduct nf the French lias been such as their best friends can- 
not approve;  but certainly the present combination against 
them,  which docs not appear to have any other object than the 
restoration of the old arbitrary government,  is as little to lie 
justified. 

Wishing,  though hardly hoping,   for better times,  I am, 

I  >ear Sir, 

Yours sincerely, 

J.   PRIESTLEY. 

Doctor Withering,  Boulonois Hotel,  Calcada D'Estrella,  Lisbon  [with 
two pamphlets]. 

7 An Appeal to the Public on the subject of the Riots in Birming- 
ham, Part II.  To which is added a letter from W.  Russell,  Esq.,  to the 
Author.      London,  1792. 

8 Letters to the Philosophers and Politicians of France on the subject 
of Religion.     London,  1793. 

9 See Letter No.  G2,  note 4. 

136 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

No.   81. 

PRIESTLEY TO REV.  DR.   ABERCROMBIE.1 

I  !  mton,  Aug.  21,  1793. 

Sir:  T think mvself much obliged  .-mil honoured by your 
letters ami the communication of tin-  pamphlet yon were so 
good as to send me;  but having advanced all that I am able 
in my various publications,  and long ceased to give any parti- 
cular attention to the subject,  I must be excused entering upon 
it again.  It is now in other hands who are abundantly quali- 
fied to do justice tu the arguments on both sides. 

This will he delivered by one of my suns,  all of whom I 
wish tu settle in your country,  anil when that is accomplished 
I intend to join them.2 The spirit of bigotry nearly bordering 
on that of persecution being encouraged by the Court is greatly 
increased in this country,  which makes it,  tho'  not absolutely 
unsafe,  yet unpleasant to live in it.  I mean for those who 
have made themselves obnoxious for the freedom of their 
sentiments mi religious or political subjects.  The state of 
France increases this power of everything tending to inno- 
vation.    Hoping that you will see our folly and profit by it, 

1 am.  Sir, 

Yours sincerely, 

J.  PRIESTLEY. 
Jas.  Aberceombie,  Esq.,  Philadelphia. 
By Mr.  .1.  Priestley. 

[Endorsed]  :  This letter from Dr.  Priestley to Dr.  Aber- 
crombie was given to me by the latter in 1831,  hut 1 promised 
his sun it should he given to him at my death,  on his 
demanding it. 

ROBERT S.  MINOR,   [f] 

1 See Introduction. 

2 Four days after the date of this letter Priestley wrote to Mr.  J. 
Gough at Savannah,  in a similar strain,  saying  :  "  I send this by my sons. 
who are going to find a settlement in your country,  all I have  (three), 
and then I shall expect to follow soon.  I cannot give you an idea of the 
violence with which every friend to liberty is persecuted in this country." 
(  Rutt,  II..  2080 

LETTER TO WITHERING.  137 

No.  82. 
PRIESTLEY TO DR.  WITHERING. 

Clapton,  Oct.  22,  1793. 

Pear Sip.:  T was happy in hearing that you returned so 
much better from Lisbon,1 tho'  I am concerned to find that 
you think it necessary to go on the same account once more, 
but I hope it will he the means of finally establishing your 
health.  I regret that,  whether you return or not,  I am in a 
manner cut oft'  from my most agreeable connection with you 
and the other members of the Lunar Society.  Here I hardly 
see any philosophical persons,  except now and then Dr.  Craw- 
ford. As to the Royal Society,  I see myself regarded in so 
unfavorable a light by the most considerable members of it 
that I never go near them. 

Andrews  [  '.'  ]  whom I think you saw at Birmingham,  was 
rejected because he was understood to be a democrat in politics. 
John Hunter2 quietly canvassed against him,  and gave Dr. 
( Irawford that and no other reason for it. 

I want your society the more,  as I have now almost re- 
placed my apparatus,  and begun to be as busy in my labora- 
tory as usual,  tho'  I fear I must break up once more to remove 
to America,  whither all my sons are gone already.  In the 
coilrse of a few weeks  (for that time will be necessary)  I hope 
to have completed some experiments I am making on the 
relation of water in air,  and,  if anything of importance results 
from them,  you shall be informed;  tho'  if you had been at 

1 See Letter No.  80,  note 2. 

2 John Hunter,  F.R.S.  There being two persons of this name,  both 
F.R.S.,  it is not certain to which Priestley refers.  One.  a surgeon,  was 
noted for his anatomical studies,  especially his papers on the gymnotus 
electricus,  and on the heat produced by animals and vegetables.  (Phil. 
Trans.  1773 to 1778.)  The other was a doctor of medicine,  and pub- 
lished "  On the heat of wells and springs in the island of Jamaica,"  etc. 
(  Phil.  Trans.  1 778.)    The first-named John Hunter died  ( )ct.  16,  1 793,  a 

few days before this letter was written,  and the sei 1 John Hunter died 

in 1809,  so the latter is the person alluded to in all probability. 

138 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

Birmingham,  our communication would have been easier,  as I 
shall send my papers to the Lunar Society.  In the mean 
time Mr.  Galton will be able to give you some account of what 
I am about,  [n three different processes air seems to be pro- 
ducible from pure water,  by means of heat,  without limits,  and 
the air so produced is better than common air.  Since Mr. 
Galton was here,  I have observed that the steam made to pass 
thro'  :i red-hot silver tube makes no difference whatever in the 
quantity or quality of the air.  Also,  in these circumstances 1 
can,  as he will explain to you,  produce the usual quantity of 
aii-.  or no aii'  at all at pleasure.  If the tube be of copper,  the 
air is of a worse quality. 

I am  "lad to hear there is so great a demand for your 
excellent work on botany.  (Jan Mr.  Jumary  ['?]  out of the 
waste,  as the printers call it,  make up a P.  [perfect  ".' ]  volume 
to complete my set  [torn]  imperfect in the notes'.'  As you do 
not  [neg]lect theological reading,  I shall send you in a parcel to 
Mr.  Watt a copy of my an\swer\  to Evanson,3 on the autlien- 
ticy of the books of the New Testament. 

i am much struck with your acc[ount]  of the glass made 
at Lisbon.  Can you give any reason for its peculiar property? 
I shall be glad to see your analysis of the mineral water4 you 
mention.  With every good wish to yourself and Mrs.  Wither- 
ing from myself and Mrs.  Priestley, 

I am,  Pear Sir,  yours sincerely, 

J.  PUIKSTLEY. 
Dk.  Withering,  at Mrs.  Martha Russell's,  Falmouth. 

3 His  "Dissonance of the Four generally received Evangelists,  and 
tlie evidence ot'  their respective Authenticity examined,"  1792. 

4  'I'll,  analysis of the medicinal spring at Caldas da Hainlia,  near Lisbon, 
was made by Dr.  Withering in April,  1 7t'3. — "Miscell.  Tracts,"  II.  p. 
397. 

LETTER TO RUSH.  139 

No.   83. 
PRIESTLEY TO DR.  BENJ.  RUSH. 

NOKTHCMBEKLAND,1 Sep.  14.    1794. 

Dear Sir:    The Professorship of Chemistry in your 
College2 has,  I own,  some attractions for me,  and one of the 

1 Dr.  Priestley's three sons emigrated to America in August,  lTM.'i, 
and receiving from them favorable reports,  he himself,  with his wife, 
joined them in April.  1 7 ;>4 .  He landed in New York June 4th,  1794; 
for a very interesting account of the voyage see Mrs.  Priestley's letter to 
Rev.  Mr.  Belsham,  in Rutt's Life,  II..  p.  235.*  In New York,  as well as 
in Philadelphia,  to which city he soon proceeded,  Priestley received 
honorable attentions from public bodies,  political and philosophical 
societies,  and from individuals.  (Rutt,  II.,  pp.  241-262.)  Priestlej and 
his family settled in Northumberland,  on the banks of the Susquehanna, 
and there occupied himself with writing theological essays and in pur- 
suing his chemical researches.  There he discovered carbon-monoxide, 
an inflammable gas which had hitherto been confounded with hydrogen. 
There he died in 1804,  as announced in Litter No.  'Jl . 

2 On the same day that Priestley wrote this letter to Dr.  Rush,  he 
wrote another to his friend Rev.  T.  Lindsey,  in which he says:  "The 
Professor of Chemistry in the College of Philadelphia is supposed to be 
on his death-heil.  In case of a vacancy Dr.  Rush thinks I shall be in- 
vited to succeed him."  And on November 12th he wrote to the same: 
"I have just received an invitation to the Professorship of Chemistry at 
Philadelphia,  and for some time was determined to accept of it,  chiefly 
on account of the opportunity it would give me of forming an Unitarian 
congregation in that city  ;  but when I considered that I must then pass 
tour months of every year from home,  my heart tailed me,  and I declined 
it.  If my books and apparatus had been at Philadelphia 1 might have 
acted differently." 

The chair of chemistry in the University of Pennsylvania was occupied 

at this time by Dr.  James Hutchinson,  who had sue eded Dr.  Benjamin 

Rush.  Dr.  Hutchinson had studied in London under Dr.  John Fother- 
gill,  and attained a proficiency in chemistry which was recognized by 
the Trustees of the College in the award of a gold medal.  He died in 
1794,  and after Dr.  Priestley had declined the chair it was again tilled 
by the election of Dr.  James  'W'oodhouse,  who expounded the antiphlo- 
gistic doctrines until his death in 1809. 

*  And for particulars of his arrival in New York see Henry Wansey's 
"  Excursion to the United States of North America in the Summer of 17U4." 
Salisbury,  1798  (2d ed.),  12mo. 

L40 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

principal is the opportunity it would give nie of having the 
advantage of your society,  the loss of which  [I o-]  ften 
-peak cil'  with regret.  I have not in this country met with 
any person whose mind seems to be so congenial to my own. 
1 In t I foresee several difficulties,  and some of them,  I fear, 
insuperable.  1.  For the first year I could only give such a 
general course as I did at Hackney,  the Heads3 of which you 
may have seen.  1 have not a copy here ;  but Mr.  "Vaughan4 
can show yon one,  and as soon as a package arrives from New 
York I can present you with one.  These would by no means 
supply so many lectures as your course would require.  Again 
my apparatus is so packed up,  and ready to be conveyed 
hither,  that I could not make any use of it at present,  and I 
fear yours would not sufficiently correspond to my course. 
2.  Being in winter,  it would hardly be in my power to prepare 
the necessary experiments in the intervals of the lectures,  even 
if I had an assistant.  3.  My books too are so packed up, 
that I could not get at them for the composition of more lec- 
tures. Against another year I could be better prepared.  In 
the mean time,  could these detects be excused?  for they cannot 
be wholly remedied. 

Before I left England some fr  [iends] 
had a scheme5 of founding a Colleg  [-e] 

3 Sec I. otter No.  80,  note 6. 

4 Mr.  John Vaughan of Philadelphia.     See Introduction. 

5 Of this scheme for a college at Northumberland,  Mr.  Joseph Priestley, 
in the continuation of his father's Memoirs,  writes:  "Soon after his 
settlement at Northumberland many persons with a view that his  (nullifi- 
cations as an instructor of youth should not be wholly lost to the country, 
concurred in a plan for the establishment of a college at Northumberland. 
Many of the principal landholders,  partly from the above and partly 
from motives of interest,  contributed largely both in money and land, 
and there was a fair prospect,  from the liberal principles upon which it 
was founded,   that it would have been of very great advantage to the 

ntry.     My father was requested to draw up a plan of the course of 

study he would recommend,  as well as the rules for the internal manage- 
ment of the institution,  and he was appointed president.  He,  however, 
declined receiving any emolument,  and proposed giving such lectures as 
he was best qualified for,  gratis,  in the same manner as he had done at 

LETTER TO RUSH.  141 

I should settle on the idea tha  [-t] 

be in a part of the  (  Ountry 

not provided with any.     Would th 

give any assistance or won  [Id]  [Torn] 

to it  ?     This seems to be a promis  [-ing] 

situation,  and my library and Appa 

ratus,  might be of great use to it 

leading men be consulted about it 

This I should prefer to anything in 

could be employed.     Put this,  I fear,  i  [-s an un-(?)] 

certain,  as well as a distant,  object. 

I like this place much,  but its  [distance] 
from Philadelphia,  anil want of an easy cornm  [-u] 
uication with it,  are great objections to it.     The latter may in 
time be removed. 

With every good wish from my family to 
[Torn]  I am,  Dear Sir, 

Yours Sincerely, 

J.  PRIESTLEY. 

I be comfortably boarded in a private family 
[Torn]  the  <  !ollege business would require. 

Dr.  Rush,  Philadelphia. 

No.  84. 

PRIESTLEY TO DR.  RUSH. 

NoRTIlOIBEKLAND,  Oct.  28,   1794. 

Dear Sir  :  Your kind intention with respect to fixing me 
in Philadelphia not taking place,  1 have now no other thought 

Hackney,  and he meant to have given to the institution the use of his 
library ami apparatus until the students could have been furnished with 
them by means of the funds of the college.  In consequence of the failure 
of some of the principal contributors the scheme fell through at that time, 
and little more was done during my father's lifetime,  than to raise the 
shell of a convenient building."     (Memoirs,  i.  169.) 

142 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

than of settling in tin's place.  I have therefore purchased 
ground on which to build  :i house,  and to this I have destined 
a thousand pounds sterling.1 A less bouse would have served 
for my family,  but 1 must have room for my library and ap- 
paratus. I find,  however,  that there will  !»■  great difficulty in 
getting carpenters.  Here noue are to be had.  and Mr.  Jones, 
who is a carpenter here,  and who superintends the whole, 
advises me to write to some friend in Philadelphia,  to en- 
deavour to engage hands there.  We want at least three good 
workmen,  but we could employ six or ten all the winter,  or 
from this time.  I thought it possible that as persons of all 
descriptions are now coming from England,  some might be 
induced to settle here,  where they will be sure to find full em- 
ployment, and may live at a moderate expence  ;  and you may 
have some friend who would take the trouble to look out for 
such hands as the ships arrive. 

Mr.  Jones savs if any master carpenter would bring three 
or four hands,  and undertake the building along with him,  he 
should have no objection to it,  or lie would give him the place, 
and let him erect the whole himself. 

As Mr.  Vaughan'  is from home,  I do not know who to 
apply to in this emergency besides yourself,  and as you must 
have acquaintance with persons of all classes,  I hope the 
trouble to you will not be very great.  The sooner I know 
whether any hands can be procured,  and on what terms,  the 
better,  as I have not much time to lose. 

I had a package of books,  consisting chiefly of my own 
publications,  copies of several of which I desired Mr.  Thomp- 
son (who assists  .Mr.  Dobson3 in the printing business)  to pre- 
sent you with in my name.  I hope he has done it,  tho'  I 
have not heard from him on the subject.      With this I beg 

1 Priestley bought 300 acres of land at 30 shillings an acre,  besides a 
house-lot,  on the river bank,  of eleven acres,  for which he paid one hun- 
dred pounds. 

'-'   Mr.  John Vaughan,  of Philadelphia  ;   see Introduction. 

3 Mr.  Dobson was a Philadelphia publisher. 

LETTER TO EUSH.  143 

your acceptance of a pamphlet4 I have just printed here.  The 
paper is wretched,  hut at the time no other could be had. 
I hope that the scheme of a colleg*  in this town will not be 
11 up.  It appears to me to be a very convenient situation 
for one.  and I should hope that I might be of some use to it. 
Would the State give any encouragement to it.  and what 
would be the best method of applying for it'.'  Some think 
that Mr.  Swamcick should be desired to undertake it.  I do 
not know him,  but you must,  and I shall not take any step in 
this business without your concurrence. 

I shall hope to have the pleasure of seeing you in the 
Spring,  and in the mean time,  I am, 

Dear Sir,  yours sincerely, 

J.  PRIESTLEY. 

P.  S. — As Mr.  Wharton intends to build here,  as well as 
myself,  he would perhaps assist in procuring carpenters to lie 
sent hither.  They will have the same price for their work as 
with you,  and may live much cheaper. 

Doctor Rcsh,  Philadelphia. 

No.  85. 

PRIESTLEY TO DR.  BEXJ.  RUSH. 

Northumberland,  Xor.  3,  1794. 
Pear Sir  :  I thank you for your kind hint respecting the 
professorship of chemistry  ;  but you will excuse me it' J feel a 
reluctance to comply with it.  I cannot appear as a candidate  ; 
but if the place was offered to me,  I would do my lust to dis- 
charge the duties of it.  The first year,  indeed,  I should lie 
under great disadvantage,  but so must any other person 
suddenly called to a new employment. 

*  "A Continuation of the Letters to the Philosophers and Politicians 
of France on the subject of Religion,  and of the Letters to a Philosophical 
Unbeliever,  in answer to Mr.  Paine's Age of Reason."  Northumberland 
Town,  1794. 

Ill CORRESPONDENCE   <>F PRIESTLEY. 

I am not,  however,  al all anxious about this business, 
hoping we shall succeed in establishing a College in this place; 

ami it will lie more  < venient to me  [to]  be employed here, 

than in Philadelphia  :  tho'  a call to spend some time,  every 
year,  in that place would not,  I acknowledge,  lie ungrateful 
to inc. 

Besides the letter you mention,  I took the liberty to write 
von another,  about a house I propose to build here,  ami other 
matters. 

With gratitude and esteem,  I am, 

1 tear Sir,  yours sincerely, 

J.  PRIESTLEY. 
D<»  .  Philadelphia. 

No.  86. 

PRIESTLEY TO DR.  BEX.T.  RUSH. 

NOKTHDMBERLAND,    Nov.    11,  179-1. 

Dear Sir  :  I hope you will excuse my weakness  (for such 
you will consider it),  when,  after giving you reason to expect 
that T would accept the professorship of Chemistry,  it'  it was 
offered to me,  I now inform you that I must decline it. 

On the receipt of your t>l>Iij>-inn-  letter,  I was determined to 
accept of it,  and in my own mind had made every arrange- 
ment for that purpose.  But when I began to consider the 
difficulty and irksomeness of a journey to Philadelphia at this 
time of the year,  and especially the obligation 1 should be 
under of spending four months of every year from home,  my 
wife in the house by herself,  my heart failed me. 

This,  in fact,  is my only objection,  but it is an insuperable 
one.  I am truly sensible of the honour that is done me by 
the invitation,  and bee-  that you would express it for me to all 
the persons concerned.  Xothing could have been so pleasing 
to me as the employment,  and 1 should have been happy in 
your society,  and that of Other friends in the Capital,  and,  what 
I have much at heart,  I should have had an opportunity of 

LETTER TO RUSH.  145 

forming an Unitarian congregation in Philadelphia.  But the 
considerations as mentioned,  and that of my time of life,  lead 
me to continue where 1 am,  waiting-  for the opportunity of being 
of use tci the College which I hope will be established here. 

Had this proposal been made to me before the removal  <>t 
my library and apparatus hither,  the case would have been 
different  ;  but this being now done,  at a great risk and ex- 
pence,  I am,  at all events,  fixed for the remainder of my life. 

If I had come,  Mr.  Henry would have assisted me in collect- 
ing materials,  and making the preparations tin-  the necessary 
experiments.  As he is well qualified for the office,  if you be 
nut better provided,  what should you think of him?  At least, 
I think the students might,  with advantage,  attend his lectures, 
till the vacant professorship he filled.  This I observe in confi- 
dence, wishing the hint to go no further,  if you disapprove of it. 

"With the greatest gratitude and respect,  I am, 

Dear Sir,  yours sincerely, 

J.  PRIESTLEY. 

Doctor Rcsh,  Philadelphia. 

No.  ST. 

PRIESTLEY TO DR.  BENJ.  RUSH. 

North'd,  May 22,  1795. 

Dear Sir  :  The day after I received your favour I,  having 
just then got my apparatus ready,  made trial of the air of 
Northumberland by the test of uitrous air,  but found it not 
sensibly different from that of England.  Your conjecture, 
however,  was very natural 

I cannot make many experiments to much advantage till I 
get into the house I am about to build.  At present I have 
both my library and apparatus in one room in my son's house. 

I desired Mr.  Yaughan to call upon you,  and consult with 
you about engaging some place in which I can preach when 
I pay you a visit,  as I wish to do,  in Philadelphia.  If I 
appear there at all,  it shall be in my proper character,  of a 
( 'hristian minister,  and I will not be reduced to a state of 
10 

14(i CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

disgraceful silence by the bigotry and jealousy of your 
preachers.  The Universalists said they should have no 
objection to my preaching in their place;  but il was not  (hen 
built.     Il may be now. 

We are much obliged to you for the pains you have taken 
about our Academy.  As the situation is not unfavorable,  I 
hope it will succeed. 

Yon will probably have heard of the death of Mr.  Haynes. 
It will make some change in our situation,  but whether for the 
better or the worse is at present uncertain. 

I have received several letters,  which give me an excellent 
character of Mr.  Millar,  son of Professor Millar1 of Glas- 
gow. He is come to America,  and wishes to be employed in 
some College.  Our scheme is hardly ripe enough for such a 
person. 

I am,  Dear Sir, 

Yours sincerely, 

J.  PRIESTLEY. 
Doctor Rush,  Philadelphia. 
Bv favour of J.  Young.2 

No.  88. 

PRIESTLEY TO JOHN VAUGHAN. 

North'd,  Oct.  17,  1795. 
Pear Sir  :    [begin to  [be]   alarmed when I look at the 
draughts I have made upon you this month,  but I hope I 
shall not draw for so much for several months to come.    They 
are as follows  : — 

William Spring 200 dollars. 

John Boyd 280 

Aaron Levi 220 

James Hepburn 300 

John  (  'onden 150 

1 John Millar  (b.  1 7 :"..". .  d.  1801),  the eminent Scotch jurist and pro- 
fesssor of civil law in Glasgow,  author of historical works,  and an at- 
tractive lecturer on his specialty. 

:  See Letter No.  88,  note 3. 

LETTER TO VAUGHAN.  147 

The Inst is to supply a loss of Henry's1 when he was last 
in Philadelphia.  That to Aamn Levi is drawn as for my son 
Joseph,  but von must put it to my account,  not his.  1 shall 
have a farther payment to make to Mr.  Boyd  ;  and another to 
Mr.  Martin for purchases,  and then,  as 1 do not build till the 
next Spring,  1 have not to trouble you for more than for cur- 
rent expenses. 

1 am exceedingly happy in the prospect of Mr.  Russell2 
fixing with lis.  In time I hope we may make the place not 
unworthy a visit from Mr.  Vaugban.      In  (lie meantime,    1 

hope to pay you a visit after  <  'hristmas.     I shall write a g 1 

many letters for England,  to go by Dr.  Young,3 who will sail 

SOI  >n. 

Yours sincerely, 

J.  PRIESTLEY. 
Johk Vaughan,  Esq.,  No.  Ill S.  Front St.,  Philadelphia. 

By favor of Mr.  Hepburn. 

[Endorsed:]  Doct.  Priestley,  North4.,  Oct.  17,  1795,  Rec'd 
2(Jth,  1795. 

i Henry Priestley died just two months after the date of this letter 
(Dee.  11.  17a:.). 

2 Mr.  William Russell,  Priestley's staunch friend and fellow-sufferer 
in the riots of 1791.  He set out from England with his family,  two 
daughters and a son,  in August,  1794.  He did not,  however,  arrive in 
America until September,  1795,  having been taken a prisoner soon after 
his sailing from Falmouth,  by a French squadron,  and detained in Brest 
Harbour,  notwithstanding the immediate intercession of the American 
Minister.  (Rutt,  II.,  279.)  Dr.  Priestley was disappointed that  .Mr. 
Russell did not join him in Pennsylvania,  but he preferred New England, 
and settled in Middletown,  Conn.  Mr.  Russell returned to France in 
1801.     (Rutt.  II.,  327.)     (See Letter No.  7,  note 4.) 

3 Dr.  Young was a physician of Northumberland,  who,  leaving his 
practice,  started for a tour in Europe.  Priestley writing by him to the 
Rev.  Th.  Lindsey,  says:  "A more friendly man 1 have hardly ever 
known,  and I hope that,  though we lose him for the present,  we shall 
get him again,  and that he will build and settle in this town."  (Rutt, 
II.,  322.)" 

1 IS CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

No.  89. 

PRIESTLEY TO DR.  WITHERING. 

NORTHl MBERLASD COCXTT,  Oct.    27,    1795. 

Dear Sir:    Your letter was peculiarly welcome to me,  as 
from the accounts I had received of the state of your health, 
1 was apprehensive that our intercourse on this side the grave 
was at an end.     I do,  indeed,  rejoice in hearing,  and especially 
from yourself,  so much better an account than I expected, and 
Hatter myself that tho!  you may not get hardy,  you may have 
tolerable enjoyment of life for many years to come.     1 am 
also happy to find that you are determined not to be idle,  and 
that we may expect so much an improved edition of your 
Botanical work.     Mr.  Galton,  in a letter I have received from 
him since 1 had yours,  mentions several of the improvements 
which please me much,  tho'  1 do not pretend to be a judge of 
those matter-.     Were I a young man,  I should certainly,  espe- 
cially in this new world,  apply to Botany,  and Natural History 
in general,  but it is too late in life for me to engage in new 
pursuits.     It will be well if I should be able to close some of 
the old ones,  and in this I am now assiduous,  and happily 
have more leisure for these than ever I had,  tho'  1 have uoi 
the same advantage that I had in England.     More than ever 
do I now regret the loss of the Lunar Society,  where I spent 
so many happy hours,  and for which I found no substitute 
even in London.     Here I am quite insulated,  and I promise 
myself,  when my house and laboratory shall be erected to de- 
vote as much time to philosophical pursuits as ever I have 
done.      Hitherto it has not been in my power to do much,  as 
I have only one room in my son's house for my library and 
apparatus too.     But I have done almost all that I can in the 
ecu,  ration of air from water,  and shall soon draw up a sequel 
to m v pamphlet on that subject for the society at Philadelphia. 
I    -till rind no end to the production of air from the same 
water,  tho'  I can now torture it in more ways than I thought 
of before.     That the air I get is not imbibed in the course of 
the process is demonstrable from it,-  being at the last wholly 

LETTER TO WITHERING.  149 

phlogisticated air.  The first that is extracted is always much 
purer than common air,  and I presumed that it would con- 
tinue to be so,  tho'  operating on a small scale,  I could not 
ascertain it.  1 now do it with the greatest certainty.  It is 
possible,  however,  that the air yielded by water may be that 
which it originally got from the atmosphere,  retaining with the 
greatest obstinacy that which it is least apt to imbibe.  I had 
many experiments,  and some of them rather curious,  on 
water deprived of air imbibing such as I present to it.  which I 
do with great ease  ;  but the particulars are too many fur a letter. 
I am now in a course of experiments by which I think I 
shall prove pretty decisively that what I have called the 
phlogistication of air is really so,  and not the men-  absorption 
of the pure part of it,  as the French chymists suppose.  In 
many of the eases there i-  something emitted from the sub- 
stance, as well as something imbibed by it,  and this something 
which we have called phlogiston uniting with the pure parr of 
the air.  make,-  phlogisticated air.  so that originally it contains 
more pure air than they suppose.  I have to ascertain how 
much it really is,  and how much is the produce of phlogistica- 
tion. In other processes I think I make phlogisticated air by 
the unison of dephlogisticated and inflammable air ;  but the 
processes are not yet completed.1 Having more opportunity 
for reading and writing than for anything else.  I am now 
chiefly employed in the continuation of my History of tin' 
Christian Church,  tasking myself,  as I presume you do.  -,i 
much every day.  By this means I reckon that I shall complete 
the whole in two years,  and more than half of one is expired.3 

1 The results of these experiments were embodied in:  "  Experiments 
and Observations relating to the Analysis of Atmospherical Air;  also 
further Experiments relating to the Generation of Air from Water." 
Read before the American Philosophical Society,  February 5th and 19th, 
1796,  and printed in tln-ir Transactions.  These papers wen-  reprinted, 
with some additions,  in London,  same year.  Cf.  note 2 of Letter No.  26 
for Priestley's earlier experiments in this direction. 

2 Priestley had published the  "General History of the Christian 
Church to the Fall of the Western Empire,"  in 1790.  The second edi- 
tion to which he alludes was not completed until 1802-03,  in four 
volumes. 

150 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

S ,  however,  I expect to be employed in the instruction 

oi youth,  as a college is to be established in this place,  and I 
am appointed the principal.3 The next spring we begin to 
build  :  but our funds will be small.  1 wish we had a proper 
person for teaching Natural History,  including Botany.  Almost 
evi rvthino else I can, ;>/•£>  tempore,  in some measure, teach my- 
W'luii our common hall is erected,  I shall also make 
ii-.'  of it as a chapel,  for such is the bigotry of the people in 
this pan of the country,  that tho'  in every other respect my 
reception has been very flattering,  their pulpits are all shut to 
me.  At Philadelphia,  1 am assured,  I should raise a congre- 
gation of unitarian Christians,  but on several accounts I could 
not live there.  It is expensive,  and disagreeable in the ex- 
treme. 1 was invited to the professorship of chemistry there, 
but 1 must have lived in the town, and more would have bo a 
expected of me than I could have performed,  without uiore 
labour than,  at my time of lite,  and interrupted as I should 
have been,  than I eould well support.  I intend,  however,  to 
spend a month or six weeks there every winter. 

1 am glad to h<  ar of the fair trial that will be made of Mr. 
Beddoes'4 theory al Birmingham.  1 want Mr.  Watt's appa- 
ratus.5 1 eould use it for various purposes.  Perhaps he will 
have the goodness to send it me,  and might not be pleased if I 
proposed to pay for it.  as I gladly would do.  I must get 
everything of much value from England.  I am much pleased 
with your favourable account of Portugal.     I had not heard 

8 See Letter No.  83,  note i. 

1 Dr.  Thomas Beddoes had founded at Bristol a Pneumatic Institute 
for llie medical administration of artificial airs.  He published,  between 
1794 and 1796,  several papers on the  "Medicinal use of factitious airs 
and on the manner of obtaining them in large quantities."  In these 
irehes he was assisted by James Watt,  and afterwards by Humphry 
Daw,  who made his celebrated discovery of the properties of  "laughing 
gas"  in the Institution at Bristol. 

5 This is undoubtedly Watt's Pneumatic Apparatus,  described in Bed- 
does's work named in the preceding note. 

LETTER TO YATT.HAX.  1 5 1 

of my election iuto their society.     Take care of your health, 
and write to me often. 

Yours sincerely, 

J.  PRIESTLEY. 

P.  S. — Our best respects to Mrs.  Withering. 

Dh.  Withering,  Birmingham,  England. 

No.  90. 

PRIESTLEY TO  \VM.  VAOGHANJ 

NORTHUMBERLAND,   Nov.   1,   1796. 

Dear Sir:  I lately concluded a letter begun by my wife 
tn your mother,  the last that she attempted to write,  for she 
died about ten days after.2 The shock was the more severely 
felt,  for it was unexpected till the day on which she died,  tho' 
we were a little alarmed at times before.  But the preceding 
night,  and that very morning,  we thought her considerably 
better.  If my son had not been so near me,  so that 1 can 
live with him,  I should not have known what to do  :  for you 
know I was,  as I have often said,  only a lodger in her house. 
I had no rail-  of anything,  but employed myself wholly in my 
own pursuits.  She was much attached to this place,  and had 
it not been for that I should certainly have fixed somewhere 
nearer to Philadelphia.  But as  .-hi'  had suffered much on my 
account,  I thought it right to sacrifice something to her, 
thinking,  at the same time,  that I could make this situation 
answer all my own views,  as I hope I ran.  It is now impos- 
sible for me to remove,  but I shall spend more time in l'hila- 

'  Just before sailing for New York.  Dr.  Priestley was a guest of Mr. 
William Vaughan. 

2 Mrs.  Mary Priestley died September 17th,  1796.  Her unfinished 
letter to Mrs.  Vaughan is mentioned by Priestley in his correspondence 
with Lindsey and with Belsham.  (Rutt,  II.,  S.i?  and 360.)  Mrs. 
Priestley's  "constancy and perseverance"  in supporting her husband 
"under all his trials and sufferings"  have been reeorded by an affec- 
tionate son in the continuation of his father's Memoirs.  Dr.  and Mrs. 
Priestley had suffered the loss of their youngest son a few months befi 

152 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

delphia tlian T should otherwise have done,  if it can be made 
tolerably convenient for me. 

I wonder we hear nothing of your brother.  I wish we had 
him,  and indeed all our friends,  farther from the trouble in 
which Europe is involved,  and which I fear will extend much 
farther.3 Here we are happily at peace,  and I hope likely to 

continue so,  and tl mntry is in all respects in a more 

flourishing state than any that was ever known or heard of. 
We are about to change our President,4 but,  tho'  the con- 
test will be a very warm one,  it will be attended with no 
serious inconvenience.  The moment it is decided by a ma- 
jority of votes all will acquiesce.  There is no danger of 
any insurrection or disturbance of any kind. 

I fear I have made too free in drawing for money.  But 
the expense attending the building of my house5 has far ex- 
ceeded inv calculation.  However,  1 want to set1 your account, 
and then I can take my measure better for the future. 

I am sdad to hear that Mr.  Wilkinson's affair is at last 
settled,  tho'  I fear not to the satisfaction of both parties,  which 
indeed were hardly possible.  It was a source of much concern 
to my wife,  who always held with the older brother. 

Mr.  Russell6 is now in this house,  on his way to some lands 
that he has north of this place,  but he has taken a house at 
Middletown,  in Connecticut,  so that I do not expect to see 
much more of him.      But I do not wish for much society. 

With every good wish to all the family I am,  Dear Sir, 

Yours sincerely, 

.T.  PRIESTLEY. 

P.  S.      All here join in their respects. 

William Vaughan,  Esq.,  Mincing Lane,  London. 

3 This probably refers to tin-  wars in which Bonaparte was engaged. 
I ii 1796 lie was in Italy. 

4 Washington was succeeded by John Adams in 1797. 

'  Priestley's house on the bank of the Susquehanna,  Northumberland, 
is still in fair condition. 

See Letter No.  7.  note l.  and Letter No.  88. 

LETTER TO VAUfiHAN.  153 

No.  91. 
PRIESTLEY TO BENJ.  VACGHAN. 

NORTHDMBERLAXD,  Ap.  19,   1798, 

Dear Sir  :  You are very kind in endeavoring to facilitate 
my journey to Kennebec,  l>ut at my age,  which you seem to 
overlook,  lint the effects of which I feel,  it is too formidable 
an undertaking.  Crossing the Atlantic appears much less 
formidable.  Besides,  tho'  I should consider your residenct 
near me as a thing valuable,  a visit would answer little pur- 
pose, ami  !"•  a great interruption to my pursuits;  and as the 
dav draws towards a rinse with me,  I have no time to lose. 
When 1 begin to lie less capable of application,  which will lie 
at no great distance,  I shall court idleuess,  and be thankful 
for amusement. 

I cannot imagine what you mean by intimating that some 
event may take place here in which I may be of some use. 
Whatever it be,  you certainly overrate my importance in 
fancying this.  All that I can possibly do here is in theology, 
and that is over.  The proposal for my Church History1 gets 
me only seven subscribers in Philadelphia,  and among them 
was not Mr.  Adams,  tho'  he received in a flattering manner 
the dedication of a volume of my 1 Hsrourses.2 All that I can 
do here is to compose the works I mentioned,  and prosecute 
my experiments,3 for which I have,  at least,  the advantage of 
leisure,  and print them when I can afford it myself I have 
never completed my Expositions of the Revelation,  and have 
made some progress in that of Daniel.  Tin's I could wish to 
have your perusal of;  but I cannot venture to scud the copy 
so far.     I have also some curious facts in philosophy to nien- 

1  "A General History of the Christian Church from the Fall of the 
Western Empire to the present time."  Vols.  i.  anil ii.  were published 
in 1802,  anil iii.  anil iv.  in 1803. 

2 Discourses relating to the Evidence of Revealed Religion,  delivered 
in the Church of the Universalists in Philadelphia,  and published at the 
request of many of the Hearers.     Vol.  i.,  1 TOG,  vol.  ii..  1797. 

8 Priestley discovered the gas carbon monoxide in the following year. 

154 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

tion  ;  bill thai will answer no end before you have seen what 
1 have already printed on those subjects in the country,  and 
there is much uncertainty in sending anything to so great a 
distance.  I sent copies of all my publications to your brother 
Charles.  They make ten different articles,  besides two printed 
in the Transactions of the Philosophical Society,  and reprinted 
in a pamphlet in England.  1 have now,  no doubt,  of over- 
turning the French new theory of chemistry.4 

I have no thoughts of going to France before a peace,  or of 
ever becoming a citizen of the United States.  In my case,  it 
could not answer any end whatever.  I choose rather to live 
as a stranger in the country.  Such is the state of things in 
France,  that 1 now give up all expectations of making any- 
thing of my property there. 

I wish you had been nearer the seat of government you 
might have been of some use in the present awkward state of 
things,  tho'  I know there is a great jealousy of the interference 
of foreigners,  I keep out of the way of all Polities,  and yet 1 meet 
with more,  and more coarse abuse here,  than in England,  and 
in a newspaper most patronized by the governing people.  But 
these things do not affect me much now.  I had hoped, 
however,  that,  while I was quiet myself,  I might have been 
quiet in this country;  to pence I have always been a friend. 
Bui the jealous friends of the revolution here are in general 
out of favour now,  and the tories are courted and popular. 

To kiln dry boards we dig a trench about two feet deep,  the 
length of the boards and what breadth you please.  We then 
support the board with the edges downward-,  and so that 
when the fire is made under them,  the  -moke and heat may 
have access to every part of them.  Two or three stages are 
placed one over another,  and on the outside boards to keep oft* 
the rain.  In ten days they will be as much dried as by expo- 
sure to the air two years.  We commonly kiln dry ten thou- 
sand feet at a time.  The fire wood must be such as is not apt 
to flame,  lest the boards should take tire,  which sometimes 

*  Priestley published numerous short articles in the years 1 796-99 in 
the New York Medical Repository,  and in the Trans.  Am.  Philos.  Soc. 

LETTER TO RUSH.  155 

happens.     The expense cannot be much.    A house constru 
with such boards I prefer to one of brick or stone. 

I have the work you mention of Beansobre,5 and have 
abridged it in my Church History but T never before heard of 
the Appendix In revising my works I frequently want to 
have recourse to my authorities but if it be of much conse- 
quence to vim I will send it.  We have now a stage wagon 
to Philadelphia which goes once in about six works.6 

Yours sincerely, 

J.  PRIESTLEY. 
Benjamin Vaughan,  Esq.,  at Charles Vaughan,  Esq.,  Boston. 

No.  92. 

PRIESTLEY TO DR.  BEN.T.  RUSH. 

HOMEEKLAXD,  Aug.  8,  1799. 

Dear Sir  :  I thank you for your very curious lectures on 
Life,  which I have read with very great satisfaction, 
as.  indeed,  I do everything of yours.  I like all your medical 
tract-,  because I think I understand them better than most 
things of'  the same kind.  I shall read all your volumes with 
more attention than ever. 

In return I shall have to present to you a work I have in 
the press,  and which I call a Comparison of tin Institutions of 
Moses with those of th<  Hindoos and other antient nations.1 
We have printed about two-thirds of it,  and it will be a pretty 
large volume.  8vo.  It includes,  however.  Remarks mi 31. 
Dupuis'  Origin of all Religions,  and an Address to tin-  J:  us on 
tin present dale of things,  am!  their interestin it;  and also, 
Methodical arrangement  *>/  all tin laws nf Moses.     I am well 

5 Isaac'  de Beausobre,  an eminent French Protestant theologian,  born 
died 1 738,    author of several theological works of historical 
bearing. 

"   A distance of 1  :;■_'  mil.'-. 
1 Published in 1799. 

156 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

aware that I shall be a considerable loser by the work,  but it 
is the only way in which I can be of any use in this country. 
My object was never gain in any of my publications,  and if I 
can only bear the loss I shall look no further. 

1 wish I could give you as much satisfaction with respect to 
the prophecies as von do to me with respect to Medicine and 
Physiology.  The present time is certainly a most interesting 
one,  and the fall of at least one of the monarchies of Europe, 
and especially that of the pope,  shows ns where we are in the 
great chain of Events.  I expect the downfall of all the states 
represented by the fen toes in the image of Nebuchadnezzar, 
and the fen horns of the 4th beast of Daniel before the present 
war he nver.  They were all to fall together and with violence. 
Egypt is.  no doubt,  to lie raised from its late abject state about 
the same time,  lint whether by Buonaparte,  or some other,  we 
cannot presume to say.  He may he only the precursor of 
their great deliverer.  I think it more probable that the French 
nation will he tin great instrument in the hand of God to 
(.'lied these great things,  as their leading men have no views 
of the kind  ;  so that it will not he said hereafter that the 
prophecies have fulfilled themselves.  I look for great things 
in the present generation.  You are younger than I am,  and 
will probably see them. 

Having much leisure,  and no disposition to idleness,  I have 
been busy,  and I think pretty successfully,  in my experiments,2 
one object of which has been the overturning of the French 
system of chemistry,  and at present having seen what Dr. 
Woodhouse3 and others have advanced in support of it,  I am 
pretty confident that it will fall.     I have sent to the Medical 

2 On December 20,  1799,  Priestley read to the Philosophical Society 
in Philadelphia a paper entitled  :  "  Experiments on the change of place 
in different forms of air through several interposing substances,"  in 
which lie recognizes distinctly,  for the first time,  tin'  phenomena of 
gaseous diffusion.     Cf.   Letter No.  30. 

3 Dr.  James Woodhouse,  Professor of Chemistry in the Medical De- 
partment of the University of Pennsylvania from 1795 to his death in 
1809.  He was a frequent contributor to Mitchill's Medical Repository, 
and opposed Priestley's phlogistic views. 

LETTER TO PERIGATJX. 

15< 

Repository4 three articles5 in answer to Dr.  Woodhouse,  and 
shall s 1 write out an account of some experiments of a dif- 
ferent kind,  which 1 have made in this place. 

Were you at liberty to make an excursion as far as these 
bach woods I shall be happy to see you,  and so would many 

others 

I am,  Dear Sir, 

Yours sincerely, 

J.  PRIESTLEY. 
Dr.  Rush,   Philadelphia. 

No.  93. 

PRIESTLEY TO CITIZEN PERIGAUX. 

Philadelphia,  April 12,  1801. 

Sir:  I take the opportunity of Mr.  Henry's return to 
France  (and to whom  [transferred the hill that yon authorized 
me to draw upon you)  to request that you would inform me of 
the amount of the annual income from the whole of Mr.  A\  il- 
kinson's donation,  on the supposition of his sending you the 
necessary powers to complete the transfer,  and also of the prob- 
able state of your funds in future.1 

I am interested in your answer,  as it is my wish to reside 
some time at least with you,  if the property in France will 

4 The Medical Repository.  Edited by Samuel L.  Mitchill.  New 
Y'ork,  1797-1826.  Dr.  Priestley was a frequent contributor to tins 
journal from its establishment to his death.  In the second volume 
(1798-99)  he published no less than eight letters addressed to Dr.  Mit- 
chill. in defence of the theory of phlogiston.  (Pp.  48,  163,  16U.  263, 
269,  383,  and 388.) 

5 Dr.  Priestley's Reply to his Antiphlogistic Opponents.  Med.  Repos., 
iii.  11G,  121,  124  [1800). 

1 This refers to the donation of  £10,000 in French funds by Mr.  Wil- 
kinson.    See Letter No.  64,  note 2. 

This apparently never yielded any income to Priestley,  who planned 
in 17H7 to go to France to attend to the matter.  (Rutt.  II..  375.) 
M.   Perigaux was his banker in Paris. 

[58 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

afford me a deoenl subsistence.     When I was obliged to leave 
England I came hither,  because,  at that time,  1 could nol go 
in France,  which I should have preferred on many accounts.2 
1 now hope we shall soon have the greal blessing of pi 
when I may cross the Atlantic with safety. 

When I wrote lasi 1 wasjusl recovered from a dangerous ill- 
ness, at present my health seems to be completely re-established.3 
I am,  Sir.  Yours sincerely, 

J.   PRIESTLEY. 
Citizen Perigaux,  Banker,  Paris.1 

No.  94. 

PRIESTLEY TO DR.   BEXJ.   RUSH. 

Northomberlaxd,  May 7.  1801. 

Dear Sir:  1 send you two papers,1 one in the form of a 
letter addressed to yourself,  which,  if you approvt of,  you may 
send to the Medical Repository.  I have most doubts about 
the paper on Dreaming,  as you will see that I have nothing to 
propose but a fact or two,  and nothing at all satisfactory by 
way of hypothesis to account for them.  The most important 
part is what 1 borrow from you.  However,  I leave it to your 
disposal. 

-  Sec Letter No.  70.  note 1. 

s Priestley had been dangerously ill with  "  bilious fever and pleurisy," 
for which Dr.  Rush bled him  "  profusely seven times."  President Jef- 
ferson wrote him a kind and confidential letter at this time,  asking him to 
complete his recovery by paying him  (Jefferson)  a visit.  (Memoirs, 
Correspondence and Private Papers of Thomas Jefferson,  1830,  I II..  4i 8.  | 

'  This letter is endorsed apparently b\  the recipient  :  "  Philadelphia. 
lJavnl.  1801.  J.  Priestley.  R[ecu]  10 July,  1802."  It hears a post- 
mark, "  Hamburg." 

1 These were undoubtedly the following:  — 

"Some Thoughts concerning Dreams,"   published in   .1/.  d.    I:       - 
v.,   1 25  ;   and — 

Remarks on the Work entitled  :  "  A Brief History of Epidemic and 
Pestilential Diseases"  [by Noah Webster],  published in the same 
\  iilunie,  page   :;_'. 

LETTER TO BUSH.  159 

With the other I am better satisfied,  and if you correspond 
with Mr.  Webster,2 you may tell him how well satisfied I am 
with his work.  But his philosophy is wild and absurd in the 
extreme.  Pray is he a believer in revelation or not?  I find 
ral atheists catch at everything favourable to the doctrine 
of equivocal generation  :  but it must be reprobated by all who 
are not. 

If there be anything not correct in what I have said of an 
anatomical kind I hope you will alter it.  This pari of my 
library is very  -canty,  and I have but an imperfect recollection 
of what I once knew of the subject.  If anything occur to 
vein in considering it.  I wish you would add it as from your- 
self. 

I frequently think with much pleasure and regret on the 
many happy hours I spent in your company,  and wish we 
were not at so great distance.  Such society would be the balm 
of lite to me.  But I must acquiesce in what a wise provi- 
dence has appointed. 

Yours sincerely, 

J.  PRIESTLEY. 
Doctob Rush,  Philadelphia. 

Xo.  95. 

PRIESTLEY TO DR.  BENJ.  RUSH. 

Northumberland,  Jany.  -~,  1^"-- 
Deab Sir:  I take the opportunity ol my son's going to 
Philadelphia to thank you for the very acceptable present of 
the Copy of your Lectures.  I have read them with more 
satisfaction than I can express.  I do not think that such 
enlarged views ever  [occurr-]ed to any professor of medicine 

in  [ (torn)].    Tho'  sublimely speculative,  they are at  [th-]e 

same time highly practical and useful.     Every thing I see of 

2 Noah Webster,  the distinguished lexicographer  (175P-1843),  was at 

this date engaged on his  '-Dictionary of the English Language." 

160 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

yours makes me wish to see tin-  practical and popular treatise 
on medicine that you told me you had in hand.  I hope we 
shall not wait for it long. 

1 suffered a good deal from the anno in our late unhealthy 
season,  and also from indigestion  ;  but I thank God 1 am now 
recruiting,  and hope to he as well as usual in a short time; 
tho'  1 do not expect to recover the flesh and the strength that 
1 had before my illness in Philadelphia,  when I was so much 
indebted to your kind attention. 

With the greatest gratitude and respect,  I am, 

1 tear Sir,  your-  sincerely, 

J.   PRIESTLEY. 
Doc roa Rcsh,  Philadelphia. 

No.  96. 
PRIESTLEY TO DR.  BENJ.  RUSH. 

Northumberland,  Aug.  5,  1802. 

Dear Sir  :  Did there appear to me the least propriety,  or 
probability of effect,  in the application you propose,  1 would 
do it for you sooner than for the nearest relation of my own. 
But what can 1 say of your brother,  as a man,  or a lawyer, 
that is not much better known to the governor already  '?  And 
as he is no stranger to my intimacy with you,  he would,  tho'  I 
should not mention your name,  conclude it was only yon that 

[ (torn)]  to him thro'  me.     Your brother'-  character and 

merits as a lawyer,  which I believe nobody questions,  cannot 
be unknown to the governor,  who is himself a lawyer,  and I 
hope it will not pass unnoticed by him.  However,  I under- 
stand that no alteration will be made in the judiciary system 
this session. 

Your letter came when I was in bed.  confined by an ague, 
which 1 had every day tor a whole week,  but it has now left 
me. 

I wish much to see your family physician.  Tho'  I was 
never robust,    I hardly knew what sickness was before my 

A PRINTED CIRCULAR.  161 

seizure in Philadelphia,  but the old building has since that had 
so many shocks,  that I am apprehensive it will ere long give 
way.  But I have abundant reason to be satisfied,  and shall 
retire from lite comnva satur.  Admonished,  however,  by 
present appearances that what I do I must do quickly,  I have 
begun to print my Church History?  to he followed by my 
Notes  "a lln Scrijitures.1 

I have sent you a  -mall pamphlet3  [ (torn)]  have just 

printed,  on a subject that will not probably interest you much, 
tho*  every thing relating to Christianity interests its friends 
more or less. 

I am,  Dear Sir.  your-  sincerely, 

J.  PRIESTLEY. 
D ros Rrsu,  Philadelphia. 

A PRINTED CIRCCLAi:. 

Philadelphia,  March 2d,  1803. 

Sir  :  You are hereby invited to join the other members of 
the American Philosophical Society,  in giving a testimony of 
respect,  to their venerable associate Dr.  Joseph Priestley,  who 
dines with them on Saturday next at Francis'  Hotel — Dinner 
on table at 3 o'clock. 

i 

1 

C.  WlSTAB,  ] 

J.  Williams, 
J.  R.  Smith. 
T.  T.  Hewsos, 
J.  Vaoghan, 

An answer will be called for to-morrow morning. 

Db.  Rrsu. 

1 A General History of the Christian Church from the Fall of the 
Western Empire to the present time.  Vols.  I.  and II. ,  1S02  ;  III.  and 
IV..  1803. 

i Priestley did not live to carry out this project ;  but the work appeared 
posthumously under the title:  Notes on all the Books of Scripture for 
the use of the Pulpit and Private Families. 

3 Probably  :  "  A Letter to an Anti-peedo Baptist,"  published in 1802. 
11 

lli'2 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

No.  97. 

Tllns.  COOPER TO DR.  BENJ.  RUSH. 

NOKTHUMBERLAKD,   Feb.  6,  1 S04. 

Dear Sir:  Mr.  Joseph Priestley is not at present in spirits 
to write ti>  his friends,  and it falls to my lot therefore to 
acquaint yon that I>r.  Priestley died this morning about 11 
o'clock,  without the slightest degree of apparent pain.  He 
had for some time previous,  foreseen his dissolution,  but he 
kept up to the last his habitual composure,  cheerfulness and 
kindness.  He wM have been 71 the 24th of next month. 
For about a fortnight there were symptoms of dropsy owing 
to general debility  :  about two days before his death,  these 
symptoms disappeared,  and a troublesome cough came on per- 
haps from a translation to the chest. 

Yesterday he had strength enough to look over a revise of 
the Annotations lie was publishing on tin.'  old and New Tes- 
tament, and this morning;  he dictated in good language some 
notices which he wished his son Mr.  Priestley to add to his 
unpublished works.  I am sure you will sincerely regret 
the decease of a man so highly eminent and useful in the 
literary and philosophical world,  and so much personally your 
friend.  Believe me with much respect 

Sir,  Your obed't servant, 

THOS.  COOPER. 
Dk.  Rush,  Philadelphia. 

The following memorandum is in the collection of Mr. 
('oiivers Button,  of Germantown,  Philadelphia,  to whom we 
are indebted for the privilege of its publication. 

COPY OF FETTER OR MEMORANDUM.  163 

COPY OF LETTER OR MEMORANDUM. 

No date,  no address,  no signatun  .' 

Dr.  Priestley having written the History and Present Stale 
of Electricity,  would willingly undertake to write the history 
of all the other branches of experimental philosophy upon the 
same extensive plan.  He apprehends that a work of this 
kind exhibiting a view of all that has been done already, 
would,  on several accounts greatly facilitate future discoveries 
in science;  but he has hitherto been discouraged from under- 
taking it by the expenses in which it would necessarily involve 
him,  and which he is not able to supply  ;  particularly in pro- 
curing the books to which he cannot have access in his present 
situation.  In order to execute this work with advantage,  he 
will also be under an immediate necessity of considerably en- 
larging his philosophical apparatus,  both to ascertain many 
disputed facts,  and to pursue the hints for farther discoveries, 
which the consideration of those that have been made by 
others will unavoidably suggest.  His history of electricity was 
very expensive to him on this account,  but he thinks himself 
well repaid by the many original experiments he was thereby 
enabled to make,  most of which are now before the public. 

Dr.  Priestley would think himself greatly honored,  if his 
Grace the Duke of Northumberland should think this work 
worthy of his patronage/ 

-• 

1 Written in a clear hand on paper 124 inches by 7^  inches. 

2 Priestley's  "History of Electricity"  was published in 1767;  it is 
dedicated to James,  Earl of Morten,  President of the Royal Society. 
The Preface is dated Warrington,  March,  1707;  the second edition is 
dated Leeds,  January,  1769.  Priestley published his  ••  History and Pre- 
sent State of Discoveries relating to Vision.  Light,  and Colours,"  in 1 772 
(2 vols.  4to.). 

In his autobiography,  Dr.  Priestley writes:  "Having succeeded so 
well in the History of Electricity,  I was induced to undertake the history 
of all the branches of experimental philosophy;  anil at Leeds I gave nut 
proposals for that purpose,  and published the:  'History of Discoveries 
relating to Vision,  Light,  and Colours.'  "      (Rutt's edition,  I.,  77-7*. ) 

The preceding memorandum is apparently the draft of the  "propo- 
sals" here referred to;  this would fix the date of the willing between 
the years 1768 and 1771,  during which time he resided at Leeds. 

SYNOPSIS 

OF 

CORRESPONDENCE OF DR.  PRIESTLEY; 

l i INSISTING i IIIEFLT OF 

LETTERS FROM HIM TO HIS BROTHER-IN-LAW,  MR,  WILKINSON 
FROM THE YEAR 1790-1802. 

In posited by John F.  Marsh,  .1 inuary,  1850,  as the Warrington Museum and 
Library by Permission of Mr.  Wilkinson's Family. 

1.  26 March,  1789.     Mr.  Joseph Priestley,  son of Dr.   Priestley,  to 

Mi-.  Wilkinson.  Iiis maternal uncle ami employer,  asking'  his sanc- 
tion to tin-  writer's marriage with Miss Ryland. 

2.  2 Sept.,  1790.     Dr.  Priestley to his brother-in-law,  Mr.  Wilkinson, 

on Mr.  Joseph Priestley's marriage and prospects,  and asking 
Mr.  Wilkinson to take Dr.  Priestley's second son,  William,  into 
his service — alludes to the writer's philosophical works.  Also 
sketch of Mr.  Wilkinson's answer. 

IS.     ;j October,  1790.     Mr.  Joseph P.  to Mr.  W.,  declining to settle at 
Bershani. 

4.  11 Oct.,  1790.      Dr.    P.   to Mr.    W.    on the same subject and the 

prospects of his other sons. 

5.  18 Oct.,  1790.     Mr.  Joseph P.  to Mr.  W.  declining his offer and 

proposing to leave his service, 
(i.      2U Oct.,  1790.     Mr.  W.'s answer. 

7.  3 Nov.,  1790.     Dr.  P.  to Mr.  W.  on Mr.  Joseph P. 's connection 

with the latter and the altered prospects of the writer's family. 
Alludes to a sermon he had published. 

8.  20 Jany.,  1791.     Dr.  P.  to Mr.  W.  on the same subject.     Speaks 

of his Letters to Mr.  Burke and mentions the number of copies 
in the three editions. 

166 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

9.     18 Feby.,  1791.     Dr.   P.    to Mr.    W.    on same subject,  and on 
pecuniary affairs. 

10.  25 Feby.,  1791.     Dr.  P.  to Mr.  AV.'s secretary. 

11.  20 Aug.,  1791.     An interesting letter on the subject of the Bir- 

mingham Riots.  .Mentions that he is engaged on an Appeal to 
the Public on the subject. 

12.  .">   Sept..  Kill.     Mr.   Gallon to Dr.   P.  on affairs at Birmingham 

and Dr.  P. 's contemplated visit there. 

13.  8 Sept.,  1791.     Dr.  P.  to Mr.  AV.  arranging to visit him at Castle- 

head.  Comments on affairs at Birmingham,  and states that his 
friends at Manchester are afraid to receive him. 

14.  No date  (Sept.,  1791).     Dr.   P.  to Mr.   W.  with change of plans. 

Determined to reside at Hackney.  Thoughts of emigrating. 
Investments in French and American funds. 

15.  4 Oct.,  1791.     Dr.  P.  to Mr.  W.    Birmingham Riots.     Prospects 

of England and France.  French and American funds.  Offer of 
inhabitants at Toulouse to place a vacant monastery at Dr.  P.'s 
disposal.     Dissenters at Hackney. 

16.  6 Oct.,  1791.     Mr.  AV.  to Dr.  P.  advises settling in France.     In- 

vestment in French funds. 

17.  23 Nov..  1791.     Dr.  P.  to Mr.  W.  asking advice on the  "  Appeal 

to the Public."  Condition of his Library,  etc.  His pursuits. 
Residence at Clapton.  Congregation at Birmingham dan-  not 
receive him. 

18.  18.   Feby.,  1793.     Dr.   P.   to Mr.   AV.       Polities and prospects of 

war.  Dangers of his own position and thoughts of emigrating. 
His son William settled in France. 

19.  19 March,  1793.     Dr.  P.  to Mr.  W.      Mentions his letter in reply 

to the observations of Burke.  Emigration of his son William to 
America.  French and American funds.  Popular feeling pre- 
vents him from procuring domestic servants. 

20.  6 April,  1793.       Dr.    P.    to Mr.    W.      Politics and commercial 

affairs.     Emigration of all his sons to America. 

21.  2 May,    1793.       Dr.   P.    to Mr.   W.      Public affairs.      Monetary 

Panic. 

22.  It;   May.    1793.      Dr.   P.   to Mr.   AV.       Thoughts of emigrating to 

America to join the contemplated college there.  State of the 
affairs of his son-in-law,  Mr.  William Finch.  Prospects of the 
War. 

LETTERS To Ml!.    WILKIN-'  iN .  167 

28.  No date  (  28 May.  1793).  Dr.  P.  to Mr.  \Y.  State of the writers 
health.     Public affairs. 

•24.  20 June,  1793.  Dr.  P.  to Mr.  W.  Public affairs.  The writer's 
health.  Determination not to emigrate.  His publications.  Emi- 
gration of his sons. 

25.  3 July.   1793.     Dr.   P.  to Mr.    W.     Pamphlets.     Public affairs. 

Visit to Castlehead.     Minerals. 

26.  15 July,  1793.     Dr.  P.  to Mr.  W.     Pamphlets.     His son's emigra- 

tion.     Public affairs.     Compensation for Birmingham Riots. 

•27.  19 Aug..  1793.  Dr.  P.  to Mr.  W.  Prospects of the War.  Re- 
ported rupture with America.  Prosecution of Mr.  Walker. 
Emigration of his sons. 

28.  No date.  (About Sept.,  1793.)  Dr.  P.  to Mr.  W.  Determination 
to emigrate to America.  His prospects there.  Present from Mr. 
W.  of a sum of money in the French funds.  Publication of the 
heads of his lectures on Experimental Philosophy. 

28a.   13 Dec,  1793.     Dr.  P.  to Mr.  W.     French assignats. 

2 Dec,  1793.  Dr.  P.  to Mr.  W.  New publications.  Allusion 
to the riots.  Protection of his rights to property in the French 
funds. 

SO.  9 Jany.,  1794.  Dr.  P.  to Mr.  W.  Arrival of Mr.  Jo..  P.  i„ 
America.  Public affairs.  Pamphlets.  Invitation to Dr.  P.  to 
join the college at New York. 

31.  25 Jany..  1794.  Dr.  P.  to Mr.  W.  Public affairs.  Letters from 
America.  American land scheme.  Pecuniary matters.  Emi- 
gration. 

:;■_'.  7 Feby.,  1794.  Dr.  P.  to Mr.  W.  Invitation to visit Dr.  P. 
American land scheme.  Regrets at leaving England.  Publica- 
tion of Discourses on the Evidences of Revelation. 

33.  14 June,  1794.  Dr.  P.  to Mr.  W.  Voyage and arrival at New- 
York,  and flattering reception there.  Money matters.  Prospects 
of war between England and America.  Difficulty in obtaining 
remittances abroad from French funds. 

:!4.  -27 June,  1794.  Dr.  P.  to Mr.  W.  Reception at Philadelphia. 
Comparison of expense of living in that city and Northumber- 
land. Memorializes the French Convention on the subject of 
the Funds.       Money matters.      Prospects of War. 

[68 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

35.  16 April,  1794.    Mr.  Cooper to Mr.  W.     Seizure of a French East 

Indiaman by the French ambassador  :it Philadelphia.  Interfer- 
ence of Dr.  P.  ms a proprietor of Actions des Indes.  Dr.  P.'s 
settlement in America. 

36.  28 May,  1794.     Mr.  Joseph P.  to Mr.  W.     American land scheme. 

State of America. 

37.  Prospectus of the American land scheme. 

38.  Copy of agreement for carrying out the American land scheme. 
30 July,   1794.     Dr.  P.  to Benjamin Vaughan,  Esq..   M.  P.     Ob- 

!9 

servations on America.     Public affairs.     Plans of life. 

JO.  26.  Aug.,  1794.  Mrs.  P.  to Wm.  Vaughan,  Esq.  Observations 
on America.     Settlement at Northumberland. 

41.  25 Oct.,  1794.      Mr.  W.  Vaughan to Mr.  W.     Extracts from letter 

from Dr.  P.  Failure of American land scheme.  Prospect of 
the Professorship at the College at Philadelphia. 

42.  12 Nov.,  1794.    Dr.  P.  to Mr.  W.     Failure of land scheme.    Plans 

of life.      Cost of living in America.      Pecuniary ami done 
matters. 

43.  24 July.  1795.     Dr.  P.  to Mr.  W.     Dispute between Mr.  \V.  and 

his brother.  Increased value of American property.  Literary 
and philosophical pursuits.  Answer to Paine.  Church History. 
&c.      Prospects of his sons.     Pecuniar)  affairs. 

44.  7 Aug.,  1795.    Dr.  P.  to Mr.  Watson  (Mr.  Wilkinson's secretary). 

Letter of condolence.      Prospects in America. 

45.  17 Dec,  1795.     Dr.  P.  to Mr.  W.     Death of the Dr.'s son Henry. 

Wishes his daughter,  Mrs.  Finch,  to join them.  Illness of Mrs. 
Priestley. 

46.  15 Nov.,  1796   [should be March].      Dr.  P.  to Mr.  W.      Mr.  W.'s 

dispute with his brother.  Mrs.  P.'s illness.  Attempt to estab- 
lish an Unitarian congregation.  Visit to the President.  State 
of America. 

47.  16 May,  1796.     Dr.  P.  to Mr.  Watson.     The Wilkinson dispute. 

The death of Henry Priestley.  Sermons on the evidences of 
revealed religion.  Religious sects in America.  State of the 
country. 

18.  28 July,  179C.  Dr.  P.  to Mr.  Wilkinson.  The dispute.  Dr.  P. 
chosen President of Northumberland College.  Literary and 
philosophical pursuits.     French funds.     Pecuniary affairs. 

LETTERS To MR.    WILKINSON.  L69 

49.  19 Sept.,    179.;.     Dr.    P.    to Mr.    W.      Death of Mrs.  Priestley. 

Wishes Mr.  and Mrs.  Finch to emigrate. 

50.  20 Oct.,  1796.     Dr.  P.  to Mr.  W.     The dispute.     Mentions Mrs. 

P.     French funds. 

51.  3 Novr.,  1796.     Dr.   P.   to Mr.   W.     Long letter on pecuniary 

transactions between them.     Future prospects. 

52.  30 Novr.,   1797.     Dr.   P.  to Mr.   W.     French funds.     Pecuniary 

affairs.  Subscriptions from philosophical friends.  Party spirit. 
Calumniated as a supposed friend of France. 

53.  25 Jany.,  1797.     Dr.  P.  to Mr.  W.     Mrs.  P.'s death.     Wishes to 

visit England.  Mr.  and Mrs.  Finch.  Narrow escape of William 
Priestley. 

54.  1 April,  1797.     Dr.  P.  to Mr.  W.     Mr.  and Mrs.  Finch.     Inten- 

tion to visit France with reference to the French funds.  Thoughts 
of purchasing land there. 

55.  11 April,    1797.      Dr.   P.   to Mr.   W.      The dispute between tin- 

brothers.  Mr.  and Mrs.  Finch and Dr.  P.'s other children. 
Visit to France.     Money matters. 

56.  7 Sep.,  1797.      Dr.  P.  to Mr.  W.      Sends copy from French agent 

as to French funds.  Commercial distress.  Mr.  and Mrs Finch. 
Failing health.  Abandons preaching in Philadelphia.  Gives up 
idea of visiting Europe. 

57.  21 Jany.,  1798.     Dr.  P.  to Mr.  W.     French funds.    Money matters 

and commercial affairs generally.  Increased value of American 
property and securities. 

58.  15 March,  1798.     Dr.   P.  to Mr.  W.     French funds.     Directory 

make an arret in Dr.  P.'s favor.  Urged to prosecute his claims 
in France.  Talleyrand.  Affairs of England and America. 
Domestic and pecuniary circumstances.  Residence and climate 
in America.     Abused as a friend of France. 

59.  7 Xovr.,  1798.     Dr.  P.  to Mr.  W.     Mr.  Joseph P.'s visit to Eng- 

land. Mr.  and Mrs.  Finch.  Pecuniary situation in consequence 
of Mr.  Vaughan's failure.      Peace-making. 

60.  25 Deer.,  1798.     Dr.  P.  to Mr.  W.    Mr.  and Mrs.  Finch.     Human 

character. 

61.  14 June,  1798.     Dr.  P.  to Mr.  W.     Money matters.     Literary and 

philosophical pursuits.     French funds.     Mr.  Joseph P. 

170 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

62.  U June,  1800.    Dr.  P.  to Mr.  W.    Money matters.     French funds. 

Talleyrand and the French Government.      Scientific pursuits. 
Contributions from English friends of science.     Public affairs. 

63.  17 July,   1800.     Dr.   P.   to Mr.  W.     Money matters.      Scientific 

pursuits.     His devotion to that object.     His children. 

64.  15 Deer.,  1800.     I>r.  P.  to Mr.  W.     Settles his affairs.     Scientific 

pursuits and contributions in aid of them.     Calumny.    Vindicates 
himself in a letter to the inhabitants of Northumberland. 

65.  30 April,    1801.     Dr.    1'.   to Mr.   W.     Scientific and Theological 

publications.     Position in America.     Letter from the President. 
Trials of life.     Recovery from illness. 

66.  21 March.    1801.     President Thomas Jefferson to Dr.   P.     Com- 

plimentary letter  (a copy). 

67.  31 July,  1802.     Dr.  I',  to Mr.  W.     Publication of two new works. 

Sends cop)  of a second letter from the President.     French funds. 

68.  in June,  1802.     President Jefferson to Dr.  P.  (a copy). 

Memorandum.  Some other letters of Dr.  Priestley and his son,  either 
of a private nature or relating only to subjects of business,  have 
been retained out of this correspondence,  and are among Mr. 
Wilkinson's papers in the hands of the solicitors to the family.1 

i For some account of this correspondence see paper by J.  Fickett Marsh, 
read to the Historic Society of Lancashire and Cheshire,  April L9,  is.".:.. 
Memoir.-  of the Society, Vol.  VII.     Liverpool,  1555.    8vo.  (IT pp.). 

APPENDIX 

I.     THE LIKENESSES OF JOSEPH PRIESTLEY IN OIL,   INK, 
MARBLE,  AND METAL.     By H.  CARRINGTON BOLTON. 

U.  THE LUNAR SOCIETY,  OR THE FESTIVE PHILOSOPHERS 
OF BIRMINGHAM 100 YEARS AGO.  By H.  CARRINGTON 
BOLTON. 

[II.     INVENTORY OF DR.  PRIESTLEY'S LABORATORY IN 1791. 

I.    THE LIKENESSES OF PRIESTLEY IN OIL.  INK, 
MARBLE,  AND METAL. 

The most youthful portrait of Dr.  Priestley with which 
we are acquainted is that commonly known as the  "Leeds 
Portrait."  (i) 

The unknown artist represents Priestley at the age of thirty, 
when he was a teacher at the Warrington Academy.  It shows 
his full tare,  slightly turned to his left,  and half length,  with 
a clerical dress,  and in a full bottomed wig;  in his right hand, 
the only one shown,  he holds a small hook  (Bible?)  between 
his thumb and lingers.  The background is perfectly plain. 
This portrait was formerly in the possession of Mrs.  Bilbrough, 
nee Ellen Priestley,  and was probably brought from Fieldhead 
by Dr.  Priestley's sister,  Mrs.  Crouch,  when she moved to 
Gildersome,  in 17.S7.  Mr.  Crouch having died in 1786,  his 
widow went to live with Mr.  William Hudson,  Gildersome, 
near Leeds  ;  and this portrait used to hang with others in his 
dining-room.  Of it Mr.  Hudson used to relate the following1 
anecdote :  The picture was once placed in the window of a 
carver and gilder's shop,  in Leeds,  when Dr.  Priestley in pass- 
ing by stopped to look at it.  A woman happening to be doing 
the same,  noticed Dr.  Priestley,  and exclaimed  :  "Why here's 
the fellow himself!" 

In 1860 this was photographed  (2)  by Messrs.  Caldesi, 
Blanford  >v  ( !o.,  18 Pall Mall,  East,  London,  and copies have 
been exhibited at various times.  One is preserved in the 
Yates Memorial volume,  at t lie Royal Society;  one is in the 
Timmins Memorial Collection at the Reference Library,  Bir- 

174 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

mingham.  For our copy we are indebted to Dr.  Jas.  F. 
Priestley,  of I >es Moines,  Iowa. 

The second portrait of Priestley,  (3)  judging by the apparent 
age of the subject,  is one which we shall call the  "  Y w i.iian 
Portrait"  after the family in whose possession it has been 
nearly one hundred years.  The artist is again unknown  ; 
Priestley is shown half length,  but no hands are visible;  his 
face is turned to his right hand,  and he wears a witr.  The 
workmanship seems to be inferior. 

This portrait  (together with one of Priestley's wife)  was 
presented by him in  ]  7!)  I or 1792 to his friend Mr.  Benjamin 
Vaughan,  who had been his pupil at the Warrington Academy 
and who gave him a refuge at the time of the Birmingham 
riots in July,  1791.  Mr.  Vaughan brought the portraits to 
America in 1795;  he settled in Hallowell,  Maine,  in 1797, 
and died there Dee.  1835,  aged 84 years.  The frames of the 
portraits suffered damage in the transportation.  These por- 
traits are now 1 1891 )  in the possession of Mr.  W.  M.  Vaughan, 
of Cambridge,  Mass.,  grandson of Benjamin,  and who has 
kindly consented to have them photographed for the first 
time.    4 

The Opie Portrait.  (5)  The eminent English artist John 
Opie,  Professor at the Royal Academy,  painted the portrait of 
Dr.  Priestley at the residence of Mr.  .1.  Johnson,  London,  the 
hitter's book publisher and friend.  It represents head and 
bust  ;  three-quarters face turned to his right;  he wears a wig, 
is dressed in the usual clerical habit and white stuck.  The 
tup button of the vest is unfastened leaving a small v-shaped 
opening.  Opie's Portrait formerly belonged to the Rev.  Mr. 
Hole,  and afterwards to Mr.  Barham,  of Exeter,  who be- 
queathed it to tin1 Manchester New College,  London,  where 
it now hangs in University Hall. 

<M'tliis portrait there are several reproductions known to 
11-.  The Arundel Society some years ago published a photo- 
graph of it.  (6)  An engraving was made by Caldwell and 
published May 1st,  1801,  by Dr.  [Robert John]  Thornton, 
in his  "New Illustrations of the Sexual System of Linnseus 

LIKENESSES OF PRIESTLEY.  175 

ami the Garden of Nature,"  London,  1801,  imp.  folio.  171 
Priestley's head is in an oval medallion grasped by the claws 
of an eagle whose head and wings project above and on either 
side.  Beneath the oval is a ribbon bearing the words  "Dr. 
Priestley."  The medallion and the eagle are backed by 
clouds and sky. 

Beneath tin's on the same page is an engraved portrait of 
Lavoisier,  from a painting by David.  Lavoisier's face is 
nearly full,  eyes are turned upward and to his right,  he wears 
a wig,  and a ruffled shirt with white stock.  The portrait is in 
an oval surmounted by a garland and ribbon,  and from be- 
neafh Hows another ribbon with the word  "Lavoisier." 

Above these two portraits are the words  :  "  Chemical Philoso- 
phers of the Present Day,"  anil beneath the names of the 
artists and engraver as given,  also the name of the publisher 
and date. 

The size of each medallion is l(i(t mm.  x 80 mm.,  and the 
page measures 46-  em.  x 32 cm. 

I.  Hazi.itt's Portrait  (8)  was painted about 1788.  It 
represents Priestley's head and shoulders,  the face turned 
towards his left.  He wears a square-cut wig with two rows 
of curls,  instead of three as in most other likenesses.  His 
clerically cut coat shows four buttons. 

This was engraved by W.  Nutter and published  "April 
14th,  1789,  by I.  Hazlitt,  No.  65 Margaret Street,  and sold 
by R.  Cribb,  No.  288 High Bolborn."  The portrait is in a 
small oval measuring 68 x 58 mm.  Beneath is the legend  : 
The Bev'd.  Joseph Priestley,  L.L.D.,  F.R.S.,  &c,  together 
with the publisher's name as given.  (9) 

Mr.  Yates thinks this was the earliesi engraved portrait of 
the chemist. 

Artatjd's Portrait.  (10)  Shortly before Priestley left 
for America,  in 1794,  he gave sittings to the artist Artaud.  a 
favorite artist with Dissenters.  This represents Priestley 
seated at a table,  full face,  half length  ;  he wears a wig,  cleri- 
cal habit,  high-cut waistcoat showing seven buttons,  of which 
the topmost is unfastened,  and the usual white stock.      In his 

17(3 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

right hand he holds a  (|iiill pen,  his arm resting upon writing 
paper on a table.  <  >n this table are an inkstand,  a book  (only 
partially shown)  and part of a glass flask.  His left arm hangs 
down so as to conceal the hand.  In the background appear 
draperv and a panel. 

In 1804,  the original was disposed of for fifteen guineas, 
and presented to Dr.  Williams'  Library,  the amount being 
raised by subscriptions of one guinea each,  (Rutt's Life of 
Priestley,  II.,  291.)  It now hangs in the Library named, 
( i ration St.,  London. 

From Artaud's portrait T.  Holloway made an engraving 
in folio size — (31 cm.  x  -'■',.  \  cm.)  It bears the legend  :  Joseph 
Priestley,  L.L.D.,  F.R.S.,  and the name of the Artist and 
Engraver.  For a copy of this engraving we arc indebted to 
Mr.  Conyers Button,  of Germantown,  Pa.  (n) 

We have in our possession a fair lithographic reproduction 
of the head of Priestley,  by Artaud,  (12)  which was part of 
Plate xxiii.,  of Lavater's Physiognomy. 

The Fusel]  Portra.it.  (13)  This,  the largest oil portrait 
of Dr.  Priestley  (three feet four inches by four feet two inches), 
was painted for Joseph Johnson,  bookseller and publisher of 
Priestley works,  in the year 1783,  while Dr.  Priestley was 
Johnson's guest.  (Knowles'  Life and Writings of Henry 
Fuseli,  London,  1831,  Vol.  I., p.  407.)  It represents Priestley 
three-quarters'  length,  seated in a high backed chair with a 
square top:  he wears a wig,  his tine is turned to the left, 
showing about seven-eighths profile.  He wears a stock and 
ruffled shirt.  His left arm rests on a table,  near open and 
closed books on manuscript.  Two fingers of his right hand, 
open,  rest on his right knee,  which is thrown across his left 
ku.  His coat shows three buttons.  The portrait is preserved 
in Dr.  Williams'  Library,  London. 

(  >f Fuseli's portrait an engraving was made by C.  Turner,  and 
published  (100 copies only),  in October,  1836,  by Richard Tay- 
lor, Red I. ion  ( 'oiirt.  Fleet Street,  London.  The plate measures 
outside,  14 x 10 inches  (356 x 255 mm.),  inside,  11^  x 8| 

LIKENESSES OF PRIESTLEY.  177 

inches  (282 x 211 mm.).  (14)  We have seen a copy of this rare 
engraving in the Hope Collection,  Bodleian Library,  Oxford. 
An engraving after Fuseli,  by E.  Wentworth,  is published 
in Robert K.  Dent's  "Old and New Birmingham."  Birming- 
ham, 1879.     Three sections.     4to.     Page 211.  (15) 

A photograph of Fuseli's portrait was published by the 
Arundel Society of London.  (16) 

An oil pm-trait by I.  Millar,  (17)  executed in 1780,  is in 
the possession of Priestley's granddaughter,  Mrs.  Robert A. 
Wainewright,  of London.  Yates gives the date of this as 
1776 or 1777.  but the canvas bears the date we have given. 
A pendant portrait of Mrs.  Priestley is also in Mrs.  Waine- 
wright's possession.  These,  so far as we know,  have not bei a 
reproduced. 

A portrait by Peter Holland,  (18)  drawing-master at 
Gateacre,  near Liverpool,  is named by Mr.  Yates,  but we have 
not succeeded in tracing it.  In 1860 it was in the possession 
of Thomas Thornely,  Esq.,  of Liverpool.  Yates says it was 
similar in style to that by Millar,  but inferior. 

The Stuart Portrait.  (19)  The distinguished American 
artist,  Gilbert Stuart,  horn at Narragansett,  Rhode Island,  in 
1756,  and died in 1828,  executed a portrait of Dr.  Priestley 
at the request of the American Philosophical Society of Phila- 
delphia; this must have been between the years 1794 and 
1800.  The contract price of fifty guineas was paid to Stuart, 
who,  however,  delayed finishing the work,  especially the 
drapery,  and took it with him to Boston.  There it was acci- 
dentally seen by Mr.  Barclay,  of Wavetree,  near Liver] 1, 

a friend and admirer of Dr.  Priestley,  then on a visit to the 
United States.  Stuart,  whose eccentricities are well known, 
sold the portrait for fifty guineas to Mr.  Barclay,  who took it 
to his home and had it finished by Artaud in 1812.  At the 
death of Mr.  Barclay it was left to Mr.  Rathbone,  of Liver- 
pool, who is said to have placed it in a public museum of that 
city.     "We have not.  however,  been able to trace it. 

While in Mr.  Barclay's possession three full-sized copies 
were made;  one of these was kept by Mr.  Priestley,  the Doc- 
12 

L78 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

toil's son,  and is now preserved by his grandchildren in North- 
umberland, Pa.  (20)  The second went to Mr.  George Skey, 
Hacknev,  and was afterwards bought by Mr,  Joseph Parkes, 
husband of a granddaughter of Dr.  Priestley.  Jt is now in 
the possession of Mine.  Belloc,  Mr.  Parkes's daughter,  and 
hangs in a private house in Westminster.  (21)  The third 
went  (we are informed)  to Miss  .Man-ell,  of Birmingham,  and 
was left l>v her to Cambridge University.  (22)  Mrs.  Waine- 
wright,  granddaughter of Dr.  Priestley,  informed me these 
three copies were made by Artaud. 

Besides these small copies were made,  one of which is now 
in possession of the widow of Dr.  James Russell,  of Birming- 
ham. (23)  Another is owned by Mine.  Belloc ;  (24)  another 
fell to Mrs.  Bowen,a granddaughter of l>r.  Priestley,  and was 
taken by her to Australia.  (25)  Still another of these is in 
po ion of Mrs.  Wainewright,  of London.  (26) 

These particulars have come to us from several sources, 
chiefly through the owners of the portraits themselves.  Mrs. 
.lames Russell,  to whom we are under special obligations,  adds 
-niic details concerning her own copy  ;  she writes:  "My copy 
was certainly procured by Mr.  Abel Peyton,  of Edgbaston, 
for presentation to Miss Lucy Finch  (then living in his house), 
a granddaughter of Dr.  Priestley,  whence it went to her sister, 
Mi—  Catharine Irene Finch,  and thence by will tome  (Dr. 
•la-.  It.).  Whether my copy is an original one,  or a second 
copv seems uncertain,  probably the latter.  Mme.  Belloc says 
her small copy is by Artaud,  of Liverpool.  Mr.  Pickersgill; 
the artist,  in examining mine,  gives it as his decided opinion 
that it was painted by his Uncle Witherington,  hut whether 
from the original he does not say." 

(From an inscription on the Russell copy,  communicated by 
Sam:  Timmins,  Esq.,  of Birmingham.) 

Yates in his  .Memorials of Dr.  Priestley refers to a small 
copy by Artaud,  made for Mr.  Charles Knight,  bookseller.  (27) 

The fact i>.  that the neglect of artists to place their initials 
or oilier distinguishing marks on portraits,  and copies of por- 

LIKENESSES OF PRIESTLEY.  L79 

traits,  and the time of execution,  causes great perplexity to 
those who a half century later make efforts to identify them. 

In Stuart's painting,  Priestley's head and shoulders are 
turned slightly to his left  ;  he wears no wig,  his hair is parted 
in the middle and hangs low behind  ;  he is dressed in a clerical 
habit with a white stuck.     Xo coat-buttons are visible. 

This lias been frequently copied by engravers.  The en- 
graving by J.  Partridge,  portrait painter to the Queen,  (28) 
bears the inscription  :  Joseph Priestley,  L.L.D.,  F.P.S.  ; 
Stuart's name is inispelled — "Stewart Pinxt."  The plate 
measures 235 mm.  x 150 mm.,  the actual bust 100 mm.  x 80 
mm.  This ha-  been issued with several works of Priestley,  his 
"Memoirs"  (London,  1806,  2 vols.  8vo.),  and the  "Monthly 
Repository"  vol.  X.  (1815). 

Stuart's portrait was more skilfully engraved by W.  Holl. 
This was published about 1833,  by  "  Charles Knight,  Ludgate 
Street and Pall  .Mall,  Past,  Loudon,  under the superinten- 
dence of the Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge." 
In this form it was issued with Knight's Gallery of Portraits 
(London,  1833,  7 vols.  roy.  8vo.),  and bears the legend  : 
"  Priestley.  From a picture by Gilbert Stewart in the posses- 
sion of T.  B.  Barclay,  Esq.,  of Liverpool."  The size of the 
plate is 132 mm.  x 105 mm.  (29) 

The engraving is a faithful copy of Stuart's portrait and 
requires no further description.  The background is perfectly 
plain.     Stuart's name is again misspelled. 

A reproduction of Knight's plate,  with the substitution of 
a facsimile of the signature of Joseph Priestley lor the legend 
above given,  was issued with vol.  vi.,  Xo.  ill,  1889,  of the 
Asclepiad,  in connection with an essay on the  "Discovery of 
Vital Air,"  by Dr.  15.  \V.  Richardson,  the editor.  (30) 

A small engraving,  evidently after Stuart,  was issued with 
the Biographical Magazine  (London,  17U4).  The head and 
shoulders of Priestley are in an oval,  54 mm.  X 42 mm.,  and 
the engraver's name is given as W.  Holl.  Beneath is the 
legend:  Or.  Priestley;  followed by a biographical sketch of 
45 lines,  completed on the same page.  (31") 

180 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRrESTLEY. 

Another eopj from Stuart  (or from Holl?)was engraved by 
C.Cook,  and i^~m  <1 in Muspratt's Chemistry,  published by 
William Mackenzie  (Glasgow,  Edinburgh,  London,  and New 
York,  1859, 2 vols.  Ito.).  The plate measures 152 x 120 mm., 
and beneath is the legend:  Joseph Priestley,  L.L.D.,  F.R.S., 
and the publisher's name as above given. 

The background shows a panel,  and to the left portion of a 
curtain and of a chair-back with a circular top.  This is 
apparently an addition by the engraver.  (321 A copy of the 
above showing theJiead only,  by an unnamed engraver,  was 
issued with the Popular Science Monthly for August,  1874. 
(I>.  Appleton A:  Co.,  New York.)  The inscription is merely: 
"l>r.  Joseph Priestley."  The size of the actual engraving 
(head)  is about 130 mm.  x 100 mm-.  (33) 

I'm stley's head iii an oval evidently engraved after Stuart 
(or sonic copy of Stuart)  in a very inferior manner,  is printed 
on the same page with equally poor portraits of Blair,  Lavater, 
Aliercroinliie.  and Moreland.  The size of the oval i>  4ii mm. 
x 40 mm.,  that of the page about 152 x 102 mm.  (34) 

The source of this we have not ascertained,  the page has 
evidently Keen torn from some 12mo.  volume. 

We have  -ecu still another engraving after Stuart,  by an 
unknown artist.  In an oval measuring 135 x I 1U  //mi. ;  the 
space within the oval is of a light green tint.  The legend is 
simply:  Priestley.  (35)  (In possession of Mr.  Conyers Button.) 

Samuel Smiles'  Lives of Boulton it Watt  (London,  1865), 
contain-  an inferior engraving after Stuart's portrait  (page 
371).  (361 

Mansell Portrait.  (37)  Portrait by an unknown artist, 
which was formerly in the possession of Mrs.  Judith Man-ell, 
of Birmingham,  an intimate friend of Dr.  Priestley.  It was 
carried off by the rioters from Fair Hill,  Priestley's residence, 
in 1791,  and afterwards sold in Birmingham.  It is now 
preserved in the Library of University Hall,  Manchester 
Xew College,  Gordon Square,  London. 

flu'  Mansell portrait shows three-quarters profile,  with wig 
and curls;  a clerical habit  ;    white stock:    two frills of the 

LIKENESSES OF rRIF.STI.EV.  L81 

shirt bosom show at the opening of the vest.  Priestley's 
right hand is thrust beneath his coat leaving exposed only a 
small part of his wrist.  The canvas represents an oval frame 
of brown color.     The size is the same a-  that l>v  ( >pie. 

Peale Portrait.  (38)     The New York Historical Society 
owns a portrait by Rembrandt Peale;  this formed a part   (if 
the Peale Collection in Philadelphia,  and was presented to the 
New York Society by Mr.  Thos.  -1.  Bryan. 

It shows Priestley's three-quarter face turned towards his 
left;  clerical habit and white stock;  close-fitting vest.  Ap- 
parently taken when advanced in years.  No wig,  his hair 
being parted at the side. 

We are indebted t"  the officers of the X.  Y.  Historical 
S iety for the permission,  and to Dr.  Louis II.  Laudy,  of 
Columbia College,  for a photographic copy of this likeuess. 
39i 

Button Portrait.  1401 A portrait in oil,  presumably by 
C.  W.  Peale,  formerly the property of Priestley's friend,  Mr. 
John Vaughan,  has recently come into the possession of Mr. 
Conyers Button,  of German town. 

It shows Priestley's face three-quarters,  head and bust  ;  hair 
rather thin,  no wig.  His vest is closely buttoned up leaving 
eiily a white stock visible;  his coat is of clerical cut,  without 
lapels and shows three large buttons.  This we shall call the 
"Button Portrait"  after the present owner,  who has kindly 
presented us with a photographic copy.  (41) 

This original portrait has been engraved as a small vignette, 
by Mr.  Jacques Reich,  of'  New York,  for Appleton's Cyclo- 
paedia of American Biography,  where it appears in connection 
with the article on Priestley;  size about 38 x 25 mm.  (42) 

Wistar Portrait.  1431 An oil-portrait by an unknown 
artist,  but which we shall call the  "  Wistar Portrait."  is in 
possession of the American Philosophical Society,  Philadelphia. 
This was presented to the Society on April 3d,  1818,  by the 
widow of Dr.  Caspar Wistar.  It represents Priestley's head 
and upper shoulders  :  he wears no wig,  and his hair parted at 
the side and features shows he was much older than when he 

182 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

-;it to Stuart.  He wears the usual white stuck and a closely 
buttoned up vest.  (44) 

For a photographic copy of this we have to thank Mr. 
( 'onyers Button,  of  <  rerrnantown. 

TheSharples Portrait.  (45)  In 1886-87,  James Walter 
exhibited in many cities of the United States a collection of 
line portraits,  which included two of Washington,  one of his 
wife,  seven of prominent American women,  and one of Dr. 
.1 — ph Priestley.  The latter was said to have been painted 
from life in Philadelphia in 1794 or ITU"),  by the artist 
James Sharpies.  Priestley's head is shown without a wig,  his 
haii'  parted in the middle and hanging low behind  :  his face 
turned slightly to his left,  with a white stock and ruffled shirt 
bosom.  A lull account of this and the other portraits was 
published in  "Walter's Memorials of Washington"  (New 
York,  1887,  8vo.).  The Academy of Fine Arts in Boston 
threw some doubts upon the authenticity of the Sharpies 
Portraits ami the collection was returned to England. 

An autotype reproduction of the Sharpies portrait  (46) 
prepared in London,  accompanied the volume named. 

A portrait in pastels by Mrs.  Sharpies  (47)  is preserved in 
the Kensington National Portrait Gallery  (Bethnal Green), 
London,  to which it was presented by James Yates in 1864. 
"  This is a bust portrait on a small scale,  turned towards the 
right,  wearing a plain black coat and a high waistcoat of the 

sam lor,  showing a little of the shirt-frill projecting beneath 

a close-fitting white cravat  ;  i~  close shaven,  pale face  -ecu 
three-quarters to the right,  the blue-gray eyes looking at 
the spectator.  The hair is brown-gray and combed straight 
down to the forehead;  the lips arc pale-red,  and there is a 
cleft in the chin.  Background shows indistinctly the fold-  of 
a bluish-green curtain.     Size.  n]xi;i inches  (241 X 165 mm.). 

Another pastel portrait by Mrs.  Sharpies  (48)  is in posses- 
sion of Dr.  William J.  Russell,  P.C.S.,  F.R.S.,  London.  It is 
similar to the above,  and measures  !)  X 7 inches  (229 X ITS 
in oval form. 

LIKENESSES OP PRIESTLEY.  183 

All the aforenamed portraits and engravings give a full or 
three-quarter view of Priestley's face  ;  a certain number show 
his sharply-defined profile. 

The original source of most of these were the famed  "Wedg- 
wood Medallions,"  which,  in several sizes,  formed one of 
the popular likenesses of Dr.  Priestley current in the last 
century.     Of this Mi~s Meteyard,  the biographer of Josiah 

Wedgw 1.  writes  :  "  In one form or another,  and in various 

bodies,  Priestley's likeness was being incessantly reproduced. 
In the houses of Dissenters it was a conspicuous ornament. 
and alter he had given to the world his discovery of oxygen 
the resemblance of this great man,  either as a full-size medal- 
lion, or as a bust,  was largely bought by continental savants" 
(ii.,  451).  Wedgwood presented one of these medallions to 
Miss Aiken,  afterwards Mrs.  Laetitia Barbauld.  It was from 
a design by either Flaxman or Hackwood,  and is supposed by 
Mr.  Yates  (Memorials of Priestley)  to date from the year 1765. 
Miss Meteyard,  however,  remarks  :  "This is far too early,  to 
none of the cameos can lie assigned an earlier date than 1  "T < : ' ' 
or 1770.     In 1765 Flaxman was only eleven years old." 

(49)  The Wedgwood Medallions were,  we believe,  of 
three sizes ;  we have seen one measuring about 9§  x 7|  inch  - 
(240x197 mm.),  and another 3|x3 inches   !'.isx77 mm.). 
They are oval disks,  with Priestley's profile and bust in white 
relief on a blue ground.     Priestley wears a wig,  having threi 
rows of curls in tin'  hack of his neck  ;  lie wears a white stock, 
and his parted coat exposes a portion of his shirt bosom; 
the side of his coat from the spectator has a peculiar fold, 
which reappears as a characteristic!  feature in the engravings 
made after the medallion.      It will lie found pictured in Mete- 
yard's Lite of Josiah Wedgwood,  vol.  i.,  p.  .'!l(i,  engraved li\ 
Pearson.   (50") 

Besides this medallion.  Wedgwood modelled in May,  1779, 
a life-size bust of Priestley  (51)  to match those of Franklin 
and Newton.  Also enlarged bas-reliefs in the style of the 
medallion,  of which plaster copies exist.  (52) 

An engraved copy of the Wedgwood medallion,  (53)  exe- 

[81 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

cuted by, an unnamed artist,  was issued with the Westminster 
Magazine for July,  1782.  The position of the head is reversi d, 
and the bust is placed in an oval frame,  on which are the 
words,  "Joseph Priestley,  L.L.D.,  F.R.S."  Above,  and hang- 
ing down over the frame,  are clusters of flowers,  somewhat 
conventionalized  ;  beneath,  and at the side of the frame,  is 
scroll-work.  This frame,  with its accessories,  rests upon a 
moulding against a panelled wall ;  beneath it is grouped philo- 
sophical apparatus,  comprising a frictional electric machine, 
two Levden jars,  model of a house with lightning-rod attached, 
a pair of dividers,  an artist's palette with brushes,  crayon 
holder and parallel ruler,  and three books,  one lying open. 
These rest upon a raised plane.  Beneath the plate,  which 
measures 93mm.  x oil mm.,  are the words :  "Published as the 
Act directs,  1 Feb.,  1782,  by  .1.  Walker,  Paternoster Row." 

The European Magazine for August,  1791,  (54)  published 
a bust of Priestley,  apparently from the Wedgwood medallion. 
The head shows the left side;  the chief peculiarity of this 
engraving,  aside from the accessories to he named presently, 
lies in the disposition of the shirt collar,  which is open under 
the chin,  showing two unfastened buttons.  The bust is in a 
circle,  beneath which,  on the left,  stands a femak in the act of 
discharging a Levden jar,  which is supported on a raised dais; 
on tlie right side two cherubs are blowing and playing with 
soap bubbles,  a dish being near on the dais.  The plate was 
engraved by W.  Bromley,  and published by  .1.  Sewell,  Corn- 
hill,  .bin.  1st,  1791.  Beneath the plate,  which measures 
125 iim.x 75 mm.,  is the legend  :  "Joseph Priestley,  L.L.D., 
F.R.S."  Above the plate*are the words :  "  European Maga- 
zine." 

A faithful copy of the Wedgwood medallion was engraved 
by Angus,  155)  and published  "as the Act directs,  1 Feb., 
1792,  by  ( '.  bolster,  No.  41,  Poultry."  It was issued with 
a number of the Literary Magazine.  The oval is a trifle 
larger than the medallion,  measuring loo mm.  x 81 mm.,  in- 
stead of US x 77.  Beneath is the legend:  "J.  Priestley, 
L.L.I  >,,  F.R.S."  and above,  the words:  "  Literary Mag-azine." 

LIKENESSES OF PRIESTLEY.  185 

On April 20th,  1794,  ELSimnionds published an engraving 
by the artist  <i.  Murray,  (56)  which shows Priestley's inutile 
looking to the right,  but he wears an ordinary coat instead of 
a fancy robe.  It is in an oval,  and apparently based on the 
Wedgwood medallion. 

An engraving much like that of Angus,  but on a square 
background,  .-tippled instead of lined,  was executed by Mac- 
kenzie (57)  "from a Basse Ivdicvo modelled from the Life," 
and published July 31st,  L805,  by A.  Tilloch,  Carey Street. 
Beneath the square is the legend  :  J.  Priestley,  L.L.D.,  F.E.S., 
the name being in script.  The squares measures 100 mm.  x 
85 mm. 

An inferior copy of the above hears the name of the en- 
graver, Fr.  Leopold,  fee.  1807.  The square is of exactly the 
same size,  aud beneath it is the legend,  in script:  "Joseph 
Priestley."  (58) 

Ambroise Tardieu,  (59)  the well known French engraver, 
executed in his neat style a portrait after the Wedgwood me- 
dallion. The bust lias been replaced by an ample extension 
of the cloak  ;  the head shows Priestley's left side.  In an oval 
measuring 105 mm.  x 78 mm.  Beneath the oval are the 
words:  "  Dessine et grave par Ambroise Tardieu,"  and the 
legend:  "Joseph Priestley  (Physieien et Chimiste),  membre 
de la Societe Royale de Londres.  Ne a Fieldhead  (('unite 
d' York)  le 18 Mars 1733;  mort  &  Northumberland  (Etats 
Unis d'  Amerique)  le 6 Fevrier,  1804." 

An engraving by Hopwood  (60)  closely resembles that of 
Tardieu,  hut differs in showing a ruffled shirt instead of a 
plain one.  The oval background is stippled and measures 
84 mm.  x 66 mm.  Beneath the oval is the legend  (in script) : 
Eev'd.  Joseph Priestley,  L.L.D.,  P. U.S.  This was published 
by H.  D.  Symonds,  June,  1804. 

Wilkes Grafton  &  Co.,  Birmingham,  published in John 
Corry's Life of Priestley  (Birm.,  1804),  (61)  a small engraving 
somewhat in the style of Hopwood's,  but stiffer in execution. 
Priestley's right face is shown,  his nose being long and sharp, 
the wig has three rows of curls,  the high cut coat shows four 

CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

buttons.  The whole is in a stippled oval measuring 7-1 mm. 
x GO mm.  Beneath is the legend  :  "Josh.  Priestley,  L.L.D., 
F.B.S." 

Alexander Hogg  &  Co.  162)  published December 1st,  1807, 
an engraving of which the Birmingham Library  (Timmins 
Collection)  preserves a copy.  Priestley's profile,  looking to 
the right with a wig,  is in an oval.  The clerical coal shows 
three buttons;  he wear,-;  a white stork,  but lias no shirl trills. 
The legend reads:  The Celebrated Priestley,  L.L.D.,  F.R.S. 
Died in North America,  Feb.  6,  1804,  aged 71.  It measures 
about 31 x  '_'!  inches  (80 x 57 mm.). 

1631 We have seen an engraving described as follows: 
Head and shoulders;  profile showing left side of face;  with 
a wig  ;  wearing a white stock and clerical habit with four 
buttons exposed.  Legend:  "Joseph Priestley,  L.L.D.,  F.B.S., 
and member of many foreign literary societies.  He was bom 
March 18th,  1733,  at Field-Head,  near Leeds,  in Yorkshire, 
and expired Feb'y.  6th,  1804,  in the 71st year of his age. 
His publications are numerous,  and in his mental constitution 
were united ardour and vivacity of intellect with placidity and 
mildness of temper.  In the domestic relations of life he was 
uniformly kind and affectionate.  Not malice itself could ever 
fix a stain on his private conduct or impeach his integrity. 
Such was the man who has added one more imperishable 
name to the illustrious dead of his country  ."  [Published by] 
William Darton,  58 Holborn Hill,  London,  1822.  Size about 
11 x 8 em.  (including. legend).  Issued with Carton's Cabinet 
of Portraits  (No.  53),  London,  L822. 

(64)  "Grape"  is the name and Gottingen the locality re- 
sponsible for a silhouette of Dr.  Priestley,  apparently after 
the Wedgwood medallion.  The left side of his face is turned 
toward-  the observer;  the bust is in an oval frame above 
which hangs a garland of flowers,  and beneath which is an 
open book enwreathed in flowers and resting on a square 
frame within which is the legend:  Jos.  Priestley.  The plate 
measures 1 10 mm.   x 80 mm.      As a likeness it has no value. 

(65)  Another and more creditable silhouette of Priestley is 

LIKENESSES OF PRIESTLEY.  187 

found in  ;i work entitled  :  "  Profiles of Warrington Worthies 
collected and arranged by James Kendrick,  M.I>.,"  London, 
1854.  4to.,  11 pages.     (Plate I.  page 9.) 

(66)  An engraving of Priestley's head and half of the body 
was published in Priestley's Notes on Scripture,  by 1>.  Eaton, 
is?  High Holborn,  which is remarkably ill-featured.  It is 
said by Yates to be copied from a crayon drawing executed 
in America.  His head is turned so as to show his left 
side  ;  lie has no wig,  his hair hangs low iu the neck behind, 
the expression of the lips is hard and unlike other profiles in 
that the chin recedes less.  He wears a white stock,  a waist- 
coat buttoned up so high as to expose no bosom,  and carrying 
four buttons.  His high-cut coat is open.  His left arm is 
shown nearly to the elbow.  The whole is in a square 
107 mm.  long and 85 mm.  wide,  beneath which is the inscrip- 
tion: "Joseph Priestley,  LL.D.,  F.R.S.  Ac.  Imp.  Petrop. 
R.  Paris.  Holm.  Taur'in.  Ttal.  Harlem.  Aurel.  .Med.  Paris. 
Cantab.  Americ.  et Philad.  Socius.  Born Mar.  13,  1733; 
Died Feb.  0,  1804. 

This engraving is bound up with some copies of Rutt's Life 
and Correspondence of Priestley. 

(67)  The same engraving but in an oval and reduced to 
106 x si  „/„(.  in size,  was issued with vol.  iv.  of Dr.  Priestlej  '- 
Notes on All the Books of Scripture,  London,  1803,  and 
Northumberland,  1804.  It bears the words:  Published 
Ma:vh 12,  lsiio,  by J.  Johnson,  St.  Paul's Church Yard. 
The plate was in the possession of Mr.  W.  Matthews in 1831. 
(Hint's Life,  II.,  291.) 

(68)  A lithographed reproduction of the last named was 
issued as a supplement to the National Bottlers'  <  razette,  New 
York,  April,  1882.  It is enlarged to 178 mm.  x 138 mm. 
Beneath the oval is the inscription:  "Joseph Priestley,  LL.D., 
F.E.S.  Father of Carbonated Waters.  Born March 13,  17.",:!; 
died February 6,  1804." 

Caricatun of Priestley.  (69)  Full length figure in action  ; 
left foot stamps on the open Bible and other works  ;  on the open 
book the words  "Bible explained away."     In his right hand 

188 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

raised above his head,  a n>ll of MS.  with the words  "  Political 
Sermons,"  from within the roll issues smoke;  in his left hand a 
MS.  with the words,  "  Essay on Government, "  also in flames; 
clerical habit with pockets stuffed with MSS.,  in the left side a 
paper inscribed  "Revolution Toasts,"  in the right pockel 
papers inscribed  "  Essays on Matter and Spirit,"  and  "Gun- 
powder." On hi-  head a wig,  face in profile;  wears knee- 
breeches,  and shoes with buckles.  Legend  :  Doctor Phlo- 
giston,  the Priestley politician or the political Priest  !  Annabal 
Scratch fecit.  Published as the Act directs by W.  Locke,  July 
1st,  1791.  Size of plate,  14 cm.  x 8.8 cm.  This was issued 
in the Attic Miscellany,  July,  1791,  and is designated as 
Political Portrait No.  4. 

(70-71)  The Timmins Collection at Birmingham,  contains 
further two shocking colored caricatures,  whose coarse and 
villanous representations would in modern times be regarded 
as good cause for an action for libel.  We do not care to 
describe these ;  one is entitled  :  "  The Treacherous Rebel and 
Birmingham Rioter,"  and the other  "The Friends of the 
People,  Priestley and Tom Paine." 

In  -I.  R.  Smith'.-  Catalogue of Portraits mention is made of 
an 8vo.  caricature,  entitled the Mystical Philosopher,  1796. 
Thi-  w e have not  -ecu.  (72) 

LIKENESSES IN STONE. 

One of the earliest busts,  was a small erne by llalliday.  173) 
a resident nf Birmingham and a friend of Priestley.  A copy 
is preserved in Dr.  Williams'  Library,  London,  and plaster 
copies were not rare. 

Among the many likenesses of Priestley two full length 
marble statues are of interest.  The first of these was erected 
in the  ( >xford University Museum,  June,  1860,  and was exe- 
cuted in  '  aeu  -1 i by the sculptor,  E.  B.  Stephens.  (74)      It 

shows Priestley full length in clerical dress and knee-breeches. 
His head carries a wig,  the eyes are directed forwards and 
slightly upwards  ;  his right arm is bent at the elbow with his 
hand raised and index finger extended as if gesturing;  his left 

LIKENESSES OF PRIESTLEY.  Is'-1 

arm hangs lower,  the hand holding a roll of MS.  He wears 
a ruffled shirt and wristbands,  and the garments hang loosely 
on his spare frame.  An outline of some physical apparatus is 
delineated on a short column at Ids left side.  He stands on a 
bracket bearing the word  "  Priestley." 

Of this we possess a good photograph.  (75) 

.V second full length statue was erected in Birmingham in 
August,  1874,  being the one hundredth anniversary of his 
discovery of oxygen.  (76)  The statue was executed by J.  1". 
Williamson,  and represents Priestley in the act of isolating 
oxygen j he stands by a short column on which is resting a 
small basin and a closed tube,  the latter being held in position 
by his left hand.  In his right hand he holds,  between his 
thumb and second finger,  a lens.  His head is inclined forward 
slightly,  and the eyes are directed downward as it'  looking at 
the experiment.  His dress is quite similar to that of the Ste- 
phens statue. 

Of Williamson's statue G.  Stodart made an engraving in 
ls7">  :  this was issued with the Art Journal  (D.  Appleton  & 
< '"..  New York).  (77)  The plate measure about 250 mm.  x 
150 mm.,  and bears the legend:  "Dr.  Priestley."  (771 

It was also engraved  (in a cheap style)  for a little brochure, 
published in 18mo.  at Pari-  |  i 875),  by Fonvielle  :  <  Celebration 
du premier eentenaire tie la decouverte de l'oxygene  [a Paris]. 
178 

The Tablet erected iu the New Meeting House,  Birming- 
ham, (79)  to the memory of Dr.  Priestley is after designs by 
the artist,  Hollins,  hut the profile is by P.  Rowe,  of London. 
The inscription,  written by the celebrated Dr.  Parr,  i-  as 
follows  : 

'■This Tablet is consecrated to the memory of the Rev.  Joseph 
I'r!'  stley,  L.L.D.,  by his affectionate Congregation,  in testimony 
of their Gratitude for his faithful attention to their spiritual 
improvement,  and tin-  his peculiar diligence in training up 
their youth to rational piety and genuine virtue:  Of their 
Respect for his great aud various talents which were uniformly 
directed to the noblest purposes  ;   and of  "' their veneration for 

190 IRESPOXDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

the pure,  benevolent,  and holy principles which,  through the 
trying vicissitudes of life and in the awful hour of death, 
animated him with the hope of a Blessed  [mmortality.  His 
I  >i-  -  a I  'hilosopher will never cease to be remembered 

and admired by the ablest improvers of science.  His firmm  — 
as an advocate  "I' liberty,  and his sincerity as an expounder of 
the Scriptures,  endeared him to many of his enlightened and 
unprejudiced contemporaries.  His example as a Christian will 
be instructive to the wise,  and interesting to the good of every 
country and in every age.  He was born at Fieldhead,  uear 
Leeds,  in Yorkshire,  March 13,  A.D.  17.">3,  was chosen a 
minister of this chapel,  Dec.  •'!! .  1 780  :  continued in that office 
ten years and six months — embarked fur America April 7, 
L794.  Hied in Northumberland Town,  in Pennsylvania, 
Feb'}  6,1804.  Unitarian Chapel,  Birmingham.  Hallidav,  F." 
Various institutions of learning,  in Europe and America, 
have honored the memorv of Priestley bv inserting in their 
walls medallion portraits of terra-cotta;  such an one is found 
in the Chemical Laboratory at Budapest,  Hungary.  (8o.) 

UKENESSES IX METAL,   Etc. 

Dr.  Priestley's likeness has also been perpetuated by num- 
erous medals and tokens in silver,  bronze,  and copper. 

An oval brass medallion showing Priestley's head in relief: 
(8i)  he wears a wig which hangs low in the neck behind.  His 
coat shows four buttons and the parted waistcoat a ruffled 
shirt.     The oval measures 1()7 X 92 mm. 

A handsomely executed medal,  by Phipson,  (82)  was struck 
to commemorate Priestley's emigration to America.  It exists 
in both silver plate and in bronze,  with,  however,  a slight 
difference to be noted.  This medal is 55 nun.  in diameter; 
on the obverse is Priestley's head in relief;  he wears a wig, 
and the parted waistcoat shows a ruffled shirt  ;  there are two 
buttons on the waistcoat.  The legend on the obverse is: 
"Josephus Priestley,  Phipson fecit;"  on the reverse around 
an outer circle:  "Magnus Christianus Philosophus,"  and 
within the circle:    "Apr.    VIII.,    Brittania litora liuguens 

LIKENESSES OP PRIESTLEY.  1!>1 

Columbiana advenit Junii I\'.."  and beneath this  :  "Natus 
Mar.  13,  IT::.".  :  mort.  Feb.  6,  1804." 

The bronze medal is a facsimile of the silver one.  except 
that the legend  "  Magnus Christianus Philosophus"  is replaced 
by  •"  I Decus I Nostrum melioribus utere fatis."  (83) 

A somewhat smaller bronze medal was executed in 1783 
by I.  G.  Hancock.  (84)  It measures 36 mm.  in diameter. 
Priestley's head with a wig  ;  the parted shirt-collar open under 
the chin shows two unfastened buttons,  a peculiarity noted in 
Bromley's engraving;  above and around the head t lie words, 
"Josephus Priestley."  The obverse is filled by a chemical 
table and apparatus.  On the table i-  a pneumatic trough,  in 
which stand five wide cylinders and one narrow tube;  be- 
neath this are two shelves,  on which lie open books,  flasks, 
tube-,  crucible,  tonus,  ami a mallet.  To the right of the table 
is a frictional electric machine,  to the left a furnace,  and a 
mercurial trough in which stand two small cylinders ;  be- 
neath the table the date  "  1783." 

A copper token,  •"<»  mm.  in diameter,  bears no date.  185) 
Priestley's head with a wig  ;  the shirt-collar is open beneath 
the chin,  and shows two unfastened buttons as in Bromley's 
engraving  ;  around the head the legend,  "  J.  Priestley,  Citizen 
of the World."  The reverse shows an altar with flame arising 
from the centre of the upper side  ;  on the front of the altar an 
oval containing the words  "  Hampden and Sidney  ;"  above the 
altar ray-  of light proceed from a central point.  Legend, 
■•  Sacred to Liberty." 

Halliday  (86)  executed,  both in bronze and in block-tin, 
medal-  52 mm.  in diameter,  showing on the obverse Priestlev's 
profile,  with a wig,  and bearing this inscription  :  "  Joseph 
Priestley,  L.L.D.  F.E.S.  Ac.  Imp.  Petrop.  P.  Paris.  Holm. 
Taurin.  Ital.  Harlem.  Aurel.  Med.  Paris.  Cantab.  Americ. 
it l'hilad.  Socius.  On the reverse is Dr.  Parr's inscription 
previously given.    (P.  189.) 

The American Philosophical Society,  of which Priestley 
was an honored member,  received at different time-  presents 
of likenesses of the chemist.     Mr.  John Yaughan,  Sept.  16, 

[92 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

lT'.M.  presented the society with a profile in plaster of Paris, 
"  particularly valuable for the resemblance."  (87)  The same 
gentleman,  on April I.  1803,  gave another plaster medallion 
to the society,  (88)  and Mr.  Patterson,  April 6,  1804,  shortly 
after Priestley's death,  gave the society a profile in black 
leather.  (89) 

Besides the great variety of forms in which Priestley's  ('are 
has been delineated,  already enumerated,  there are doubtless 
many mere.  We can add the following unclassified list,  only 
two of which we have seen  : — 

(90)  A papier maehe copy of the Wedgwood medallion — 
of a black color.     (C.  B.) 

(91)  A plaster bust of Priestley,  cast by Bemi,  Birming- 
ham.    (C.  15.) 

(92)  William Waite's medallion portrait,  exhibited at Bir- 
mingham at the Midland Institute,  April.  1867. 

(93)  A locket portrait,  exhibited on the same occasion,  by 
Toulmin Smith. 

Several valuable collections of portraits,  letters,  manuscript 
note-,  plates and relics of and concerning Dr.  Priestley are in 
possession of private hands and public depositories.  Of these 
the most notable is that collected and arranged by the late 
.lames Yates,  F.R.S..  and bequeathed by him to the Royal 
Society.  It consists of an elephantine volume of portraits, 
engravings,  letters,  newspaper cuttings,  etc.,  and is superbly 
bound with a Wedgwood medallion and bronze and silver 
medals inserted in the front cover.  I am indebted to the 
Secretary of the Royal Society,  Burlington House,  for the 
privilege of examining this unique collection.  Under the 
title,  ••  Memorials of Dr.  Priestley,"  Mr.  Yates described this 
collection in The Christian Reformer,  or Unitarian Magazine 

■ 

and Review,  New Series,  vol.  xvi.,  p.  ">.'!4  ;  London,  1860. 
To this article we are indebted for some of the items in the 
present paper. 

From the historical and antiquarian view point,  the Tim- 
mins Collection,  preserved in the Birmingham Reference 
Library,  are more valuable.  These two volumes were com- 
piled by Sam  :  Timmins,  Esq.,  of Birmingham,  the well-known 

LIKENESSES OF PRIESTLEY.  193 

antiquarian and historian.  One contains a mass of original 
documents pertaining to the Riots of Birmingham,  including 
such interesting documents as the ticket to the ill-fated dinner, 
broadsides and handbills published against the liberal party; 
portraits,  view-,  and a series of caricatures of Priestley and his 
friends,  too coarse to be amusing.  The other volume contains 
newspaper cuttings,  pamphlets,  and printed documents relating 
to the statue erected to Priestley in Birmingham in 1874,  by 
a committee of which Mr.  Timmins was chairman.  These 
precious volumes are preserved in the fire-proof vaults of the 
Birmingham Library. 

Relics of a more personal kind are preserved by Swann 
Hum]],  Esq.,  of Cambridge,  England.  These comprise three 
oval miniatures,  in which Priestley's profile appear.-  in white 
on a Mile ground  ;  one measure-  about 40 nun.  in length anil 
has a lock of hair i Priestley's?)  set in the back  ;  the other two 
measure about 55 mm.  in length,  and the profile i-  set above 
pillars and surrounded by ornamental scrolls and wreaths. 
Mr.  Ilurrell also treasures two gold rings,  one bearing Priest- 
ley's profile cut in a red stone;  two hair lockets with the 
monogram S.  F.  (Sarah Finch);  and two Wedgw 1 medal- 
lion-, one about 0.\  x 7:;  inches,  and the other smaller.  For 
permission to examine these I am indebted t"  the courtesy of 
their owner. 

The descendants of Dr.  Priestley's granddaughter,  the late 
Mrs.  Robert A.  Wainewright,  nie Sarah Priestley,  and Dr. 
Priestley's great granddaughter,  Mrs.  Conyers Button, 
Jennie Priestley,  of  <  lermantown,  Pennsylvania,  treasure many 
valuable relics which we shall not further describe.  Priestley's 
descendants residing at Northumberland have also MSS.  and 
souvenirs,  but they deposited the large collection of chemical, 
electrical,  and optical apparatus in the National Museum, 
under charge of the Smithsonian Institution,  Washington, 
D.  C. 

Finallv,  we note a rare engraving showing the furv of the 
mob engaged in sacking Dr.  Priestley's house at Birmingham; 
1791.      The legend reads:  "Dr.  Priestley's House and Labo- 

13 

194 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

ratorv,  Fair Mill,  destroyed in the Birmingham Riots,  July 
1 Itli,  1791.  From a picture sketched on the spot in the 
possession of Joseph Parker."  (Publisher's name illegible.) 
Original painting in possession of Mme.  Belloc,  London.  Of 
the print we have a photograph made by Dr.  L.  II.  Laudy,  of 
( !olumbia  <  College,  X.  Y. 

Photograph by Dr.  Laudy,  of the interior of a room in 
Northumberland,  Pennsylvania  :  size 20 em.  x 14.5 em.  On 
the wall hangs one of Artaud's portraits of Priestley,  wreathed 
in evergreens.  <  >n a table in the foreground lie several manu- 
scripts, books,  etc..  with three bell-jars,  which form'a small 
pari of the apparatus exhibited at the Centennial of the Dis- 
covery of Oxygen in August,  1874,  at Northumberland,  and 
now deposited in the Smithsonian Institution. 

postscript. 

We cannot close this imperfect record of tributes to the memory of 
Dr.  Priestley without mention of a monument most recently erected, 
although it bears no liki rn ss of the philosopher whom ii honors. 

\  handsome tablet was dedicated to Joseph Priestley on the 156th 
anniversary of Ids birth  (Wednesday,  March 13th,  1889),  at the First 
Unitarian Church of Philadelphia.  The inscription is as follows: 
"Joseph Priestley,  LL.D.,  F.R.S.,  Theologian,  Philosopher,  Scholar. 
One of the ablest and most eminent exponents of Unitarian Christianity; 
a leader iii scientific research,  his life was consecrated to the service of 
religion;  an indefatigable student,  an acute observer,  a prolific author,  a 
devoted pastor,  ■■■■  wise and influential preacher;  in all relations he was 
pure,  simple,  upright,  humane,  courageous.  A steadfast defender of the 
rights nt'  humanity,  he was in her early struggle against oppression,  a 
generous friend of America." 

And on the left hand side:    "Born at Fieldhead in Yorkshire,  Kng- 

gland,    13 March,    1733,       Per uted for his opinions he emigrated to 

America,    7 April.    1794.       Died at Northumberland in Pennsylvania, 
6 February,  1804." 

And on the right hand side:     "This Church was founded under Ids 
ragement,  1 'J June.  17'.";.     This monument is erected as a tribute 
to his memon from the Unitarians of America,  13 March,  1889." 

II.    THE LUNAR SOCIETY, 

THE FESTIVE PHILOSOPHERS OE BIRMINGHAM 
ONE HUNDRED YEARS AGO. 

by H.  Carein-'.ton Bolton at tick Founding of the Luxar Society of New 
York,  April 27.  IS88. 

The Ltxar Society was an informal club or association 
of scientific men which flourished in Birmingham for nearly 
forty year-.  It was founded about the year 1766,  by Matthew 
Boulton,  Dr.  Erasmus Darwin.  Dp.  William Small,  and their 
friends  ;  they do not seem to have numbered more than eight 
or ten at any one time,  and they met at each other's houses 
for dinner every month on the Monday nearest to the full 
moon,  "in order,"  -ays Dr.  Priestley,  "to have the benefit of 
its light in returning home."  Hence the name Lunar Society. 
The members were accustomed to  -it down to dinner at two 
o'clock,  and did not part until eight,  exchanging views with 
each other on topics relating to literature,  science,  and arts, 
each contributing his quota of entertainment and instruction. 

•■  We had nothing to do,"  add-  Priestley,  "  with the 
ous or politieal principles of each other,  we were united by a 
common love of Sci ice,  which we thought sufficient to bring 
together persons of all distinction-.  ( Jhristians,  Jews,  Mahome- 
tans and Heathens,  Monarchist and Republicans." 

Each member was allowed to brino;  with him a friend,  and 
thus many distinguished guests wen-  present at these philoso- 
phical baucpiets.  The society occasionally held  ••meet _- 
extraordinary,"  in honor of scientific magnates from abroad. 

llu;  CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

Among the members of the Lunar Society were the follow- 
ing eminent nun of science  : — 

Matthew Boulton,  F.E.S.  (1728-1809),  mechanical engi- 
neer and inventor of improvement's in the steam-engine.  A 
partner of James W;iit. 

Dr.  Erasmus Darwin,  F.R.S.  I L731-1802),a physician,  poi i, 
and naturalist.     Author of the  "  Botanic Garden." 

Dr.  William Small  (1734-1775),  an intimate friend of Dar- 
win, Boulton,  and Watt.  Be was an accomplished physician, 
chemist,  and machinist,  He held the professorship of mathe- 
matics and natural philosophy in William and Mary College, 
Virginia,  for some years,  but returned to England and settled 
in Birmingham. 

Thomas Day  (1748-1789),  a wealthy,  eccentric philanthro- 
pist, best known as the author of  "  Sandford and Merton." 
A friend of  <  'apt.  Keir. 

Richard Lovell Edgeworth,  F.R.S.  (1744-1817),  author and 
philosopher;  he contributed papers to the Royal Society.  A 
friend of 1  >ay and Darv.  in. 

1).-.  William Withering,  F.R.S.  (1741-1799),  physician, 
botanist,  and chemist,  lie analyzed the mineral witherite 
named in his honor. 

James Watt.  F.R.S.  (1736-1819),  inventor of improvements 
in the steam-engine,  chemist,  and engineer.  Partner of Boul- 
ton. 

Captain James Keir  (1735-1814),  chemist and author ;  pro- 
prietor of several chemical establishments at West Bromwich, 
near Birmingham.      A friend of Darwin and Small. 

John Baskerville  (1706-1775),  inventor of superior type, 
and publisher of standard works. 

Rev.  Dr.  Joseph Priestley,  F.R.S.  (1733-1804),  the father 
of pneumatic chemistry,  theologian,  and philosopher. 

William Murdock  (1754-1839),  mechanical engineer,  super- 
intendent of the works of Boulton and Watts.  Inventor of 
the system of lighting by gas,  and of many improvements in 
steam machinery. 

Rev.  R.  A.  Johnson,  F.R.S.,  of Kenilworth. 

THE LUNAB SCH IKTV.  19" 

Mr.  Samuel Galton,  F.R.S.,  a wealthy man of letter?,  well 
skilled in chemistry and natural history. 
Mr.  Samuel Galton,  junior,  his son. 
Dr.  Stoke,  a physician of Birmingham. 
Among the guests known to have been entertained were the 
following distinguished nun of science and letters  : — 

Josiah Wedgwood,  F.R.S.   (1730-1795),   the well-known 
potter and inventor of the ware called by his name. 

Sir Joseph Banks,  F.R.S.  (1743-1820),  botanist,  President 
of the Royal Society. 

Sir William Herschel.  F.R.S.  (1738-1822),  the most dis- 
tinguished astronomer of the peri. id. 

John Smeaton  (1 724-1 7H2 1,  civil engineer,  builder of Eddy- 
stone Lighthouse. 

Dr.  Samuel Parr  (1747-1825),  eminent English scholar 
and critic. 

The Rev.  Hugh Blair,  D.D.  (1718-1800),  author of  "Lec- 
tures on Rhetoric."  Professor in the University of Edin- 
burgh. 

Adam Afzelius  (1750-1836),  Swedish botanist.    He visited 

England in 1789. 

Dr.  Daniel C.Solander,  F.R.S.  (1736-1782), Swedish Natu- 
ralist and physician,  Librarian British Museum. 

.lean Andre"  de Luc  (1727-18171.  Swiss natural philosopher 
aud geologist. 

Dr.  Pieter Camper,  F.R.S.  (1722-1789),  Dutch naturalist, 

and anatomist. 

Mr.  John Wilkinson,  iron-master,  brother-in-law to Dr. 

Priestley. 

Mr.  William Bewly,  a surgeon and apothecary of Norfolk, 
author of letters on the chemistry of gases.  A friend of Dr. 
Priestley. 

Mr.  Collins,  an American  "rebel." 

Dr.  Henry Moves,  of Edinburgh,  lecturer on chemistry, 
though blind.     He emigrated to America in 1785. 

Mr.  M.  Robinson Boulton,  son of Matthew. 

The Rev.  Joseph Barringtou,  Roman Catholic priest of 

198 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

Oscott,  a small hamlet,  seven or eighl miles from Birmingham. 
Author cii'  several historical works. 

( )!'  tli<'  original members,  two,  Small and Baskerville,  died in 

177').     l>r.  Priestlej did nol bee e a member until 1780, 

and Murdock,  being so much younger,  must have joined still 
later.  Apparently,  the society kept no records of its meetings, 
and bul scanty notices of its proceedings can be gathered from 
the correspondence of its members. 

We have given 17m;  as the date of the commencement of 
these social gatherings,  but it is probable that they occurred 
still earlier,  for when  -lames Watt visited Soho in 17(i.S on his 
way from Loudon to Glasgow,  Dr.  Small,  Dr.  Darwin,  and 
(apt.  Kiii'  were invited to meet him at  "I'hdteldt  'I'amitie sur 
Handsworth Heath"  as Matthew Boulton styled his hospitable 
mansion.  The Society had not perfected its method of con- 
ducting affairs as late as 177H,  for in this year Boulton wrote 
to Watt,  who had settled in Birmingham: — 

"  Pray remember that the celebration of the third full moon 
will be on Saturday,  March 3d;  Darwin aud Keir will both 
be at Soho.  J then propose to submit my motions to the mem- 
bers respecting new laws and regulations,  such as will tend to 
prevent the decline of a Society which,  I hope,  will he 
lasting." 

Boulton was of a thoroughly social disposition,  and the 
formation of the Lunar Society was a natural outgrowth of his 
genial character.  He took pleasure ingathering about him 
in his home persons of kindred tastes and pursuits,  in order 
both to enjoy their friendship aud to cultivate his nature by 
intercourse with minds of the highest pattern.  lie was a 
favorite alike with children and philosophers,  with noble 
guests and simple workmen of Cornwall.  London had not at 
that time absorbed to so great a degree the active intelli- 
gence of England,  especially in the higher departments of 
science,  art,  and literature.  The men of that period,  though 
busy with their professional duties and domestic-  cares,  were 
not so wholly engrossed in the turmoil of business which 
makes lit'e a burden for so many in the present age,  and found 

THE LUNAR SOCIETY.  19!) 

time for relaxation in convivial gatherings.  In Liverpool 
Roscoe and Currie were the centres of a social intellectual cir- 
cle: at Warrington,  Aiken,  Enfield,  and,  for a time,  Priestley, 
were the leading spirits of another ;  at Bristol,  I  >r.  Beddoes 
and Humphry Davy of a third  ;  ami at Norwich,  the Taylors 
and Martineaus of a fourth.  In London,  Sir Joseph Hank-. 
I  >r.  Si  .lander.  Sir Charles Blagden,  Dr.  George Fordyce,  Drs- 
Milner,  and Maskelyne,  Captain Cook,  Sir  (i.  Shuckburgh, 
Lord Mulgrave,  John Smeaton,  and Jesse Ramsden with 
Edgeworth and others,  met once a week at Jack's Coifee House, 
and afterwards at Young Slaughters Coffee House for social 
converse.  This assemblage had no distinctive name.  Benja- 
min Franklin was a frequent attendant,  and alludes to it in 
his correspondence.  Hut the most distinguished gatherings of 
all were those of the Lunar Society at Birmingham. 

The Patriarch of the Society was Dr.  Erasmus Darwin,  at 
least until he removed to Derby in 1782.  "His fame as a 
doctor,  philosopher,  and poet was great throughout the Mid- 
land Counties.  lie was extremely speculative in all directions 
even in such matters as driving wheel carriages by steam." 
Being very busy with his medical practice at Lichfield,  he 
was not very regular in his attendance at the dinners of the 
Society,  and excused himself for his absence by such a letter 
as the following  : 

April 5th,  1 77s. 
Dear Botltox  :  I am sorry the infernal divinities who 
visit mankind with diseases,  and are therefore at perpetual 
war with doctors,  should have prevented my seeing all your 
great men at Soho to-day.  Lord  !  what inventions,  what wit, 
what rhetoric,  metaphysical,  mechanical,  and pyn (technical, 
will be on the wing,  bandied like a shuttlecock from one to 
another of your troup of philosophers  !  while poor I,  I by 
myself I,  imprison'd in a post-chaise,  am joggl'd,  and jostl'd, 
and bump'd,  and bruised along the King's highroad to make 
war upon a stomach-ache or a fever."  .  .  . 

[Signed.]  ERASMDS DARWIN. 

200 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

The society evidently served the purpose of a scientific ex- 
change, each member contributing ai the monthly meeting 
results of his own observations,  and reporting news from 
without the circle.  Before the establishment of weekly 
journals of science,  this exchange was the natural means of 
intercommunication,  just as the Athenians gathered on Mars 
Hill  "to tell or to hear some new thing"  in the political 
world.  The society seems further to have been chosen by 
persons from a distance as a channel for announcing their own 
discoveries or those of others to scientists who would appre- 
ciate and pul>li.~li them.  .lames Watl wrote to the Irish 
chemist Kirwan as follows: — 

Birmingham,  Nov.  14,  its:;. 

Dear Sir:  Your obliging communication of Mr.  Seheele's 

process of making the Prussian acid gave me great pleasure. 

and,  according to your desire,  1 communicated it to our Lunar 

Society last Monday,  who desire me to return to you their 

thanks.   .   .   . 

JAMES WATT. 

When Dr.  Priestley dissolved his connection with Lord 
Shelburne,  and removed to Birmingham in 1780,  he was 
win inly welcomed by the members of the Lunar Society as a 
valuable acquisition.  He had corresponded with Boulton, 
and was already celebrated for his publications and his dis- 
coveries in gas chemistry.  His discovery of nitric oxide dates 
from 177:2;  that of ammonia,  hydrochloric acid,  and oxygen 
from 1774;  sulphurous acid gas and silicon-tetrafluoride, 
177")  ;  and nitrous oxide  (laughing gas),  177G.  He had 
published three volumes of his  "Experiments and Observa- 
tions on Air,"  and was engaged on a fourth.  Priestley's love 
of polemics in metaphysics and theology was ■  reflected in his 
work in science,  and though unassuming and gentle in dispo- 
sition, his advent infused new vigor into the society,  and 
henceforth gave a chemical turn to the weighty discussions of 
the feasting philosophers. 

THE LUNAR SOCIETY.  201 

Tn his autobiography,  Priestley refers to these meetings in 
the following language  : — 

"I consider my settlement at Birmingham as the happiest 
event in my life,  being highly favorable to every object I had 
in view,  philosophical or theological.  In the former respect 
I had the convenience of good workmen of every kind and 
the society of persons eminent for their knowledge of chemis- 
try, particularly Mr.  Watt,  Mr.  Keir,  and Dr.  Withering. 
These with Mr.  Boulton and Dr.  Darwin,  Mr.  Galton,  and, 
afterward,  Mr.  Johnson,  of Kenilworth,  and myself,  dined 
together every month,  calling ourselves the Lunar Society, 
because the time of our meeting was the full moon." 

The invitations sent out by the host were not formal,  hut in 
the nature of friendly letters,  in which hints were given as to 
the intellectual feast in store.  Thus,  on January 3d,  1781, 
Watt wrote to Dr.  Darwin  :  "  I beg that you would impress 
on your memory the idea that you promised to dine with 
sundry men of learning at my house on Monday next,  and 
that you will realize the idea.  For your encouragement there 
is a new book to cut up,  and it is to be determined whether or 
not heat is a compound of phlogiston and empyreal air,  and 
whether a mirror can reflect the heat of the tire.  I give you 
a friendly warning that you may be found wanting whichever 
opinion you adopt in the latter question  ;  therefore he cautious. 
If you art1 meek and humble,  perhaps you may he told what 
light is made of,  and also how to make it,  and the theory 
proved both by synthesis ami analysis." 

To this communication Dr.  Darwin sent the following 
curious and characteristic answer : — 

Bkau Desert,  January 6th,  1781. 
Dear Mr.  Watt  :  You know there is a perpetual war 
carried on between the devil and all holy men.  Sometimes 
one prevails in an odd skirmish or so,  and sometimes the 
other.  Now,  you must know that this said devil has played 
me a slippery trick,  and,  I fear,  prevented me from coming to 
join the holy men at your house,  by sending the measles with 

202 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

peripneumony amongst nine beautiful children of Lord 
Pact's.  For I must suppose it is a work of the devil  ! 
SmvK the Lord could never think of amusing himself by 
setting nine innocent little animals to cough their hearts up. 
Prav,  ask vour learned Society it'  this partial evil contributes 

tn any public g I,  if this pain is necessary to establish the 

subordination or different links in the chain of animation.  If 
niie was tn lie weaker and less perfect than another,  most he 
therefore have pain as a part of his portion?  Prav,  inquire 
of your philosophers,  and rescue me from Manichajism. 

As tn material philosophy,  I can tell you some secrets in 
return for yours,  viz.,  that atmospheric air is composed of 
light,  and the earth of water  (and aqueous earth).  That water 
is composed of aqueous gas which is displaced from its earth 
1>\  oil of vitriol.  Pray,  make my best devoirs to all the 
Phlos.,  and pray tell I  >r.  Priestley that I wish he would try 
whether a plant insulated in  $   will spoil air. 

E.   DARWIN. 

When I  >arwin removed to I  )erhv,  he wrote to the Society  : — 

"  1 am here cut oil'  from the milk of science,  which flows in 
such redundant streams from your learned Lunatics,  and 
which,  I can assure you,  is a very great regret to me." 

In another letter he said  : — 

"  I hope philosophy and fire-engines continue to go on well. 
You heard we sent your Society an air-balloon,  which was cal- 
culated to have fallen in your garden at Soho,  but the wicked 
wind carried it to Sir Edward Littleton's.  Pray,  give my 
compliments to your learned Society." 

On another occasion Darwin wrote to Boulton : — 

"  I hope Behemoth has strength in his loins.  Belial and 
Ashtaroth are two other devils of consequence,  and good 
names for engines of fire." 

Judging from these letters,  Darwin was certainly a lively 
associate. 

The meetings of the philosophers at Mr.  Galton's must have 
been among the most delightful.      The host was a man of 

THE LUNAB SOCIETY.  203 

superior intellectual endowments,  well skilled in the exact 
sciences,  and a member of the Royal Society and of the Lin- 
oaean Society.  He was of the Quaker persuasion,  and a man 
of family and opulence.  Heat first resided at The Five Ways 
about one mile from Birmingham,  but in 1785 moved to  <  mat 
Barr House,  a beautiful estate of Sir Joseph Scott,  about seven 
miles further from town.    The house was large and rambliug, 

it had four or five different staircases and halls,  and was re 

like an assemblage of several houses under one roof.  It was 
situated in an amphitheatre of wooded hills,  and was bordered 
by an old-fashioned Dutch garden  ('nil offish ponds.  In this 
comfortable mansion the Lunar Society was most hospitably 
entertained.  Mr.  Galton's daughter Mary Anne  (afterwards 
Mrs.  Sehimmel Penninck)  characterizes the members with a 
graceful pen.  Mr.  Boulton,  whom she calls the Father of 
Birmingham,  "  was tall and of a noble appearance;  his tem- 
perament was sanguine,  with that slight mixture of phlegmatic 
which gives calmness and dignity  ;  his manners were eminently 
open and cordial;  he took the lead in conversations,  and with 
a social heart had a grandiose manner like that arising from 
position,  wealth,  and habitual command.  He went among his 
people like a monarch bestowing largess.  His forehead was 
magnificent  ;  the organs of comparison,  constructiveness,  and 
of individuality were immense.  The characteristics of Mr. 
Watt,  his partner,  were altogether different.  Mr.  Boulton 
was a man to rule society with dignity Mr.  Watt to lead the 
contemplative life of a deeply introverted and patiently ob- 
servant philosopher.  He was one of the most complete speci- 
mens of the melancholic temperament.  II is head was generally 
bent forward or leaning on his hand in meditation  ;  his 
shoulders stooping,  and his chest fallen in  ;  his limbs lank and 
unmuscular,  and his complexion sallow.  His intellectual de- 
velopment was magnificent.  .  .  .  Whilst Mr.  Boulton's eye 
and countenance had  .something of radiance,  Mr.  Watt's were 
calm,  as if patiently investigating or quietly contemplating his 
object.  His utterance was slow and uuimpassioned,  deep and 
low in tone,  with a broad Scotch accent  ;  his manners gentle, 

20-1 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

modest,  unassuming.  In a company where he was not known, 
unless spoken to,  he might have tranquilly passed the whole 
time in pursuing his own meditations.  But this could not 
well happen  :  li>r.  in poinl of fact,  everybody practically knew 
the infinite varietv of his talents and stores of knowledge. 
Winn M r.  Wntt entered a room,  men of letters,  men of science, 
nay,  military men,  artists,  ladies,  even little children thronged 
around him.  I remember a celebrated Swedish artist ha\ 
In en in-i ructed by him that rats'  whiskers make the must pliant 
and elastic painting-brush  ;  ladies would appeal to him on the 
best means of devising grates,  curing smoking chimneys,  warm- 
ing their houses,  and obtaining fast colors.  I can speak from 
experience of his teaching me how to make a dulcimer and im- 
prove a Jew's harp."  "  Quite different was the aspect of Dr. 
Withering;  he was the personification of' that which IicIhhlis 
to a physician and a naturalist  ;  enormous were his organs of 
proportion and individuality,  and great were his powers of 
active investigation and accurate detail.  His features were 
sharpened by minute and sagacious observation.  lie was 
kind,  lint his great accuracy and caution rendered his manner 
less open,  and it had neither the wide popularity of  .Mr,  Boul- 
ton's,  aor the attraction of Mr.  Watt'-  true modesty." 

<  If Dr.  Priestley she says:  lie was  "a man of admirable 
simplicity,  gentleness,  and kindness of heart,  united with great 
acuteness of intellect.  I can never forget the impression pro- 
duced on me by the serene expression of his countenance.  He, 
indeed,  seemed present with  ( rod by recollection and with man 
by cheerfulness."  She differed from Dr.  Priestley in his 
religious views,  hut pays a handsome tribute to his earnest- 
ness, candor,  anil sincerity. 

Captain Keir she characterizes as  "  the wit,  the man of the 
world,  the finished gentleman,  who gave life and animation to 
the party." 

Dr.  Stoke she calls  "profoundly scientific and eminently 
absent,"  and relates the following incident in which he was 
concerned:  "On one occasion,  when the Lunar Meeting,  or 
'  Lunatic-,'  as our butler called them,  were seated at dinner,  a 

THE linai;  SOCIETY.  205 

blazing fire being in the room,  we were astonished by hearing 
a sudden hissing noise,  and seeing a large and beautiful yellow 
and black snake rushing about the room.  .My dear mother, 
who saw it was not venomous,  said to me:  'Mary Amu.  - 
and catch that snake,'  which,  alter some trouble,  and thinking 
all the while of little Harry Sandford and Tommy Merton,  1 
succeeded in accomplishing.  We were wondering where it 
could have come from,  when I  >r.  Stoke said that,  as lie was 
riding along,  he had seen the poor animal frozen cm a bank, 
and  |int it in his pocket to dissect,  but the snake had thawed 
and escaped from his pocket.  The doctor praised me very 
much for my prowess,  and as a reward he made me a present 
of my prisoner,  which 1 long kept in a glass jar and carefully 
tended every day  ;  at la.-t,  however,  1 gave him his freedom." 

<  )f the eccentric Dr.  Darwin the lady had less agreeable 
reminiscences.  The doctor had been called professionally to 
see her mother;  he arrived in a worn-out,  muddy  " sulky," 
fitted up with receptacles for writing and eating,  stocked with 
sweet confections,  of which he was fond,  and heaped up with 
books from the floor to the front window.  "  We all hasteni d," 
she says,  "to the window to see Dr.  Darwin,  of whom we had 
heard so much,  and whom I was prepared to honor and ven- 
erate, in no common degree,  as the restorer of my mother's 
health.  What,  then,  was my astonishment at beholding him, 
as he slowly got out of the carriage!  I lis figure was vast and 
massive;  his head was almost buried on his shoulders,  and he 
wore a scratch-wig,  as it is called,  tied up in a little bobtail 
behind."  Meanwhile,  amidst all this,  the doctor's eye was 
deeply sagacious,  his observation most keen,  and his intelli- 
gence well calculated to inspire confidence in his patients. 
When conversation began,  his flow of wit and anecdote was 
most entertaining and astonishing,  in spite of an inveterate 
stammering. 

Elsewhere she records the painful impression made ou her 
by the doctor's irreligion.1 

1 We have ventured to  <|uote.  at great length,  from Mrs.  Schimmel 
Penninck's graphic reminiscences,   because they certainly bear the im- 

206 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

Olivine the vcars 1780 to 1785,  pneumatic chemistry was 
the principal topic under discussion,  for Priestley and Watt 
were each contributing his share to the much-vexed question 
of the constitution of water.  Cavendish in London,  Lavoi- 
sier in Paris,  and Watt in Birmingham were three rival 
claimants for the honor of the discovery of the composition of 
water.  Priestley,  as a friend of Watt,  communicated speedily 
the result of hi-  experiments,  sometimes it is reasonable to 
believe,  over the festive board of the Lunarian?,  and left the 
conclusions to he drawn by others.  As to the relative merits 
of the claimants,  that is foreign to the purpose  (,t'  tin-  essay. 

The Priestlev-Wedgwood correspondence1 shows that in 
17s.",  the philosophers were greatly exercised over Priestley's 
discovery of the conversion of water into air,  the fallacy of 
which he himself afterwards admitted. 

The Phlogistic Theory,  which had been the controlling 
spirit in chemical philosophy for nearly a century,  received its 
deathblow at the hand-  of Priestley himself,  when he isolated 
oxvgen on the 1 si August,  1774.  P>ut he,  as is well known, 
failed to perceive the important bearing of his own discovery, 
and it was across the channel that Lavoisier and other French 
chemists were skilfully burying the corpse out of sight.  The 
French theory of combustion was but slowly accepted by the 
conservative Englishmen,  and slowest of all by the friends of 
Priestley. 

In the transition period,  hydrogen was for a time believed 
to lie the elusive phlogiston  ;  to this phase of doctrine,  Boul- 
ton alludes in a letter to Wedgw 1 dated March 30th,  1781. 

'•  We have long talked of phlogiston without knowing what 

press  "f truth and are lifelike in their portraiture.  She had every ad- 
vantage ni forming the acquaintance  <>t'  the members of the Society,  her 
father being active in it from the time she was eight years old until she 
was live and twenty,  and a tenacious memory,  added to a power of 
discrimination of unusual delicacy,  enabled her.  in after years,  to record 
her souvenirs.  Her motlierwas a most intimate friend of Mrs.  Priestley, 
and William Priestley was a playmate in her youth.  ("  Life of Mary 
Ann Seliimmel l'enninek."  edited by C.  C.  Hankin.  London.  1859.) 
1 See authorities at the close of this paper. 

THE LUNAR SOCIETY.  201 

we talked about ;  hut now that Dr.  Priestley hath brought the 
matter to light,  we can pourthat element out of one vessel iuto 
another,  can tell how much of it l>y accurate measurement is 
necessary to reduce a ealx to a metal,  which is easily dune,  and 
without putting that ealx into contact with any visible thine-. 
In short,  this goddess of levity can be measured and weighed 
like other matter.  For the rest,  I refer yon to the doctor him- 
self." 

A few months later,  Priestley himself wrote to his 1'riend, 
Josiah Wedgwood:  "Before my late experiments,  phlogiston 
\\;i-  indeed almost given up by the Lunar Society,  but now it 
se,  ms to be re-established"  I March 21st,  1782). 

Again Boulton writes to his partner,  Watt,  July 3d,  1781. 

••  I dined yesterday at the Lunar Society  (Keir's housi 
there was Blair,  Priestley,  Withering,  Galton,  and an Ameri- 
can "rebel,"  Mr.  Collins.  Nothing new.  except that some-  of 
my white spathos iron ore was found to contain more air than 
any ore Priestley had ever tried,  and what is singular,  it con- 
tain- no common air,  but is part fixable and part inflam- 
mable." 

On September 20th,  1785,  Watt wrote to Boulton: — 

"The Lunar Society was held yesterday at Mr.  Galton's,  at 
Barr.  It was rather dull,  there having been no philosophical 
news lately,  except Mr.  Kirwan's discovery of' an air from 
phosphorus,  which takes fire of itself on being mixed with 
common or dephlogisticated air." 

We imagine that the philosophers would have hardly re- 
garded their feast as dull,  could Mr.  Kirwan have shown to 
them the beautiful yet nauseating experiment of spontaneously 
inflammable phosphoretted hydrogen.  And a modern Acad- 
emy of Science-  would be enthusiastic over such a notable 
discovery.1 

The discussions of the philosophic convives were not,  how- 
ever, confined exclusively to chemistry,     "flic period was one 

1 Gengembre.  one of Lavoisier's pupils,  had discovered inflammable 
phosphoretted hydrogenjn 1783,  but Kirwan's discovery was made inde- 
pendently. 

208 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

ofgreal activity in the world of science;  Laplace was applying 
his mathematical genius to the problems of astronomy  ;    Her- 

!  was sweeping the heavens with his gigantic telescopes; 
Galvani and Volta were laying the foundations of a revolu- 
tion in electricity  ;  Count Rumford in Bavaria,  was devoting 
lii-  ijreal energy in industrial and social economy  :  Hutton and 
Werner were geologizing in their respective countries;  Haiiy 
was systematizing the innumerable crystalline forms occurring 
in nature  ;  the Mongolfier brothers were experimenting with 
air-balloons,  and prophesying the yet unsolved problem of 
aerial navigation  ;  ('apt.  .lame-.  Cook returned from his mem- 
orable voyages around the world full of adventures and novel- 
ties in nature  ;  the application of steam to the driving of land 
carriages and the propelling of boats was gradually being 
perfected by patience and genius.  These,  together with the 
metaphysical and even the political questions of the day,  must 
have engrossed the attention of the talented friends who dined 
together at the full moon.  The predilections of their guests 
sometimes determined the character of the subjects discussed. 
Thus,  in the autumn of 1782,  the venerable engineer Smeaton, 
having business in Birmingham connected with his canal,  was 
invited to attend a meeting of the Lunarians at the house of 
\\  att.  \\  att wrote of thi.-  evening's proceedings to his friend 
Boulton,  then in London,  as follows: — 

"Smeaton grows old and is rather more talkative than he 
was:  luit retains in perfection his perspicuity of expression and 
good sense.  He came to the philosophers'  meeting at my 
house on Monday,  and we were receiving an account of his 
experiments on rotative-  and some new ones he has made, 
when unluckily his facts did not agree with Dr.  Moyes,  the 
blind philosopher's theories,  which made Moyes contradict 
Smeaton,  and brought on a dispute which lost us the informa- 
tion we hoped fir.   and took away all the pleasure of the 

ting,  a-  it lasted two hours without coming half an inch 
neanr to the point."     (<  >ctober 26th,  1782.) 

Dr.  .Moves was a Scotch chemist who had the affliction to 
be deprived of his sight by smallpox in infancy,  yet acquired 

THE LTJNAK SOCIETY.  209 

an extensive knowledge of natural philosophy and languages, 
and became a  "  pleasing philosophical lecturer."  Eis chemical 
experiments were,  of course,  performed by an assistant.  In a 
letter dated February 6th,  1783,  Priestley introduced Moyes 
to Sir Joseph Banks in very flattering terms,  calling him  : 
"A phenomenon in philosophy,  being quite blind,  yet superior 
to most who see." 

It has been surmised that the Lunar Society discussed the 
action of light upon nitrate of silver,  and the application of this 
phenomenon to the production of pictures.  This suggestion 
was made by Mr.  W.  P.  Smith,  at a meeting of the Photo- 
graphic Society of Birmingham in 1863,  and was based on the 
discovery in Mr.  Boulton's library at Soho,  of certain photo- 
graphic pictures on metallic plates.  It was understood at the 
time that Boulton's rooms had been closed for fifty years,  but 
this proved to l>e an error,  and the pictures were probably 
made by a Miss AVilkiuson who had access to the rooms,  and 
who had experimented in photography soon after its invention 
by Niepce.  It is well known that Thomas Wedgwood,  son 
of Josiah,  is said to have made  "silver pictures"  under Sir 
Humphry Daw's eves as early as 1791-93,  hence during the 
existence of the Lunar Society.  A facsimile of one of these 
early photographs is prefixed to Miss Met<  yard's  "  Life of the 
Younger Wedgwoods,"  but she herself throws some doubt on 
its authenticity. 

The philosophical converse of the learned men was some- 
times enlivened by humorous interludes,  such as the following  : 
Dr.  Darwin,  whose levity in religious matters was notorious, 
had invented a speaking machine which pronounced  "papa," 
"  mamma,"  and other words quite accurately.  Mr.  Boulton, 
who perhaps had suffered from the caustic wit of the Doctor, 
drew up the following satirical contract  : — 

"  I promise to pay to Dr.  Darwin,  of Lichfield,  one thousand 
pounds upon his delivering to me  (within two years from date 
hereof)  an instrument called an organ that is capable of pro- 
nouncing the Lord's Prayer,  the Creed,  and Ten Command- 
14 

210 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

ments in the vulgar tongue,  and his ceding to me,  and me 
onlv,  the property of said invention with all tbe advantages 
thereunto appertaining." 

[Signed.)  M.  BOULTON. 

Soiio,  September 3d,  1 7v7. 

Witness,  .Tames Keir. 
Witness,  W.  Sm  \li.. 

A wide range of topics was admitted in the discussions at 
the informal meetings.  Mrs.  Schimmel Penninck,  already 
quoted,  gives a vivid picture of an exciting scene in her 
father's house.  It was in the summer of 17SS,  and Matthew 
Boulton presented to the company his son M'.  Robinson 
Boulton,  who had jusi returned from a long sojourn in Paris. 
"  I well remember,"  writes Mrs.  Schimmel Penninck,  "my 
astonishment at his full dress in the highest adornment of 
Parisian fashion  ;  but I noticed as a remarkable thing that 
the company  (which consisted of some of the first men in 
Europe),  all with one accord gathered around him and asked 
innumerable questions,  the drift of which I did not fully 
understand.  It was wonderful to me to sec Dr.  Priestley, 
Dr.  Withering,  Mr.  Watt,  Mr.  Boulton himself,  and Mr. 
Keir manifest the most intense interest,  each according to 
his prevailing characteristics,  as they almost hung upon his 
words;  and it was impossible to mistake the indications of 
deep anxiety,  hope,  fear,  curiosity,  ardent zeal,  or thoughtful 
gravity,  which alternately marked their countenances,  as well 
as those of my own parents.  My ears caught the words 
'Marie Antoinette,' '  Cardinal de Rohan/  '  diamond necklace,' 
'  famine,'  '  discontent among the people,' '  sullen silence instead 
of shouts of Vive le Roi !'  All present seemed to give a fear- 
ful attention.  Why,  I did not then well know,  and in a day 
or two these things were almost forgotton by me,  but the rest 
of the party heard,  no doubt,  in the young man's narrative, 

the distant tl gh as yet faint rising of the storm which a 

year later was to burst upon France,  and in its course to 
desolate Europe." 

It is proper to note that Mary Ann Galton was but eleven 

THE UXAR SOCIETY.  211 

years of aee at the time which she describes from memory in 
her later years. 

In 17i»l a popular outbreak occurred in Birmingham,  which 
threatened the very existence of the Lunar Society.  A riotous 
mob,  led by designing men of the baser sort,  took possession, 
as it were,  of the town,  and for four days  (July 1 llli to 17th) 
pillaged and destroyed private property to the value of over 
one hundred thousand pounds.  These July riots have often 
been described,  and details of the fanatical and violent pro- 
ceedings do not belong to this place.  We can but briefly say 
that the animosity was caused by political Mas and religious 
intolerance,  and was especially directed against Dr.  Priestley 
and his friends who had openly expressed their sympathy 
with the French Revolution,  and as Dissenters were known to 
be opposed to the Established Church.  The enraged mob,  at 
first small in number,  but increasing to more than a thousand, 
attacked first a company of eighty gentlemen who were dining 
together at a public house to commemorate the anniversary of 
the French Revolution.  The mob broke the hotel windows, 
and shouting  "Church and King,"  sought out Dr.  Priestley, 
who had not dined with the company.  Not finding him the 
mob rushed to the  "  New Meeting House,"  of which the Rev. 
Doctor was pastor,  and destroyed it by fire.  They then 
sought another Dissenting Chapel,  arid having levelled it to 
the ground,  marched over a mile to the residence of Dr. 
Pricstlev,  which was plundered without mercy.  His philo- 
sophical apparatus was ruthlessly destroyed,  and his library 
and manuscripts scattered to the winds.  Dr.  Pricstlev and his 
family barely escaped with their lives,  ami never entered the 
town again.  His cheerful temperament and philosophic habit 
of mind supported him wonderfully,  but he never ceased to 
lament the loss of valuable manuscripts,  in which were re- 
corded the results of twenty years of labor and study. 

During three succeeding days the mob continued its work 
of destruction,  almost unchecked by the municipal govern- 
ment. They directed their attacks against the property and 
persons of Dissenters,  and of those holding liberal political 

212 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

view-.     The houses of the estimable William Hutton,  book- 
:  of a poor Presbyterian parson,  Mr.  Hobson ;  and the 

i ■!•  costlv mansions of  -Mr.  Humphreys ami Mr.  William 

1;  i---  II,  n particular friend of Dr.  Priestley,  were pillaged and 
burned to the ground.  The members of the Lunar Society, 
popularly known as  "Lunatics,"  were the especial object of 
their hatred and zeal.  Shouting  "No philosophers — church 
Icing forever ;"  they attacked Edgbaston Hall,  the resi- 
dence of Dr.  Withering,  but the timely arrival of the light- 
horse terminated their wretched work of plunder.  Some per- 
sons, to escape their fury,  wrote  "No philosophers"  on the 
fronts of their houses.  Boulton and Watt weir not without 
apprehension of an attack,  and placing arms in the hand-  of 
their workmen,  addressed them on the criminality of the 
riotous proceedings,  and obtained their promise to defend 
the establishment.  But Soho was spared the dreaded attack, 
owing to the fact,  says Watt,  that most of the Dissenters lived 
in another direction. 

As a sequel,  some of the ringleaders were executed,  and the 
sufferers were awarded partial compensation for their pecu- 
niary losses.  Priestley shook the dust of Birmingham off his 
feet,  lied to London,  and some three years later emigrated to 
the wild regions of the Susquehanna in search of peace. 

The first meeting of the Lunar Society,  after the frightful 
riots of July,  1791,  must Lave called for all the philosophy 
the learned victims could muster.  We find several allusions 
to it.  Priestley,  in w riting to Keir,  on the 22d of July  (1791), 
and again on the 29th,  from London,  expresses the hope that 
he may be permitted to return to Birmingham before the next 
Lunar Society,  and begs that the meeting be not made to de- 
pend upon his arrival.  And Mr.  Galton,  writing to Priestley 
on Monday,  Sept.  5 i IT'.M i.  expresses pleasure at the prospeel 
of seeing him in Birmingham,  and says :  "  Our Lunar Meet- 
ing will be held on Monday,  at Ban-.  Will that influence 
you to leave London any sooner?"  (Correspondence preserved 
in the Warrington Museum.) 

Mr.  Samuel Garbett;,  of Knill Court,    Herefordshire,  in a 

THE LUNAR SOCIETY.  213 

letter to the Marquis of Lansdowne,  dated September 24, 
1791,  gives a few interesting particulars of this meeting,  held 
mi the 12th,  at Mr. Galton's,  which was probably the first one 

after the riots.      He writes  :   "  My a wnts from Birmingham 

do not show that the acrimony subsides.  I am told that Dr. 
Priestley intended to attend the last Lunar meeting,  .  .  .  • 
ami tin rehire Mr.  Watt,  one of the members,  went with pistols 
in his pockets.  But Dr.  Priestley did not attend the meeting, 
and I suppose that many of the Presbyterians have beg'd that 
he may nut appear at Birmingham."  And in a postscript he 
adds:  "  Since writing the other side,  I received a letter from 
Birmingham,  in which is the following paragraph  :  '  Mr. 
Boulton says he was not at the Lunar Meeting:  he said Dr. 
Priestley is not coming,  and complains his friends have not 
stuck l,,i him:'" 

Dr.  William Withering,  the accomplished botanist and 
physician,  eventually abandoned the delusive ami favorite doc- 
trine of Phlogiston,  so stoutly advocated by Dr.  Priestley, 
ami at one of the social meetings of the  "Lunatics"  read to 
them a humorous piece in verse entitled:  "The Life and 
Death of Phlogiston"  which was long remembered for its 
clever treatment and pointed wit. 

On the 30th March,  1798,  Dr.  Withering wrote to Sir 
Joseph Banks.  "  Mr.  Boulton was here Tuesday last  ;  he is up 
to the elbows in  $>  coinage,  but does not talk of visiting 
London at present.  Mr.  Watt has sprained and nearly broken 
the tendo-Achilles of his leg.  but in other respects is well. 
My imperfect health prevents me attending our Lunar meetings 
in the winter season,  but I will not forget as I meet with the 
parties. to express your kind remembrance of them." 

Dr.  Priestley,  while suffering an enforced separation from 
the society of his fellow-philosophers,  was not forgetful of 
them,  and in 1793 he dedicated hi-  treatise,  "  Experiments on 
the Generation of Air from Water, "'to his  "valued friends, 
the members of the Lunar Society at Birmingham."  In this 
dedication,  he  -ays  :  "There are few things I more regret,  in 
consequence of my removal from Birmingham,  than the loss 

214 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

of vour socictv.  Ii both encourages and enlightens me,  so 
thai what I did thereof a philosophical kind ought in justice 
tn be attributed almost as much to you as to myself.  From 
our cheerful meetings I never absented myself voluntarily, 
and from my pleasing recollection they will never lie absent. 
Should the cause of our separation make it necessary for me 
in remove to a still greater distance from you,  I shall only 
think the more,  and with the inure regret,  of our past inter- 
views."      "Philosophy,"     he adds,    "engrossed us wholly. 

Politicians may think there are bjects of any consequence 

besides those which immediately interest them.  But objects 
far superior to any of which they have any idea engaged our 
attention,  and the discussion of them was accompanied with a 
satisfaction to which they are strangers.  Happy would it be 
for the world it'  their pursuits were as tranquil,  and their pro- 
jects as innocent and as friendly to the best interests of man- 
kind as ours."  Finally,  he concludes by earnestly committing 
them all,  though in religious persuasion differing from himself, 
"  tn the protection and blessing of that  <  rreat Being whose we 
are,  and whom 1 trust we all serve,  and who established that 
course of nature which is the object of our common inves- 
tigation." And then the Rev.  Doctor prays  "  with the greatest 
esteem and affection"  for a happy reunion with them all in 
another state of being. 

On another occasion,  Priestley,  writing to Watt,  again ex- 
pressed his affection for the members of the society in graceful 
language.  After thanking Watt and Boulton for the gift of a 
copying machine  (invented by the former),  the Doctor adds: 
"  This and many other things will ever remind me of the obli- 
gation- 1 am under to you,  and the pleasing intercourse I have 
had with you and all my friends of the Lunar Society.  Such 
another 1 can never expect to see.  Indeed,  London cannot 
furnish it.  I shall always think of you at the usual times of 
your meeting."     (Letter of November 2d.  1791.) 

A few days later,  Priestley writing from London to Dr. 

W ithering, utters thesa sentiments even more at length  :  "It 

will be a considerable time,  with every assistance that money 

THE I.TXAI!    SOCIETY.  215 

can afford,  before I can be at work again,  and hardly ever to 
so much advantage as at Birmingham.  Sue])  assistance from 
philosophical friends T should in vain look for here,  and as 
long as I live I shall look back,  and with pleasure and regret 
to our Lunar meetings,  whirl]  I always enjoyed so much,  and 
from which I derived so much solid advantage.  If I could 
find the same intelligence in any club of philosophers here.  I 
could not find thesame frankness,  which is the charm of all 
society." 

In tin same letter he adds  :  "  I have lately written to Mr. 
Watt,  and desired him.  or the Lunar Society,  as a body,  to 
make a proposal to those vvho act for the county.  I hope you 
will consider the propriety of it,  ami contribute to its effect. 
I still hope to have the satisfaction of seeing you and my 
friend-  of the Lunar Society some time hence,  and always to 
hear of your proceedings." 

Priestley reiterates these cordial sentiments in a letter to 
Dr.  Withering,  dated Oct.  '_'.  1 7 '.  *  :2 ,  wherein he writes:  "One 
of'  the things T regret the most in being expelled from Birm- 
ingham, is the loss of your company and that of the rest of 
the Lunar Society.  I feel I want the spur to constant exer- 
tion which I had with you.  My philosophical friends here 
[Clapton]  are cold and distant." 

And he writes in a similar strain just a year later i<  )ct.  22, 
L793) :  "'I am in a manner cut off from my most agreeable 
connection with you and the other members of the Lunar 
Society.  Here  [Clapton]  I hardly see any philosophical per- 
sons, except now and then Dr.  Crawford  ....  I shall send 
my papers to the Lunar Society." 

Even after his settlement in Northumberland,  the doctor 
continued to communicate his scientific observations to his 
friends in the Lunar Society.  On December 6th,  L 795,  writing 
to his friend the Rev.  Theophilus Lindsey,  Priestley explains 
that he forwards through Dr.  Young a copy of a paper pre- 
pared for the Philosophical Society at Philadelphia,  and says: 
"Please to forward it to Mr.  <  ralton the first convenient oppor- 
tunity.    It contains several new experiments,  which must he 

216 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

though!  of importance,  especially with respect to the new 
French svstem with which,  though universally adopted,  I 
more and more reason to be dissatisfied."  This paper was 
entitled:  "Experiments and Observation Relating to the 
Analysis of Atmospherical Air;  also Further Experiments 
Relating to the Generation of Air from Water,"  and was read 
t<>  the Society February 5,  I 796. 

About the same time he writes to Dr.  Withering:  ".More 
than ever do 1 now regret the loss of the Lunar Society,  where 
I spent so manv happy hours,  and for which I found no sub- 
stitute even iii London."  (Letter of Oct.  27,  1795,  from 
Northumberland.) 

Still later,  we find evidence that the cordial friendship of 
Priestley with Boultonand Watt seems to have been unbroken, 
except as distance prevented personal contact.  In 1801,  the 
firm sent Priestley a present of a  " noble furnace and other 
apparatus for making large quantities of air,"  and the Doctor, 
in acknowledging the gift,  wrote thus:  "I send every good 
wish to yourselves and all the other members of the Lunar 
Society,  the advantages of which 1 most feelingly find the 
want of."     (Letter of October 17th,  1801.) 

The latest reference to the Lunar Society in Priestley's writ- 
ings is probably that in the introduction to his essay,  entitled : 
■■The Doctrine of Phlogiston Established and that of the 
( 'omposition of Water Refuted,"  published at Northumberland 
in 1803.  In this he comments on the almost universal ac- 
ceptance of the new theory of combustion,  and says:  "And 
now that Dr.  <  'raw lord is dead,  I hardly know of any person, 
except my friends of the Lunar Society of Birmingham,  who 

adhere to the doctrii f phlogiston." 

]>r.  Priestley is not the onl)  one who records his attachment 
to this social organization and to its members individually. 
In his  " Memoirs,"  Richard Lovell Edgeworth writes :  <  >ur 
Society combined  "  men of very different characters,  lmt all 
devoted to literature and science.  This mutual intimacy has 
never been broken hut by death,  nor have any of the number 
failed to distinguish themselves in science or literature.    Some 

THE LUNAB SOCIETY.  217 

may think that I ought,  with due modesty,  to except myself. 

Mr.   Kiir.  with his knowledge of the world and g 1 sense ; 

Dr.  Small,  with his benevolence and profound sagacity; 
Wedgwood,1 with his increasing industry,  experimental vari- 
ety, and calm investigation  ;  Boulton,  with his mobility,  quick 
perception,  and hold adventure;  Watt,  with his strong. in- 
ventive faculty,  undeviating steadiness,  and bold res 'ces; 

Darwin,  with his imagination,  science,  and poetical excellence  : 
and Day,  with his unwearied research after truth,  his integrity 
and eloquence — proved altogether such a society as few men 
have had the good fortune to live with  ;  such an assemblage 
of friends as fewer still have had the happiness to possess and 
keep through life." 

As the century drew towards its end.  the Lunar Society 
gradually dissolved,  its members dropping off one by one. 
Priestley had emigrated  ;  Thomas Day was killed by a fall 
from his horse,  in 1789;  Dr.  Withering died of a lingering 
consumption,  in 1799  ;2 Dr.  Darwin was carried off by an 
attack of angina pectoris in L802  ;  and the ever-welcome guest 
Josiah Wedgwood passed away in 17'.>.">:  ('apt.  Keir,  James 
Watt,  and Boulton,  the founder,  were almost the only mem- 
bers surviving.  The vacant seats remained unfilled and the 
meetings passed into history.  The few lingering survivors 
found its associations too painful to be continued.  But the 
influence exerted by the society did not die  ;  it had stimulated 
inquiry and quickened the zeal for knowledge of all who had 
come within its influence,  and this spirit diffused and propa- 
gated itself in all directions.  Leonard Horner,  who visited 
Soho in 1809,  thus refers to the continued moral influence of 
the association  :  "  The remnant of the Lunar Society,"  he  -ays, 
"ami the fresh remembrance in others of the remarkable men 
who composed it,  are very interesting.  The impression which 
they made is not yet worn out,  but shows itself to the second 

1 Miss Meteyard,  the biographer of Wedgwood,  says he was not a 
member of the Lunar Society,  Imr a truest. 

2 During the botanist's long illness,  his friends said:  "  The flower of 
physic is withering." 

218 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

and third generation,  in a spirit of scientific curiosity and free 
inquiry which even yet makes  -nine stand against Toryism 
and the love of gain."     (Smiles.) 

-  cial gatherings of men having kindred intellectual 
interests and pursuits have many advantages which are 
laekinir in other organizations of a mure formal character. 
Our migratory American Association has marked  -ocial 
aspects,  but it brings together worker-  in science only once 
a veai'.  and its chief social advantages result from the 
acquaintances formed between the entertaining citizens and 
their scientific guests.  <  >ur New York Academy of Sciences, 
with its noble history,  occupies a field of its own,  and is the 
proper place for announcing discoveries in every department 
of learning,  but the parliamentary forms necessary to digni- 
fied proceedings forbid or hamper the freest interchange of 
opinion-  and the formation of those personal friendships 
which a social organization like the Lunar Society so admira- 
bly fosters. 

One of the members of the Lunar Society,  Richard Lovell 
Edgeworth,  perceived this difference between the two classes of 
associations,  and states the case in well chosen words.  Allud- 
ing to the Lunar Society in his  "  Memoirs."  he writes  : 

"A society of literary men and a literary society may be 
verv different,  In the one,  men give the results of their 
serious researches and detail their deliberate thoughts  :  in the 
other,  the first hints of discoveries,  the current observations, 
and the mutual collision of ideas are of important utility. 
The knowledge of each member of such a society becomes in 
time disseminated among the whole body,  and a certain esprit 
da corps,  tmcontaminatcd with jealousy,  in some degree com- 
bines the talents of members to forward the views of a single 
person." 

It is with such thoughts as these that I have ventured to 
call together this distinguished company,  and to propose the 
perpetuation of the memory of the historic society of Bir- 
mingham by founding in the metropolis of the New A\  orld 
another Lunar Society having similar aims and methods. 

THE LUNAR SOCIETY.  219 

The original organization lias long passed into history;  Init 
will nm the meetings on this side of the Atlantic lie enlight- 
ened by the same moon that shone on the festive philosophers 

of Birmingham? 

In preparing this sketch we have made free use of the fol- 
lowing works : — 

Muirhead's  "  Lite of James Watt,"  London, 

Muirhead's  "Mechanical Inventions of Watt,"  London,  L854. 

les'  "  Lives of Botilton and Watt,"  London.  1864. 
Krause's  "  Erasmus Darwin."  London,  1879. 
Edgeworth's  "  Memoirs,"'  London,  1820,  2 vols. 
Brougham's  "  Philosophers of the Time of George III.,"  London,  1 8 
Rutt's  "  Lite and Correspondence of Priestley,"  London.  1832.     _'  vols. 
Jewett's  ••Life of William Hutton,"  London,  n.  d. 
"  Life of Marj Aim Schimmel Penninck,"  by herself,  London,  IS 
Meteyard's  "Life of Wedgwood,"  London,  1865.      2 vols. 
Meteyard's  "Group of Englishmen,"  London,  1871. 
J.  A.  Langford's  "  Century of Birmingham Life."  Birmingham,  1868. 

SMi..     'J Vols. 

Robert K.  Dent's  "Old and New Birmingham,"  Birmingham,  1879- 

-  i.     :;  vols..  4to. 
(J.  Keir Moilliet.)      "  Sketch of tin-   i I n es Keir,"  London, 

n.  d.      (1868.)     8vo. 
Edouard Grimaux's    "Lavoisier d'apres sa correspondance, "   Paris. 

1888.     svo. 
(W.  Withering.)     "  Tlie Miscellaneous Tracts of Win.  Withering with 

a Memoir of his Life,  Character,  and Writings,"  London,   1822.     2 

\  m1-.  .     Mil 

Muirhead's    "Discovery of the Composition of Water."    London, 

1850.      8vo. 
A-  well as of the letters in this volume. 

"The religious tenets of Dr.  Priestley appear to me 
erroneous in the extreme  ;  but I should be sorry to suffer any 
"pinion to diminish my sensibility to virtue,  or my 
admiration of genius.  His enlightened and active mind,  his 
umvearied assiduity,  the extent of his researches,  the light he 
has poured into almost every department of science,  will be the 
admiration of that period when the greater part of those who 
have praised,  and those who have blamed him,  will be alike 

gotten." 

Robert Hall. 

"  Let Dr.  Priestley be confuted where he is mistaken  ;  let 
him be exposed where he is superficial ;  let him be repressed 
1 1 he is dogmatical ' ;  let him be rebuked where he is cen- 
sorious. But let not his attainments be depreciated,  because 
they are numerous,  almost without parallel.  Let not his talents 
be ridiculed,  because they are superlatively great.  Let not his 
morals be vilified,  because they are correct without austerity, 
and exemplary without ostentation  ;  because they present,  even 
to common observers,  the innocence of a hermit,  and the sim- 
plicity of a patriarch ;  and because a philosophic eye will at 
once discover in them the deep-fixed root of virtuous principle, 
and the solid trunk of virtuous habit." 

Samuel Parr,  D.D. 

III.    INVENTOR!  OF DR.  PRIESTLEY'S 
LABORATORY,  1791. 

From the  "Birmingham Weekly Post,"  March 15,  22,  29,  and April 5,  1890,  am> 
Rkpkixted by Permission of Sam:  Timmin-.  Esq.,  F.S.A. 

DR.  PRIESTLEY'S LABORATORY IN 17S1. 

The courtesy of a friend has allowed me to have a copy made of a 
unique document,  an official Inventory of the Household Goods,  Hooks, 
Pictures,  and Laboratory at Fairhill,  Stratford Road.  Birmingham,  which 
were damaged or destroyed by the Rioters in 1791.  The document is a 
folio book,  with 65 pages,  in which the most minute details are given and 
tin-  value of each entry is given by sworn valuers,  surveyors for the build- 
ings, auctioneers for the furniture,  and booksellers for the book-.  &c,  &c. 
All these are very curious and interesting as records of the interior of a 
substantial house a hundred years ago.  and valuable as a register of the 
prices of household furniture.  The record is.  perhaps,  too minute to be 
reprinted at full length and in full detail,  but the accounts of the Labora- 
tory, Philosophical Apparatus,  &e.,  are well worth preserving as a record 
of the means at the command of a famous chemist and philosopher whose 
name and discoveries have secured him the highest honours in the world 
of science for more than one hundred years. 

The Catalogue of Books in the Library has also much interest,  but it 
will,  probably,  suffice to limit this account to the various rooms in which 
Philosophical Apparatus was placed.      Many of the items have singular 
interest,  and some of them,  probably,  require some explanation or deserve 
some comment from the experts in science who may read this record. 

Este. 
Library. 
A Mahogany Bureau    .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .     £4 

An Oak Writing Table and Drawer 1 

A Grate Fender Tongs and Fire Irons  ....       1 

Six Mahoganv Chairs and an Arm ditto covered with Leather 7 

1 1 

6 

1 

0 

0 

0 

5 

o 

CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY, 

Library. 

A Magellan Time Piece £3 3 0 

A Boulton ami Watts Copying Machine compleat  .         .770 

A strong Deal Table to Ditto I feel by three and shelf the 

whole length with two drawers  .         .         .         .  1 10 0 

A lar«e Deal Chest with folding Doors Shelves Locks Bolts 

anil k<  \  -  .........        3 3 0 

A Ural Table 4 feet by  •->  feet G with a Shelf the whole length 

Shelf for Papers 0 8 0 

A large Roll up Screen to receive Images for a Solar Micro- 

and roller  !••  mil ditto       .  .  .  .  .  .220 

The W indow Shutters to darken the Room for the above pur- 
pose Bolts and Fastnings  .         .         . 
Three Wedgwood black Inkstands and 2 Glass Inkstands 
Eighl Shelves the whole length of the Library 21 feet long 
and    \    inch thick and Uprights to Ditto making a nest of 
Hook Shelves    ......... 

The side where the Door went in full of Shelves 9 ft.  by lfi feet 
1-  ire place side tilled with Shelves same as Door side      . 
A large Shelf over Windows ami Brackets and Knd pieces     . 
A large Ditto       ......... 

A small nest of Shelves tor small Books and 2 small Pidgeon 

holes to.  Papers 113 

Money in the Bureau o guineas     ..... 

A large Silver Medallion of Sir Isaac Newton 

Two live Guinea Notes in pocket Books 

Wedgwood large Medallion of Newton Oval Ebony frame 

Two Medallions untrained and 2 small ditto of Dr.  Franklin 

The Head of Sir George Saville  .... 

The Head of Dr.  Franklin Mezzitinto 

A View of new Colledge Hackney        .... 

A View of the Meeting and Dwelling House at Nantwieh 

A Steel pen in a Silver Case a Ditto Silver Case and Metal pen 

Aboul a Ream of Foolscap paper  .... 

A Ream of Quarto better paper  .... 

About a Ream of Copying paper  .... 

A Quire of Cambric paper tor the Machine 

Eleven papers of Ink powder        ..... 

A Sel oi Tools for cleaning pistols and Gun steel 

Shelves in passage one 16 feet long on braeketts three Ditto 

12 feel long ami one  :'.  feet long all for Books     .         .         .15 0 
Shelves In the Bins Boom for Books — 7 Shelves  '.)  feet long 
and three Ditto uprights one Ditto 1 2 feet long nine Ditto 
sis feet Ditto and one Upright and two Shelves ij feet long 3 11 6 

0 15 0 

0     (I 6 

4 10 0 

2 10 0 

i ii t; 

n 7 o 

ii t;  o 

;i o 

2 2 

10 10 

1 1 

2 12 
ii 10 
o 10 
n 7 
0 7 

0 in 

1 o 

I o 
0 is 

II 1 
(I 11 

II 111 

INVENTORY OF HIS LABORATORY.  223 

Closi t. 
One Shelf 8 feet long inch iliirk and 12 broad and two Ditto 
6 feet long and 4 feet broad £0 18 0 

Sfa Ivt  .<  in th   ^laboratory. 
Three Shelves eighteen feet long twelve inches broad and 

upright between         .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1 10 0 

Three Shelves twelve feet long with three Supports two 12 

feet long and 9 inch broad  .  .  .  .  .  .18 0 

Six Ditto 13 feet Ions one 10 feet and 10 Ditto three feet 

narrow      .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .200 

A long part for Retorts two Boards with pegs tor phials 2 two 

pillars tor Ditto 14 0 

Above Stairs in the  ^laboratory. 
Two Shelves 12 feet 1 2 inches broad three Ditto 12 feet 

narrow Five Ditto 1"2 feet long with Upright Ends from 

Floor with Ledges on Ditto        .  .  .  .  .  .18 6 

One Shelf 16 feet long four shelves 12 feet long supported 

from Floor and one upright to divide  .  .  .  .11" 

Two ditto 12 feet long one Do.  4 feet and two one Ditto 2 

feet long 0 12 0 

One Shelf 8 feet long 4 feet and two three feet long on Stair- 

a painted Shelf eight feet long at Outside of the house       .        0 12 0 
Shelves in the Shed two Shelves and the fitting up of the 

Coal Hole fitted up compleat with Sliding Boards in front 1 10 0 

In the  ^laboratory. 

A large Oak Bureau Desk 2 12 6 

A strong Deal Table six feet by  :'<k and 2 shelves through the 

whole divided by partitions        ...... 

A Ditto Table 3 ft.  by 2 ft.  with a Shelf under ditto    . 

A Ditto Table 4 t'eet by 2 with Shell'  to go into partitions 

under Ditto       ......... 

A strong Deal Table 4 feet by o\  with two Drawers 

Three wooden Bottom Chairs        ...... 

Twenty-four Boxes different sizes         ..... 

A Franklin Stove and Fire Irons  ..... 

A large Oak Table painted to try Experiments in the Sun     . 
A large Smiths forge Bellow-  lixt to a strong Deal Table 
A large pair of Hand double Bellows  .... 

A large Double Bellows with compleat Apparatus for melting 

Glass and a large  'fable      ....... 

A small Ditto neatly made under a smaller Ditto Table 

2 

2 

0 

ii 

12 

0 

1 

II 

0 

1 

1 

0 

ii 

!l 

1) 

1 

it; 

II 

4 

4 

II 

o 

10 

6 

3 

m 

II 

1 

in 

II 

4 

4 

0 

1 

10 

0 

II 

224 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

A lar^c Trough of Inch Deals about three feet long 1 2 inches 
wide and 12 deep with a strong Slult'  in Ditto cut into 

Funnels £110 

An Apparatus to support  'i Glass Funnel within the Water    .       0 5 0 

A  \\ leu pillar made to suspend Vessels in and over the 

Water 0 2 6 

A L'rough 2 feet Deep with Shelf as above  .         .         .110 

A lar"e Trough 8 feet long 9 inches deep made to hold Water 0 18 0 
Two Water Troughs 18 in.  long 12 inches deep and 12 wide 1 1 0 

Two 15 by 12 as above "  15 0 

A Worm Tub with pewter Worm and pewter Tubes     .         .       0   \-     0 

\  (  opper Still fitted to Worm Tul 

A small Worm Tub with Glass Worms  .  .  .  .110 

A japan'd watch makers San pan with a Shade     .         .         .110 
A Mahogany pillar with Candlesticks to slide up and down    .       0 14 0 

i nt Lamp to lighl a passage 0 5 i 

in"  Lock and Ke\  -  and Iron Barrs to all the Windows and 

Bars to Do 8 0 0 

A Mahogany Vessel to bold Toll,,  mercury with an upright 

■  to support tubes and a wooden Trough for it to stand in 2 12 ij 
i  .     [ve white Basons to hold Mercury J doz.    Ditto small 
Cups and dishes         ....... 

Twelve large white ware Dishes various sizes 

Eighteen earthen Vessels round 6in.  diameter and 4 deep 

Six large Stone brown Jars with 2 large stone bottles with 

Handles 18 0 

A  -mall Anvill with four hammers and a large Iron Shovel 

and twn small ditto Stands 0 1 s      ,; 

A compleat Chest of Carpenters Tools  .         .         .  4 4 0 

A large Mahogany Lathe for turning Wood Iron and Brass 

with Tools compleat  .......     12 12 0 

A I arp nt'  i-  large Work Bench with Vice fixt and hand cut- 
ting fixt to Ditto . 

Two hand Vices  ........ 

A small Bench Vice     ........ 

12 Doz.  Corks 

A Chest of small Drawers in 2 parts full of drawers stained 

\\  1 

A Copper Vessel 12in.  deep and 8 wide with a handle 
A Ditto sin.  dee]i and six wide close at Top and a spout 
Twelve i run Barrels     ........ 

A Copper  \  essel the same bore as the Gun Barrels 
A Cast Iron Tube four feet long and 1 i ilia. 

arge Iron Tubes 4in.  Bore  ..... 

2 

."' 

0 

0 

Is 

0 

0 

!l 

0 

2 

2 

o 

0 

8 

0 

o 

7 

6 

0 

1" 

0 

2 

■> 

0 

o 

10 

6 

0 

10 

6 

1 

14 

0 

o 

12 

0 

0 

5 

0 

1 

1 

0 

INVENTORY OF HIS LABORATORY. 

225 

Ail Iron Vessel made to steam light      ..... 

Twelve doz.  phials        ........ 

Three wooden frames for Distillation    ..... 

Three doz.  of large black earthen Vessels holding from 3 

Galls,  to 1 Gall 

Two doz.  of a small size holding from one Gall,  to a pint 

Miscellaneous Articles. 
A Firing Iron sundry Toys and pressing Screw three Quar- 
ters Hundred best Quills  ...... 

An Oak Box with partitions neatly made       .... 

A large Mahogany Drawing Board with a jointed T Square 
Two Slates tiled brass Slides to write in Dark 

£1 5 

0 

0 12 

0 

0 12 

0 

0 18 

0 

o 12 

0 

1 10 

0 

0 10 

1' 

1 8 

0 

o r, 

0 

Fifth,  a Schedule Inventory and Appraisement of the Philosophical 
Instruments,  Electrical Apparatus,  Optical Instruments,  Mathematical 
Instruments,  Chymical Apparatus and Chymical substances belonging to 
the said Plaintiff being in and about his said Dwelling House and Out- 
houses and being wholly or in part destroyed and demolished by the 
Rioters,  vizt.  : — 

Philosophical Instruments. 
Two Vessels of tin'd Iron painted eight inches diameter to 

catch and measure the Rain one of them furnished with a 

Glass Tube one inch in diameter        .... 
A Brass Dial eight inches in diameter and a wooden pillar 
Two Thermometers of Mr.   Cavendishe's construction fo 

measuring Heat and Cold in any Interval 
Another Ditto of Mr.  Six's construction 
i inr ditto of Mr.  Nairne's in a Shagreen case 
Another Ditto of a similar construction with a Brass Scale 
Two Do.  accurately divided into tenths of Degrees 
About a dozen ditto without Divisions 
Four Ditto for Measuring great Degrees of Heat and Cold 

with Divisions and numbers cut on the Tubes     . 
A Barometer and Thermometer in a neat Mahogany frame 
Double Barometer with Mercury and Spirits 
Ditto with a seal of three fleet in length        ... 
Do.  constructed in the manner of Mr.   Six's Thermometer 

the Heighth of the Mercury in a persons absence 
Mr.  Wedgwoods Thermometer with a complete set of Fire 

pieces in a Mahogany Box and another separate Scale on 

Wood 

Four large Vessels for Dr.  Crawfords'  Experiments on Heat 
An Oslipite with two necks  ...... 

15 

1 1 

0 

1 1 

0 

1 4 

o 

2 2 

0 

1 1 

0 

1 1 

(1 

6 6 

0 

1 10 

0 

s 

.   12 12 

0 

2 12 

t; 

0 12 

0 

0 12 

1' 

3 3 0 

3 0 

0 14 

1 5 

o 

36 15 

.1 

2 12 

G 

226 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

Every thing belonging to an Air Gun except the Barrel Stool 
ami Syringe     •         •         •         •         •         •         •         •         • 

Mr.  Seaton's Air Pump and Condenser         .... 

Mr.  Martin's Table Air Pump of the smallest size 

A mtv extensive Apparatus for Experiments on the Air 
Pump including two Brass Transferrors and two of Glass 
b\   Mr.  Parker 3 

A verj large Condensing Machine by Mr.  Nairne with a 
S\  i in<*e and two additional strong  <  ilass Vessels of a smaller 
size with Brass Stands 10 is 0 

A copper Vessel and Fountain by condensed Air with a Brass 
Syringe adapted to it  .         .         ■         .         .         .3 1:!     6 

A Paiiin-  Digester bj Mr.  Nairne with a Furnace adapted to 

it and another by Nairne with double Iron vessels  .       ii 4 o 

Mr.  Cantons Set of Magnets of the best sort by Mr.  Nairne 1 16 

A Sett of Large Horse Shoe Magnets which would lift mon 
than a Hundred Weight 8 14 6 

A paii-  of Magnets about nine inches long     .         .         .         .060 

An apparatus to shew the Dipping property of the Magnet 
by Mr-    Uams 0 18 0 

A Twisted Glass Tube with Bulbs at each and set in a Frame 
to shew the Specific Gravity of differently coloured Liquors 

A large Water Hammer        ....... 

Two Pulse Classes with IKal Cases        ..... 

A pair  .it'  twelve ineli Globes with the latest discoveries 

An Orrery of Mr.  Martins Plan shewing the Motion of all 
the Primarj Planets with a double set of stems to support 
the Planets 10 10 0 

A Wooden Globe one toot in diameter to represent the Sun 
and Wood or Ivory Balls in proportion to it to represent 
the Planets in order to lie placed on stands at proper dis- 
tances in a large Field        .  .  .  .  .  .  .110 

An Hygrometer of Mr.  De Lues  .....'_'     '-'     0 

Amount of Philosophical Instruments    ....   160 lti 6 

Eh ctrical Aparatus. 
An Electrical Machil n the largest construction by Mr. 

Nairne the Cylinder 13 inches in diameter with various 
Apparatus         .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .     25 4 0 

An additional Prime Conductor fifteen feet long and eighteen 
inches in diameter with two  (dass Pods each an inch in 
diameter and four feet long,  fixed in Mahogany Claws a 
Brass Cylinder to slide into it eighteen inches long and one 
in diameter with three Brass Falls one of them six inches 
in diameter another four and another three  .  .  16 1G 0 

II 

■> 

6 

o 

5 

0 

3 

6 

0 

INVENTORY OF HIS LABORATORY.  227 

Mr.  Xairnes Medical Electrical Machine with its complete 

Apparatus and an additional Cylinder       .         .         .         .£13 2 0 

Mr.  Cuthbertsons Machine with two Plates Eighteen inches 
in diameter a neat Mahogany Box to contain it anil its Ap- 
paratus and an additional one of Deal tor common 1'se      .      18 0 0 

A large Electrical Machine tor the Table of my own con- 
struction described in my History of Electricity  .  .770 

A small Electrical Machine witli a Wheel and a Box to con- 
tain it to be used in Experiments on Air    .         .         .         .110 

Three Globes about ten inches in diameter fitted to turn in a 
Lathe the Rubber insulated with a Class plate and a small 
prime Conductor        .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .250 

A Coated Jar of the largest size with a Box stuffed on the 

inside to contain it.         .         .         .         .         .         .         .250 

Another Coated Jar nearly as large and though cracked by 

an explosion yet of consibl.  use  .  .  .  .  .050 

Another Jar about half the size entire and properly filled up 110 

A Battery consisting of thirty-six Jars each eighteen inches 

by four 16 16 0 

Another of twenty five square feet of Coated  <  ■  1  ;i -~   the Jar 

of a smaller size        .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .770 

Another of four Jars eighteen inches by four  .  .  .        2     '_'     o 

About forty square feet of coated Jars which had been 

cracked by Explosions but were of some use      ...        2 lo 0 

An Electrophone nine inches in diameter with a Marble plate 

of the same size for a Condenser        .  .  .  .  .110 

Another of about six inches in diameter by Mr.  Nairne in a 

neat shagreen case    .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .0150 

Mr.  Bonnet's Electrometer with a Marble Condenser adapted 

to it 0 18 0 

Mr.  Nicholson's revolving doubler         .         .         .         .         .830 

Dr.  Heberden's fine Tourmalin described in the Philosophical 
Transactions for which he gave  .         .         .         .         .990 

Two of Mr.   Henley's Electrometers one in Ivory and the 

other in Wood by Mr.  Nairne 0 15 0 

Mr.  Bane's Electrometer with a Mahogany Stand  .         .       0 3 C 

Three of Mr.  Canton's Electrometers in Mahogany Cases      .        0 7 6 

Two dozen of Brass Balls from two inches to half an inch in 
diameter and one dozen of Iron Balls turned in a Lathe 
one inch in diameter  .         .         .         .         .         .  1 IC,     0 

Twelve brass Rods of different Lengths with screws to fasten 

them to 0 6 0 

A prime Conductor of Copper tour feet long and four inches 

in diameter terminating in a Ball of six inches  .  .        1 11 6 

2 

3 

6 

0 

8 

0 

0 

10 

0 

1 11 

ti 

0 10 

0 

0 15 

0 

0 7 

6 

228 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

A tinned Iron Conductor seven or eight feet long and six 
inches diameter made to divide into two    .         .         .         .£110 

A round inch Deal Board three feet diameter coated with 
Tinfoil and furnished with Silken Strings in order to be 
suspended over a Mahogany Table of the same size  .         .       0 10 0 

A line round piece of Amber eight small Tourmalins a Bra- 
zilian Topaz and six dozen Pith and Cork Balls of various 
sizes  .......... 

Tour pounds of Tinfoil         ....... 

Ten yards of Brass ami Iron Chain of different sizes     . 

A Glass Globe ten inches in diameter with an Apparatus for 
exhausting it three Glass Tubes between three and four 
feel long prepared in the same manner anil other Tubes ex- 
hausted and hermetically sealed to shew the electric Light 
in vacuo  ......... 

A large double Vacometer for the same purpose    . 

Two Stools with Glass Feet 

An Inflammable Air Pistol  ...... 

Amount of Electrical Apparatus     .  .  .  £144 3 C 

Optical Instrumi nts. 

Six prisms of the best kind  ...... 

Two Mahogany Stands in order to place them in all directions 
comprized and made by  -Mr.  Ramsden       .... 

A Refracting Telescope fourteen feet Focus with wooden 
Sliding Tubes and a Set of Lenses for Day Objects  . 

A Telescope eight feet Focus with Paste board Tubes  . 

Two Tele-copes magnifying about ten times one in a Ma- 
hogany Tube and the others in sliding Tubes and a shagreen 
case 0 14 0 

Another Achromatic with Sliding Tubes about two feet when 

drawn out  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .1116 

Solar Microscope in brass fitted also for opaque objects with a 
small achromatic Telescope and a complete Wilson's 

Solar Microscope in Wood   ....... 

Nairn's Aquatic Microscope with an Addition to make it 
compound         ......... 

A  \\  ilson's Microscope in a Mahogany Box with several ad- 
ditional Lenses by Mr.  Dollond  ..... 

About three dozen of Sliders with objects including one Dozen 
of lline sections of Wood   ....... 

Six ffigures in Anamorphosis with a Cylindrical Mirror 

A Burning Lense twelve inches in diameter with a 

Wooden Stand 6 6 0 

6 6 

0 

1 12 

0 

1 11 

6 

0 12 

0 

7 

7 

0 

1 

11 

6 

3 

13 

6 

2 

12 

6 

2 

9 

0 

2 

•> 

0 

INVENTORY OF HIS LABORATORY. 

229 

I >itto seven inches diameter without a Stand 

Ditto five inches diameter with a Handle and Mahogany 

frame        ......... 

Ditto three inches diameter in a Horn frame 
Ditto three small Lenses in a frame of Horn 
Three small Lenses in single Frames    .... 

A set of Lenses in frames to move on a stand in order to ex 

plain the Structure of Telescopes      .... 

About half a dozen smaller Lenzes of different Focus's 
A pair of Temple Spectacles         ..... 

Ditto of Green Glass    ....... 

Ditto with two setts of opake Glasses for viewing Luminou 

Objects    ......... 

A large Magic Lanthorn       ...... 

Three Slides of figures remarkably well done 

Twelve such as are now commonly sold 

A Camera Obseura in the form of a very large Book    . 

Two dozen Landskips and Views coloured    . 

One dozen ditto not colored  ..... 

A Glass Globe 7 inches diameter silvered on the inside 
Three small Microscopes with single LeDses in Glass  (Frames 

£  :i 3 0 

Amount of Optical Instruments 

Mathematical Instruments. 
A Perambulor      ........ 

A Theodolite by Wright       ...... 

A curious Brass Scale by ditto      ..... 

A Plain Table and a large brass Scale with sights 

A cross Staff with Sights      ...... 

A Gunter's chain  ....... 

A Pocket case of Instruments       ..... 

Three pair of brass Compasses      ..... 

A one foot Box Rule    ....... 

A one foot Box Sector  ...... 

A Sliding Rule of the best construction 

A Navigation Sliding Rule  ..... 

An Ebony Parallel Ruler one Foot in length 

Tin Case of small Tools       ...... 

Two sets of Beams and Scales by Mr.  Whitehnrst to weigh 

about one pound each        ...... 

A pair of very fine Assaye Scales in a large Glass fframe 
A Scale Beam about three feet long with Scales and weight 

four of them Iron ten pounds weight neatlv turned    . 
Mr.  Nairne's Hydrostatic balance  .... 

10 6 

4 G 

:,  o 

t  .; 

18 0 

6 0 

5 0 

6 0 

0 
0 
0 
0 

5 0 
1 6 0 
18 0 

£59 11 0 

5 

5 

o 

5 

5 

0 

0 

12 

II 

4 

4 

0 

0 

7 

6 

0 

7 

6 

0 

13 

6 

1 

4 

0 

0 

1 

G 

0 

IS 

0 

0 

5 

'i 

0 

3 

6 

0 

7 

6 

1 

6 

0 

6 

6 

0 

7 

7 

0 

4 

4 

0 

4 

4 

0 

1 11 

0 

0 4 

6 

1 1 

0 

0 10 

6 

5 5 

0 

II IS 

0 

0 10 

6 

230 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

n's ditto £i»  12 

.\  ,,i 0f Tro}  and another of Averdupoise weight each one 

pound with their Subdivisions   ..... 
Three sets of Penny Weights and Grains 
A Set of Sub-divisions of a  (.rain by Mr.  Whitehurst 
A set of  (.rain Weights divided decimally and a Mahogany 

l i foi small Weights     ...... 

Ellicott's p\  rometer     ....... 

I ii Q ladrants of Wood 

|  son's Magic Circle in Horn and Box Wood 

Amount of Mathematical Instruments         .         .         .  £55 13 G 

Chymical Apparatus. 
A Furnace of Dr.   Black's Construction made of Iron and 

lined with Fire Brick         .         .         •         •         ■         ■         .       3 13 6 
A  -and Heat of Cast Iron three feet in length and one in the 

other Dimensions with an Apparatus curiously constructed 

In Dr.  Withering for admitting more or less air  .         .600 

Mr.  Parker's  (Furnace and apparatus for distilling with many 

small Retorts containing a large Copper Vessel also Iron 
twelve feet long and four in diameter adapted to it 

in order to warm the Laboratory and an additional Iron 

Grate to go over the Fire  .         .         .         •         ■         .880 

A Brick Air Furnace for great Degrees of Heat  .  .  .  1 1!  6 
Two Furnaces made by Mr.  Wolfe for the largest Crucibles 2 2 0 
Another ditto with an Apparatus for distilling and Copper 

Tubes to encrease the Heat by Mr.  Warltire inclosed in a 

( lopper Case      .         .         .         .         .         .         •         •         .1116 

Two small Iron ffurnaces      .         .         .         .         .         .         .076 

Two Cylindrical Iron Vessels with Grates about seven inches 

diameter 0 10 0 

Two Iron Grates about sixteen inches long and eight wide for 

temporary Furnaces with loose Bricks        .         .         .  0 1 2 0 

Mr.  Argand's Lamp on a Stand with an Apparatus tor distilling 1 4 0 
Another adapted to a tin Vessel containing about a Quart of 

Oil 0 12 0 

Landriani's Eudiometer with Glass Cocks sent from Italy       .       110 
Fontana's ditto    .         .         .         .         .         .         .         •         .110 

Another of my Own Construction with two addition Glass 

Tubes and the Figures cut on them with a File by Dr. 

Falconer  .         .         .         .         .         .         .         •         .1116 

A Set of  (.lass Measures t'rorn a pint to an ounce of water  .  0 12 0 
A strong Glass Tube three feet long and one Inch and half 

in diameter fitted with brass Caps for explosions with Air 110 

INVENTORY OF HIS LABORATORY.  231 

Four Glass Tubes one inch in diameter from twelve to 

eighteen inches in length fitted in the same manner    .         .    £1 12 0 
A similar One Copper  .         .         .         .         .         .         .050 

Another in  (ilass to be filled with Mercury and then with Air 

fitted with strong screws for explosions      .         .         .         .       0 7 G 

About thirty  (ila-s Retorts containing from two quarts to one 

some ot'  them tubulated         .         .         .         .         .         .900 

About four dozen ditto of a smaller size holding from one pint 

to half a pint 2 8 0 

About three dozen small ditto holding about an ounce of 

water        .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .170 

About two dozen thin Glass Vessels six or eight inches in 
height and two in diameter for Experiments on the Air in 

the Sun 140 

About two dozen Glass Phials with Tubes ground to them tin- 
largest holding more than a quart and the smallest about an 
ounee of water  .         .         .         .         .         .         .  4 16 0 

About 8 dozen Phials with ground Stoppers holding from two 

or three quarts to half an ounce of water    .  .  .  .600 

About sixteen dozen of Phials with ground Stoppers     .         .       0 16 0 
About three dozen of Glass Jars ten or twelve inches in height 

and two in diameter for Experiments on Air      .  .  .        116 0 

About two dozen of smaller sizes  .  .  .  .  .11"" 

About eighteen Jars ten inches in length and three in diameter 2 5 0 
Six Jars eighteen inches in length and four in diameter  .        11"     0 

Six large Glass Shades for Lamps  .  .  .  .  .0180 

Three Conical Vessels eight inches in diameter and six in 

height ground for Receivers to an Air Pump      .  .  .060 

Three Conical Vessels twelve in height and six width    .  .090 

Mr.  Parker's Apparatus for impregnating Water with fixed 

Air of the last construction        .  .  .  .  .  .110 0 

Another wanting the lower Vessel  .  .  .  .  .12 6 

Another of small Size complete    .         .         .         .         .         .110 

Three dozen Glass Tubes three feet long three of them an 

inch in diameter with Ground Stoppers      .  .  .  4 17 6 

About six dozen smaller flint Glass Tubes from three to four 

feet long and various small diameters         .         .         .  4 10 0 

About four dozen Green Glass Tubes ditto    .         .         .         .       3 0 0 

About three dozen Glass Tubes wide and closed at one end 
and drawn to a point at the other from two to three feet in 

length 580 

A Glass Tube three feet long and one inch in diameter with a 

Bulb at the End hold two quarts of water  .         .         .       0 12 0 

Three Barometer Tubes with Bulbs holding about a pint       .        1 11 6 

232 

CORRESPOND  >EN<  E OF PRIESTLEY. 

six Cases  "I'  Iron and Brass win-  to support Retorts in distil- 
lation             £0 15 0 

Five cast lion Retorts with Sand  .         .         .         .         .030 

A great Variety of small Tools tor cutting   &c.   bending 

win-  fcc. 0 10 6 

Three brass blow pipes and several Glass ones       .         .         .076 
A 1 Mint a dozen files       .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .050 

Nail Pincers and various small Tools     .  .  .  .  .050 

Half a dozen forceps and other Instruments to manage rhres 1 10 0 
A Tin'd Iron Vessel with Cover ten inches in length six wide 

and six deep tor a Sand Heat    .  .  .  .  .  .0100 

About a dozen Other tin'd Vessels with Covers to hold 
different substances  .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .080 

About Eighty pounds of Mercury  .         .         .         .  20 0 0 

About thr lozen Glass Vessels an inch or half an inch in 

diameter and ten or twelves inches long to confine different 

kinds of Air by Mercury  .  .  .  .  .  .250 

Dr.  Crawford's Apparatus for ascertaining the specific heat 
of different kinds of Air by Mr.  Xairne    .         .         .         .550 

Half a dozen large,  black Crucibles 0 18 0 

A dozen large White ditto and two dozen Nests of small 

Hessian Ones    .  .  .  .  .  .  .     "     .  .080 

The Apparatus to a Lens sixteen inches in diameter by Mr. 

Parker 7 7 0 

Amount of Chymieal Apparatus 

Chymical Substana s. 
Terra Ponderosa aerated half cwt.         .... 
Cwl of Manganese most of it finely powder'd and cleaned 

( >ne pound of Magnesia 

Seven pound of Epsom Salt 

About three quarts of Salt of Tartar 

Half cwt.  of saltpetre 

Four His.  of Flour of Brimstone 

Four lbs.  of Alum 

Fourteen pounds of Pot Ash 

Two Glass Bottles with ground Stoppers each holding two 
quarts of Oil of Vitriol quite full 

Pint of Spirit of Nitre 

Cart load of'  ( 'oak         .... 

Two or three Bushels of Charcoal 

Specimens of all Metals and Ores and Earths one of Native 
lion from Siberia great varieties of Lava and Basaltes from 
different parts of the world specimens of Coals the different 
Strata in digging into a well,  spars scorsa  &c,  &c.     .         .     20 0 0 

.41133 

10 

o 

.    £3 

3 

0 

1 

1 

0 

0 

4 

0 

0 

3 

6 

0 

9 

o 

1 

11 

6 

0 

1 

4 

0 

2 

fi 

o 

7 

0 

0 

8 

8 

0 

3 

0 

o 

10 

0 

0 

5 

0 

INVENTORY OF HIS LABORATORY.  233 

Six or seven hundred Substances liquid and solid of which no 
account can be given many of them the results of expensive 
processes  ........ 

About half an ounce of Gold        ..... 

Something more than the same quantity of Silver 

Half a pound of Platina       ...... 

Three ounces of Phosphorus         ..... 

Three dozen Phosphoric Matches in a tin case 

Two quarts rectified Spirits of Wine    .... 

Two ditto frequently distilled by Mr.  Parker 

fib.  of the best red Bark      ...... 

Ten Glass Vessels containing about 30 ounces of water to 
raise Air in its first production  .... 

Amount of Chymical Substances 

.  £20 0 

0 

■>     5 

0 

0 G 

0 

■2 s 

0 

1 1 

0 

o 10 

6 

0 6 

0 

o    ].-, 

o 

0 3 

6 

1 0 

0 

.  £57 lo 

6 

Brought forward from fo.         the Value and Amount of the 

Plaintiff's Chymical Substances  .  .  .  .  .  57 10 6 
The like from fo.         the value and amount of the Plaintiff's 

Chymical Apparatus 133 10 0 

The like from fo.         the value and amount of the Plaintiff's 

Mathematical Instruments  .         .         .         .         .         .     53 13 6 

The like from fo.         the value and amount of the Plaintiff's 

Optical Instruments .      59 11 0 

The like from fo.         the value and amount of the Plaintiff's 

Electrical Apparatus  .  .  .  .  .  .  .    144 3 6 

The like from fo.         the value and amount of the Plaintiff's 

Philosophical Instruments 1 GO 10 6 

£609 
To be deducted from the above Account for the value and 
amount of the several following Articles saved wholly or in 
part by the sd.  pit.  or since returned to him — viz.: 
Part of a Solar Microscope  .         .         .         .£330 

Part of a Planetarium or Orrery  .         .         .       0 15 0 

Part of a Copper condensing ffountain  .         .050 

4 3 0 

Total value and amount of sd.  5th Schedule      .         .  £G05 2 0 

(Errors and Omissions excepted.) 

The foregoing Schedule Inventory and Appraisement hath been made 
and taken by Messrs.  Nairne and Blunt Mathematical Instrument Makers 
of Cornhill in the City of London persons of great Eminence Experience 
and Competent Judgment in all the several above articles which will be 

234 CORRESPONDENCE OF PRIESTLEY. 

proved on the Tryal of the Cause if necessary and the Articles have been 
bv them all valued and appraised nt the prices it will cost the pit.  to 
replace and reinstate them and in the above Valuation-;  allowance has 
been made for all the Articles saved and returned and for such of them 
a^  are but in part demolished. 

Note. 

About three years alter the foregoing Inventory was taken,  another 
one was made of the apparatus of the French chemist Lavoisier under 
circumstances still more melancholy.  Lavoisier had already perished on 
the guillotine  (May,  1794),  when the Committee of Public Instruction by 
a decree dated 19 brumaire,  an III.  (Oct.  1794),  ordered an inventory of 
the contents of his laboratory.  This was carried out by a commission of 
eifht,  including Fourcy and Melan,  dealers in chemical glassware,  and 
of which the chief was Nicolas Leblanc,  the inventor of the process of 
manufacturing soda-ash,  imperishablj associated with his name.  Those 
interested in such matters will find the text of this inventory in the 
Biography of Leblanc published by his grandson,  Aug.  Anastasi ;  Paris, 
1884.     1'Jmo. 

I N I)  E X. 

n.  =  note. 

Abercrombie,  Rev.  James,  sketch of 
Air,  inflammable,  two kind-  recognized 
Air of Northumberland analyzed 
Air produced from water  . 
Alchemical studies of Dr.  James Price 
Alkaline air       ....         . 
Apparatus given to Priestley by Wedgwood 

Banks,  Sir Joseph,  Biographical sketch 

Banks,  Sir Joseph,  sends specimens to Priestley 

Barbauld,  Mrs.  Anna Lsetitia  (Aiken) 

Beausobre,  Isaac de  ... 

Beddoes,  Dr.  Thomas 

Bentley,  Thomas        .... 

Bergman,  Sir Torbern 

Berthollet,  Claude Louis   . 

Bewley,  William,  apothecary     . 

Biographical notes of Lunarians 

Biographies of persons to whom letters are addressed 

Birmingham Riots and Lunar Society 

Birmingham Riots of 1791 

Blagden,  Sir Charles 

Bones,  composition of 

Boulton and Watt     .... 

Boulton,  Matthew,  and the Lunar Society 

Boulton,  Mr.  M.  Robinson 

Brougham,  Lord,  criticises Priestley 

Burke,  Edmund,  statesman 

Button,  Conyers,  of Philadelphia 

Calk,  or heavy spar 
Canton,  John,  and phosphori 
Carbon monoxide       .... 
Castlehead,  Wilkinson's residence 
Cavendish,  Henry     .... 
Cavendish's,  Watt's,  and Lavoisier's claims 
Centennial of the Discovery of Oxygen     . 

43 h. 

r Af ;  b 

17 

67,  72 

1 IS 

4,  60 a. 

42 n. 

35 n. 

23 n. 

14 

123 n. 

73 n. 

155 a. 

150 n. 

10,  21 

64 n. 

93 u. 

U5 n. 

196 

9 

211 

108 n. 

93 n. 

41 n. 

15 

198,  203 

210 

26 n. 

106 n. 

4,  193 

85 n. 

12 7 n. 

75 n. 

13 

88 n. 

53 a- 

194 

236 

INDEX. 

Chisholm,  Alexander 

( looper,  Thomas        .... 

William,  bookkeeper 
Crawford,  Adair.  M.I I. 

Darwin,  Dr.  Erasmus,  and the Lunar Society 
Darwin's letter to Watt 
Darwin's speaking machine 
Dephlogisticated marine acid 
Dinner of Lunar Society at Galton's 
Dinner at Birmingham attacked 1>\  rioters 
Dreer.  Ferdinand  .1.,  of Philadelphia 

Earths and minerals used in pottery 
Edgeworth's estimate of the Lunar Societ 
Etruria,  or Hetruria 

Fallacy of water yielding air admitted 
Fontana,  Felice         .... 
Fox,  Charles James 
Francois,  Jean Paul,  due d'Ayen 
Franklin,  Benj.,  and his health 
Franklin's Estimate of Priestley 
French proposals to Priestley     . 

Galton,  Samuel  .... 

Galton,  Samuel,  and the Lunar Society 
G        .  osmose of,  observed by Priestley 
Gengembre,  discoverer of phosphine 
Grimaux,  Edouard,  of Paris 

Hall.  Robert,  Estimate of Dr.  Priestley 

Heberden,  William.  M.D. 

Horner,  Leonard,  estimate of the Lunar Society 

Hunter,  John,  F.R.S. 

Hurrell,  Swann,  of Cambridge.  Eng. 

Hutchinson,  Dr.  James,  of Philadelphia 

Inflammable air,  varieties of 
Ingenhousz,  Jan        .... 
Inventory of Priestley's Laboratory 
Invitation to dinner in honor of Priestley 
Irish affairs in Parliament 
Iron,  experiment with,  in dephlogisticated 

Johnson,  Joseph,  publisher 

Johnson.  Rev.  R.  A. 

Jones,  Rev.  David    .... 

Kcir.  ('apt.  James.  Biographical sketch of 

Keir,  Capt.  Ja -.  Characteristics of 

Keir's  ^ie^y of the French nomenclature    . 

1 l 

PAGE 

.       54 n. 

.    loo n. 

.      68   .. 

63 n. 

199,  202,  'Jo;, 

■Jul 

I 

41 

204 

110 n. 
4 

28 n. 
217 

57,  59 
20  ». 

1 1 o n. 
97 n. 

43 

17 

,  132 n. 

'i4 a. 

202 

70 

207 n. 

4 

220 

9G n. 

217 

137 n. 

n.,  193 

139 n. 

72 n. 

20 n. 
221 
161 

7 7.   78 n. 
71 

79  «.,  176 
.      121 n. 
122 n.,   124,   129 

16 

204 

99 

11 

INDEX. 

237 

Kirwan.  Richard       ..... 
Kunz,  Geo.  F..  of New York   . 

Laboratory,  Inventory of Priestley's 

Laboratory.  Inventory of Lavoisier's 

Landriani,  Marsiglio,  physicist 

Laudy,  Louis H.,  of New York 

Lava.  Vesuvius,  experiment with 

Lavoisier,  Antoine Laurent,  sketch of 

Lavoisier's Laboratory.  Inventory of 

Leblanc,  Nicolas        ..... 

Lead calx,  reduction of     . 

Lee,  John,  Solicitor-General 

Letters of Priestley,  see Priestley's Letters. 

Light,  action on spirit of nitre   . 

Light and Heat.  Th.  Wedgwood's experiments 

Lindsey,  Rev.  Theophilus 

Lunar Society,  its principles 

Lunar Society of New York,  founding of 

Macquer's experiment        .... 

Maddocks,  I.,  chaser  .... 

Manganese,  regulus of        ... 

Mansell,  Miss Judith  .... 

Medal commemorating Priestley's emigration 

Meteyard,  Eliza        ..... 

Millar,  John,  of Glasgow 

Mirabeau on Benjamin Franklin 

Mitchill's Medical Repository    . 

Moilliet.  James Keir.  of Great Malvern 

More,  Mr.  Samuel,  F.S.A. 

Moseley Hall.  Birmingham 

Moves,  Dr.  Henry,  chemical lecturer 

Nairne,  Mr.,  philosophical instrument maker 
Nomenclature,  French.  Keir's view of 
Northumberland.  Scheme for a College 

Osmose of gases        .... 

Paine,  Thomas  .... 

Parker,  W.,  and his lens   . 
Parr.  Samuel,  Estimate of Dr.  Priestley 
Philadelphia,  Tablet to Priestley in    . 
Phlogiston  ..... 

Phlogistic Theory       .... 
Phlogistic Theory and the Lunar Society 
Photography and the Lunar Society 
Photography,  Early experiments in    . 
Plavfair.  John  .... 

33 n. 

PAGE 

36 n. 

221 
234 

7 2 n. 

194 

30,  31 

24 n. 
234 
234 

80 

69 
10J 

S3     . 

218 

55 n. 

7^ 

84 

126 

190 

6 

1 16     . 

17 

157 n. 

4 

75 u. 

113 n. 

.     116 n. 

99 

.  150 

70 n. 

106 
40 n.,  58 
220 
1 94 
!9,  46 n. 

209 

128     - 

)1  .  . 

238 

iMn:.\. 

Portraits of Priestley;  set Priestley's Likenesses, 
Price,  James,  M.l>.,  the alchemist 

Richard,  Re\ .  ..... 

Priestley,  Joseph,  Biographical sketch of 

Priestley and the Lunar Society 

Priestlej discusses phlogiston     .... 

Priestley emigrates to America 

Priestlej gives lectures af New College,  Hackney 

Priestley honored by a dinner in Philadelphia 

Priestlej injured in the laboratory 

Priestley receives tributes of esteem after Riots 

Priestlej receives oiler of Professorship in Philadelph 

Priestley relics at the Royal Society 

Priestley relics in Cambridge.  England 

Priestlej settles at Hackney,  London 

Priestley settles at Northumberland,  Pa 

Priestley shunned by the F.R.S. 

Priestley versus Lavoisier 

Priestley's ancestry   .... 

Priestley's  "Appeal to the Public"  (1791) 
Priestley's benefactors and subscribers 
Priestley's birthday 
Priestley's coat of arms and motto     . 
Priestley's death announced by Mr.  Cooper 

ley's estimate of the Lunar Society 
Priestley's experiments with nitrous air,  etc. 
Priestley's financial loss in the Riots 
I'rie-tley's health  (in general)   . 
Priestley's History of Electricity 
Priestley's illness  (1801)    . 
Priestley's laboratory in 1791,  Inventory of 
Priestley's laboratory robbed 
Priestlej"'  s lens,  experiments with 
Priestley's Letters,  Sources of  . 
Priestley's Letters to Wedgwood,  Descript 
Priestley's Letters to Rev.  Th.  Lindsey 
Priestley's Letters to Mr.  Wilkinson 
Priestley's Likenesses  :    Artaud's Portrait 
Priestley's Likenesses:    Button Portrait 
Priestley's Likenesses,  caricatures 
Priestley's Likenesses  :    Fuseli's Portrait 
Priestley's Likenesses  :    llazlitt Portrait 
Priestley's Likenesses:    Holland Portrait 
Priestley's Likenesses in metal 
Priestley's Likenesses in stone   . 
Priestley's Likenesses:    Leeds Portrait 
Priestley's Likenesses:   Mansell Portrait 

L. 

12 n. 
117 n. 

7 
200 
149 
139 re. 
22,  134 
161 
70 
114 n. 
139 
192 
193 
1 20 
139  >'..  142 
130,  137 
37 
SI re. 

! 

56 1. 

5,  89 

162 

213,  215 

87 

116 n. 

21 n. 

163  . 

158,  160 

221 

91 

40 re.,  66 
3,  4 
5 
2 re. 
165 
175 
181 
187,  188 
17 6 
175 
177 
190 
188 
173 
180 

INDEX. 

239 

Priestley's Likenesses :   Millar's Portrait     . 
Priestley's Likenesses :   Opie Portrait 
Priestley's Likenesses  :  Peale Portrait 
Priestley's Likenesses  :   Sharpies Portrait  . 
Priestley's Likenesses:   Mrs.  Sharpies Portrait 
Priestley's Likenesses,  silhouettes 
Priestley's Likenesses :    Stuart Portrait 
Priestley's Likenesses  :    Vaughan Portrait 
Priestley's Likenesses,  Wedgwood Medallions 
Priestley's Likenesses :   Wistar Portrait 
Priestley's losses by the Birmingham riots 
Priestley's monument in New Meeting House,  15 
Priesthv'-  monument in Philadelphia 
Priestley's names for gases 
Priestley's Portraits,  see Priestley's Likenesses 
Priestley's proposal to write Histories of Science 
Priestley's purchase at Northumberland 
Priestley's seal  ..... 

Priestley's statue by Stephens,  at Oxford 
Priestley's statue by Williamson,  at Birmingha 
Priestley's view of the composition of water 
Priestley's views on respiration 
Priestley's quantitative formation of water 
Priestley.  Mrs.  Mary  .... 

Priestley,  Rev.  Timothy    .... 
Priestley.  Win.  O.,  M.D.,  of London 
Pyrometer,  Wedgwood's   .... 
Pyrometer seale,  Wedgwood's    . 

Riots at Wedgwood's Potteries 

Riots in Birmingham  .... 

Rochefoueauld-Liancourt,  Due de 

Rowley rag,  analysis of      . 

Rowley rag  (basalt)  .... 

Royal Society rejects Thomas Cooper 

Rush,  Benjamin,  M.D.,  Biographical sketch 

Russell,  William         ..... 

Russell,  William,  losses by the Birmingham riot 

Rutt,  John Towill,  Editor 

Scheele and Priestley         .... 
Schimmel Penninck,  Mrs.  Mary Anne 
Scientific discussions by Lunar Society 
Scientific gatherings in England 
Senebier,  .Jean,  naturalist 
Shelburne,  Lord        ..... 
Solander,  Karl Daniell       .... 

PAGE 

177 
174 
i-l 
182 
182 
186 
177 
174 
183 
181 
212 
189 
194 
: :  l i . 

IG3 

142 n. 
5,  89 

i 38 

189 

88 
24 n. 

55 

1 5 1  » • 

81 

3 

36 n. .   39 

1"  ....  41 

61 n. 

211 

3!  n, 

32 n. 

27,  30 

100 

18 

147 ii. 

212 

1 

41  ,i 

125 n. 

203,  210 

207,  208 

199 

71 n. 

8,  1!)  a. 

32 a. 

240 

INDEX. 

Stahl's view of phlogiston 

Synopsis of Priestley's Letters to Mr.  Wilkinson 

Terra ponderosa aerata  (Witherite)   . 
Timmins,  Sam:.  F.S.A.,  of Birmingham 
Timmins's collections,  Birmingham    . 
Toadstone,  Analysis  < >i" 
Transmutation,  alleged,  of metals 

Vaughan,  Benjamin,  William,  and John     . 
Vaughan,  Win.  M.,  of Cambridge,  Mass. 

Wainewright,  Mrs.  Robt.  A.  (Sarah Priestley) 

VValtire's experiment         .... 

Water,  constitution of according to the French 

Water,  conversion into air 

Water,  discovery of composition 

Water,  Mineral,  near Lisbon,  Analysis of 

Water,  Priestley's view of its composition 

Walt.  .lames,  Biographical sketch of 

Watt.  James,  Characteristics of 

Watt on Priestley's experiments 

Watt's letter to Kirwan      .... 

Watt's paper for the Royal Society    . 

Watt's letter to Darwin     .... 

Webster,  Noah  ..... 

Wedgwood,  Biographical sketch of    . 

Wedgwood condoles Priestley after the Riots 

Wedgwood medallions of Priestley    . 

Wedgwood's queries to Priestley 

Wedgwood's retorts tested 

\\  edgwood's speculations on combustion     . 

Wedgwood's subscription to Priestley 

Wedgwood,  Thomas,  and photography 

Wilkinson,  John,  Biographical sketch of   . 

Wilkinson's donation to Priestley 

\\  ilkinson-Priestley Correspondence 

W ilson,  Benjamin,  and phosphori 

Withering,  William,  M.D.,  Biographical sketch 

Withering,  Win,  M.D.,  Characteristics of 

Withering,  Dr.  Win.,  poem by 

Withering' s analysis of Lisbon mineral water 

Withering' s analysis of Rowley rag 

Withering's analysis of Toadstone 

W Ihouse,  Dr.  James,  of Philadelphia    . 

Yates's  .Memorials of Dr.  Priestley    . 
Sfoung,  Dr.,  of Northumberland,  Pa, 

43 

12 

PAGE 

33 n. 
165 

85 

3 

192 

32 n. 

42 n. 

11 
4 

3,  193 

55 n. 

105 

44,  60 n. 

53 n. 

138 a. 

88» 

15 

203 

45 n. 

200 

62 n. 

201 

159 

9 

111 

183 

50 

49 

97 a. 

95 n. 

209 

12 

114 n. 

165 

127 a. 

14 

204 

213 

138 

32 n. 

32 n. 

156 n. 

192 
147 n. 

n. 

^\fl
