
This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 
to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 
publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 

We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 



at |http : //books . google . com/ 



K 



A 438013 



•-**■.: 



c< v\; tdL 



At 



'.'•'.•<. 





LIBERAL EDUCATION: 

OR, A ' 

PRACTICAL TREATISE 

ON THE METHODS OF ACQUIRING 

USEFUl, AND POLITE LEARNING. 

B Y 

VICESIMUS KNOX, M. A. 

rOKMERLT rZLLOW OF ST. JOHN*S COLLEGE, OXFOtO^ 
AND NOW MASTER OF T VNBRIDGX-SCHOOL* 

THE SEVENTH EDITION, 

IN TWO VOLUMES. 

VOL. L 



OT MIKPON AIA*EPEI TO OTTaX H OYTfll EYeT2 EK 
KHilN £€1ZE20AI, AAAA nAMnOAY* MaAAON AE, TO HAN. 

Aristot. 



LONDON: 

FRINTID FOR C. DILLY, IN THE POULTRY. 
MDCCLXXXV, 



LB 

775- 

V.I 



T O 

THE WORSHIPFUL 

COMPANY OF SKINNERS, 

THE 

Patrons of Tunbridge-Schoou 



GENTLEMEN, 

^T^HE fulfome language of a flatter- 
•*■ ing Dedication would be no lefs 
difagreeable to you to receive, than to me 
to offer. But I will not lofe an opportu- 
nity of publicly exprefling to you the 
honeft fentiments of an unfeigned refpeft. 
There feems, indeed, a peculiar propriety 
in dedicating a Treatife on Education to 
thofe who have conftituted me, in a man- 
ner which increafes the obligation, the 
fuperintendant of an ancient and refpeft- 
able feminary^ 

To the honour of the commercial or- 
ders in the community, it muft be re- 
marked, that, amidft the avocations of 
lucrative purfuits, they have ufually paid 
3 attention 



iv D E D I C A T I O N. 

attention to the ftate of literature, and 
have greatly contributed to the diffufion 
of polite learning, by expending the fu- 
perfluity of their opulence in literary efta- 
blifhments. 

If we examine the origin of many an- 
tient foundations, we Ihall find a great 
number of fchools and colleges inftituted, 
endowed, and augmented, by the libera- 
lity of rich citizens i by a liberality dif- 
played at that early period, when reviving 
learning, in a ftate of infantine imma- 
turity, might again have expired, had 
fhe not been foftered by the warm pro- 
tedlion of mercantile munificence. 

As one of the early benefaftors to li- 
V terature, Sir Andrew Judd, a Lord Mayor 
of London, and the pious founder of 
Tunbridge- School in the reign of Edward 
the Sixth, claims a fhare of general gra- 
titude. He was one of the many gene- 
rous and worthy charafters who have 
adorned your very refpeAable Society, 
and, fortunately for the fchool, has ap- 
pointed you the guardians and admini- 
ftrators of his bounty. You have not 
only expended his bequefts in the fervice 
of the fchool with the ftrifteft integrity, 
but from other refources have adorned 
and enlarged the edifice, and promoted 

every 



DEDICATION. v 

every improvement which can conduce to 
the comfort of the maftcr, and the ac- 
commodation of the fcholar. 

A fortune acquired by commerce, when 
it is difcreetly expended in advancing 
learning, and in other afts of benefi- 
cence, acquires a grace and elegance, 
which a life devoted to the accumula- 
tion of money for its own fake, can fel- 
dom poflefs. Indeed, the many inftances 
of the Englifh citizens generofity in 
building and enriching fchools and col- 
leges, and in affording exhibitions for the 
maintenance of fludious youth * at the 
univerfities, feem to prove the error of 
an opinion very generally received, that 
a laborious attention to trade renders the 
fentiments mean and narrow. In a few 
individuals, indeed, of neglefted edu- 
cation, and confined ideas, it certainly 

* Sir Thomas Smylhe, an anceftor of the late 
Lord Chief Baron, gave fix exhibitions to Tun- 
britlge fcholars, and was in other refpecls a great 
benefaftor. Several other perfons, chiefly rich 
CITIZENS, have alib bequeathed exhibitions to the 
fchool. There are few of the City Companies 
which have not many exhibitions in their difpofal, 
left by fome of their members for ftudents in the 
univerfities. The Skinners, I am informed, have 
many. So alfo have the Grocers, the Cloth workers, 
the f iihmohgtrs, and, I believe, all the twelve 
and many of the inferior Companies, 

Vol. I. a has 



vi DEDICATION. 

has produced this difgraceful efFefti but 
that it has not a fimilar operation on all, 
is abundantly evinced by fuch examples 
as thofc of a Judd, and a White *, and 
of nnany whofe munificence now flows in 
other channels, not lefs copious or ufeful. 

* The founder of St. John's College in Ox- 
ford, and a Lord Mayor of London. He was a 
n.cinbcr of the Merchant Taylors Company, and 
allotted thirty-fevcn fellowlhips in t .a college to 
their very ancient and capital fctiool, founded and 
nobly fupported at their expente, unaided by 
ANY ENDOWMENT. I hope it Will not be difagree- 
able if I add the following anecdote from Mr. 
Warton, of the favourite khool and college of Sir 
Thomas White. 

** Richard Mulcaster, from King's Col- 
lege, in Cambridge, was removed to a lludentlhip 
-of Chriftchurch in Oxford, about the year 1555, 
and foon afterwards, on account of his diliinguilh- 
cd accompliftiments in philology, was appointed 
firft mailer of Merchant 1 aylors fchool in London. 
Merchant Taylors fchool was then juft founded 
as a profeminary for St. John's College, in a 
houfe called the manor of the Rose, in St. 
Laurence Pountnlv, by the Company o? 
Merchant Taylors. St. John's College had 
been then eftablifhed about feven years, which 
Mulcafter foon filled with, excellent fcholars till 
the year 1586. In the Latin plays adled bc-fore 
queen Elizabeth, and James the Firll, at Oxford, 

the ftudents of this college v^ere dillinguilhed. 

This was in confequence of their being educated 
under Mulcaster." Sir Thomas White gave 
one of his fellowfhips to Tun bridge-School. 

Charitable 



DEDICATION. vU 

Charitabk foundations, unthotight of m 
many other countries, and fuch as rcflcft 
honour on hunnan nature, are continually 
raifed and fupported by the citizens of 
London. Thus are we able to trace 
much of the national learning and the 
national beneficence, thofe eminent qua- 
lities which have added an unrivalled 
brilliancy to the Britifli charafter, to the 
fame fertile fource. 

Yes, Gentlemen ; an impartial review 
will juftify the aflertion, that learning in 
England is more indebted for thofe nur- 
feries of it, the grammar fchools efta- 
blifhed in almoft every town * in the 

king^ 

♦ Two of the greateft grammar- fchools in the 
capital of the Britiih empire arc feverally fup- 
ported by the Merchant Taylors and the Mer- 
cers Companies. The Charterhoufe was alfb 
founded by a citizen ; and I believe it would 
be eafy to enumerate a very confiderable number 
of FREE or GRAMMAR SCHOOLS fouuded and 
fupported in this country by citizens; a truth 
moil honourable to the commercial cha- 
ftACTER. Ma«y of the other City Companies 
have Free Schools in the country, and from all 
thefe together have chiefly originated the offi« 
ciATiNG clergy, and much of that light which 
hasfo remarkably enlightened the middle ranks 
of this illuflrious natioD. 

I beg leave to remark* that a free fchool. 

(fciiola libera) does not always fignify, as it it 

A 2 commonly 



Hi D E DICATION. 

kingdom, and confequently for the no- 
bleft produftions of learning, to city cor- 
porations. 



commonly fuppofedy a fchcol in which children of 
any defcription' are to be taught '* free of 
COST;" but a liberal or genteel fchooJ, in op- 
pofition to inferior fcbools, where only mechani- 
cal or low qualifications are taught. By ** free" 
fays the learned Mr. Brynrit, fpeaking of the 
word in its antient flgnification^ ** is fignified any 
•* thing genteel or liberal : alfo any thing elegant 
•• and graceful." 

Such, indeed, are the fchools in which is chiefly 
to be fought a liberal education, or that kind 
of improvement which is recommended in this 
book, and which Plato defcribes in the fallowing 
paflage tranflated by Mr. Harris. Socrates denies 
-not the ufefulnefs of education in the pradlice of 
lucrative and mechanical arts ; but he aflerts, that 
the more comprehenfive kind of it, which he calls 
LIBERAL, tends to effedl more generous and more 
valuable purpofes. 

2ITA MA0HMATA 'cy^ord-pinv* To ^ i^v ov 'Siocvv (pavXoVf 

TOi? OPFANON TI yYXH2 EKKA0AiP£TAI, KAI 
•ANAZnnYPEITAI, 'aHOAAYMENON ICAl TY(DAOY-* 
MENON 'YnO TON AaAHN EnrfHAEYMATIiM, 
KPEITTON OM SHGHNAI MYPmN OMMATI^N' 
MONfi TAP AYrn AAH0^1A OPATAI. 7'ou are 
flea/ant, fays he^ in your feeming to fear the mtilti* 
tude^ left you Jhould ht thought to enjoin certain fciences 
that are useless, '7/j indeed no contemptible 
matter^ though a difficult one^ to helieve^ that through 
the/e particular fciences the soul has an organ 

PURIFIED 



DEDICATION. ix 

porations, and to individual citizens, than 
to others, who, from their hereditary rank 
and power, . might have monopolized 
the enviable privilege of calling forth 
genius, and of difFufing, by well-efta- 
blifhed foundations, the polifh and the 
light of learning throughout an em- 
pire. 

From you, then, who appear to inhe- 
rit the fentiments, with the trull repofed 
in your predeceflbrs, every attenapt to 
improve the modes of edVication, origin- 
ating from a place which you have ever 
patronized with peculiar partiality, will 
for that reafon be fure to find a favour- 
able reception. 

PURIFIED AND ENLIGHTENED, WHICH IS DE- 
STROYED AND BLINDED BY STUDIES OF OTHER 
kinds; AN ORGAN BETTER WORTH SAVING 
THAN A THOUSAND EYES; IN AS MUCH AS 
TRUTH BECOMES VISIBLE THROUGH THIS 

ALONE. Plato de Repub. 

INTELLECTUAL GOOD (fays the liberal writer 
from whom the above tranflation is taken), is the 
good of that part which is moft excellent within 
us; it is a good accommodated to all places and 
times, which neither depends ov the will 
OF others, nor on the affluence of external for- 
tune ; it is a good which decays not with decaying 
appetites, but often rifes in vigour when thoie are 
no more. 

a 3 I have 



X DEDICATION. 

I have again the honour to fubfcribc 
myMfy 

GENTLEMEN, 

Your obliged and 

humble fervant, 

VICESIMUS KNOX^ 



PREFACE. 



^TpHOUGH a condiKaor of a fchool may be 
*■- qualified by his experience to write on 
the fubj€<il of Education; yet there are circum- 
ftances arifing from the nature of his engage - 
ments, which render the undertaking extremely 
^klicate. While he recommends any particular 
mode, it will be fuppofed, that he is obliquely 
recommending his own plan, and confulting 
little more than his own interefl. If he fuggefls 
a hint derogatory from the merit of any new and 
falhionable method, or places of inftrudlion, he 
will appear to fome, to be actuated by envy, 
and to be artfully inviting pupils to his own roof. 
Many can fee and attribute to felfifli motives, a 
paffage which has a tendency to promote the 
writer's advantage, though they may be income 
petent judges of the propriety of the fentiment, 
or of the advice which it conveys. 

It is indeed a truth to be lamented, that few 
of us are fo improved by philofophy, though we 
ftudy and admire it, as not to feel the influence 
of interefted motives. Intereft infenfibly blinds 
the underftanding, and often impels the judg- 
ment to decide unjuftly, without the guilt of in- 
tention. I will not arrogate fo much, as to 
fuppofe myfelf exempted from one of the moft: 
powerful principles of at^ion which fiimulate 
a 4 the 



xii P R E F A C E. 

the human heart. But I will fay, that I have 
eiuleavoured to diveft myfelf of every improper 
prepofleflion, and to v.^rite the diftates of my 
convicSlion, and the rcfult of my experience. 
To fome (hare of experience he may without 
arrogance pretend,* whofe life has been fpent with 
little interruption in places of education; at 
fchool, as a learner; at college^ as a ftudent* 
and again at fchool, as a mailer. 

That I have notwithftanding freqiiently erred, 
is but too probable j and I am fure I ihould 
have profited little from obfervat-ion, if I had not 
remarked the folly of prefumptuous confidence. 
I am ready, therefore, to acknowledge my mif- 
takes upon convi6lion. Truth is my obje6t ; 
and if 1 have not yet difcovered truth, it is ftill 
equally defirable, and will be welcomed when- 
ever it fhall be pointed out by more fuccefsful 
enquirers. 

Some apology may be thought neceflary for 
the number of quotations in the notes. All I 
can advance in my defence is, that they were 
not introduced from qftentation, but to confirm 
my opinions. I was indeed defirous of fecuring 
fome elegance and fbnie authority to my book, 
by giving them a place in it. 

I have from the fame motive made additions 
to the notes in every fucceeding edition : and, 
in confequence of a particular requeft, the mot - 
tos, and moft of the citations from the antient 
writers, are tranflatcd. 

One volume having encreafed beyond the due 
fize, I was advifed to divide the matter into 
two 5 but to this I could not confentj without 

making 



PREFACE. »ii 

making fome additions. As the ftate of the 
univerfities is of great importance to liberal 
education, I have made many free remarks on 
them, relying on the protedion of the generous 
Public at large, againft the pride, prejudice, 
and refentment of thofe v/ho may think their 
dignity fuUied by the freedom of my cenfure. 

It is but juftice to acknowledge, that irt 
fpeaking of the univerfities, 1 chiefly, though 
not entirely, allude to that of Oxford, of which 
I am an ufelefs member. 



tanquam 
Mancus, et extindae corpus non utile dextrae. 

Juv. 

My animadverfions on the univerfities arife 
from pure motives. I have nothing cither to 
hope or to fear from any univerfity. I am at- 
tached to that of which I am a member, on 
many accounts, and efteem all univerfities a$ 
inftitutions, which, in the original defign, re- 
dound not only to the honour of the nations in 
which they are encouraged, but of human nature. 
Do I ad the part of an enemy in endeavouring 
to recover their true luftre, and to remove the 
abufes which length of time has gradually intro- 
duced ? I cenfure no particular perfons. I 
lament, as I believe many refident members do, 
that the magiftrates are fo embarrafled by ufe- 
lefs forms and cuftoms, and fo entangled by 
antiquated Statutes, that they cannot adl accord- 
ing to their better judgments, in rendering the 
places efficient for the purpgfes of a virtuous and 
learned education. I have reafon to believe, 

that 



xiv PREFACE. 

that thofe who poflefs moft power and reputation 
in univerfities, think as I do on the fubjedl 
of their dcfedls and corruptions, and that they 
would readily co-operate in producing the re- 
formation, if they were not unwilling to incur 
the odium which attends the character of an 
oftenfible reformer. But though I am perfuaded 
that my attempt will meet with fccret approba- 
tion from the moft refpcftable perfons, yet at 
the fame time, I cannot but cxpcA to excite in 
others an implacable enmity ; for what is it to 
oppofe old eftablifhments like the univerfities, 
with which dignified perfons and great families 
are intimately conneded, but to contend againft 
riches, rank, pride, and prejudice. 

Pefendic numems jiindtsque uaibone phalanges. 

JuY. 

It is fomcwhcre obferved, that it is particu- 
larly imprudent to offend public bodies of men ; 
that individuals forgive or forget, or if they 
Ihould not, that their refentment dies with 
themfelves ; that their power of revenge is 
circumfcribed within narrow limits ; but that 
public bodies, by perpetual fucceilion, become 
immortal, that they render their refentment 
traditionary,^ and that their colleded power is 
ableeflentially to injure every fingle antagonift. 
Of this I am convinced ; but having engaged 
in the caufe, whether raflily or from good mo- 
tives, let events determine, I am not inclined to 
fhrink from a fear of any confcquences, how- 
ever formidable, Tihe iiilprovement of educa- 
tion, and the reformation of the univerfities, are 

great 



PREFACE. XT 

great national objefts ; and to have been inftru« 
mental in any degree to their accomplifhment, 
will furnifli a fource of fatisfaftory reflexion *• 
The univerfities certainly daim particular at- 
tention in every book on the fubjeS of a Libera) 
Education ^ for as rivers flow into the ocean, fo 
fchools are emptied into univerfities ; and it is 
^f great confequence to the colled^ youth of 
the nation, the hopes of the rifutg age, that 
imiverfities ihouM be pre&rved in a ftate propec 

^funfAtfOs 00 &» Tfv; iuiS^rmci i|pfii»iT»(* eiu<at^ T>^ 

It is by coDtiBiMJ eftbrls that human affairs «i« 
preferved in a ftate of tolerable perfedion. Thay 
have a natural tendency to degenerate. It becomes 
neceilary, in the revolutions of agesj to point out 
errors and corre£l them ; but he wlio undertakes 
die office, is in danger ofincnriog peculiar diflifce. 
The cenfure which he infinoates, though general,* 
iRrill be applicable to many individuals; and 2^1 
who fear a difturbance of their indolent repoie, or 
a prohibition of their improper condodt, will na-» 
tHrally unite in perfecuting the writer who attempta 
the reformation. 

The fear of this odium canfes a connivance at 
abufes and errors which are too obvious to efcape 
notice. Evils, long allowed, like fome noxious" 
weeds, ftrike a root fo deeply that they can fcarceJy 
be removed. If, however, the odium confcquent 
on the attempt, or the difficulty of fucceeding in 
it, were utterly to preclude it, the advances to cor- 
ruption and ruin mud at leitgth become rapid and 
irrefiHible^ 

to 



xvl P R E F A C E. 

to receive them. A convi6lion of the import- 
ance of univerfities has led me to pay them par- 
ticular attention ; but the genera] fcope of my 
book is to promote good education, independ-' 
ently of particular places or ellablifhments, an 
rf)je6l far fuperior to the concerns of any fingle 
univerfity, however celebrated. 

I cannot fuppofe but that both they who 
educate, and they who have been educated 
in methods which are reprefented in this 
Treatife as erroneous or defedive, fhould 
feel themfelves difpleafed with it. Their dif- 
pleafure may probably rife to refentment. I 
lament the probability. 1 moft fincerely wife 
it had been poflihle to have pleafed them, and at 
the fame time not to have concealed what ap- 
peared to me ufeful truth. 1 mean to give of- 
fence to no man, I halve no perfonal enmity. 
I fpeak plainly, but not malevolently. 

I am aware that he who endeavours to pro- 
mote an univerfal advantage, by oppofing er- 
rors widely difFufed, muft meet refiftance. I am 
alfo convinced, that he ought to difregard both 
the miftaken and the malicious animadverfions 
of the interefted and the ill-informed. E very- 
reader has indeed a right to make remarks ; but 
his alone will deferve attention, whofe judgment 
is not influenced on one fide by partiality, nor 
on the other by malignant paffions. 

Little good would have been produced by the 
works of the beft writers, if the voice of Truth, 
and the genuine feelings of Independence, had 
been fupprefled by the fear of perlbiial or of party 
refentment, 

I will 



PREFACE. xvii 

I will not negle£l the opportunity afforded by 
a new edition, of publicly difclainiing all arro- 
gant pretenfions to a method of managing a 
fchool, fu peri or tothofe of the many worthy and 
able perfons who are at this time engjaged in 
the work of Education. I have indeed' in this 
book fuggefled hints which may poflibly excite 
the diligence of the idle and inadvertent, or 
which may be farther improved by the judicious ; 
but 1 muft entreat the reader not to do me fo 
muchinjuftige, as to fuppofe, that I boldly pro- 
fefs an ability to execute all that I prefcribe. I 
clearly fee, and feelingly lament, that in this 
department, as well as in others, our praflice 
will feldom be adequate to our ideas of reditude. 

In the Pamphlets of one or two Writers who 
have done me the honour to animadvert on my 
Book, I do not recolledl that there is any argu- 
ment which demands a particular refutation; 
but I cannot omit acknowledging myfelf obliged 
by the very liberal manner in vvnich Mr. Cor- 
nifh has made his Ren%arks, in a fhort Trea- 
tife, which he modeftly entitles An Attempt 
to difplay the Importance of ClaJJical Learning. 
The book and the Remarks are both at the 
tribunal of the Public; and let the Public 
finally decide. 

Upon the whole, if from miftake and preci- 
pitation I have advanced a fingle opinion inju- 
rious to any good man, or any good inftitution, 
I beg leave, in this place, to retra6i it, and to 
fay withGrotius, id pro non scrii»to habe* 

ATUR. 



CONTENTS 

OF THE 

FIRST VOLUME. 



I NTRODUCTION. Page i 

SECTnN 

L On Elementary Difcipline ii 

II. On difcovering, whether or not there 
exifts a Natural Propenfity to Learn- 
ing, and on fixing the Deftination, 
according to Appearances, at an early 
Age 20 

I.I. On the Queftion, Whether a public or 
a private Education is to be pre- 
ferred 27 
IV. On Grammars, and Introduftory Books 
to the Latin 39 
V. On School Books, Didionaries, Sec, 48 
VI. On writing Exercifes 55 
VII, On writing Latin Verfe 65 
VIII. On writing Latin Profe 81 
IX. On ufmg Tranflations 91 
X. On learning the Claffics by Heart 102 
XI. On improving the Memory 108 
Xn. On learning Greek, and on the Intro- 
du6tory Books 114 
XIIL On making a Proficiency in Greek 125 
XIV. On the Study of the Englifli Language 

XV. On the Preparation for a Mercantile Life 

138 

XVI. On learning French at School 14S 

a XVIL Oa 



CONTENTS. 

StCTlOM 

XVII. On the Ornamental Accompli fh- 
ments Page 156 

JlVIII. On the NecefRty and Method of 
learning Geography, &c. 165 

XIX. On the Study of Hiftory in the 

Courfe of Education at School 1 74 

XX, On learning to fpeak or read with 
:*|H^' Propriety, and on Repetitions of 

Authors 190 

XXI. On infpiring Tafte 206 

XXII. On the Study of Poetry in general 

215 
XXIII. On infpiring a Love of Letters, and 
the Ambition of obtaining a Li- 
terary Charafter 222 
XXIV* On the neceflity of Induflry even to 
Genius 236 
XXV. On private Study during the Inter- 
vals of School 247 
XXVI. Oh late Learners, and on Perfons 
who wifli to recover the Acquifi- 
tions of their Youth 260 
XXVII. On the literary Education of Wo- 
men 275 
XXVIII. On^theFear of appearing pedantic 
• 287 
XXIX. On private Tuition 300 
XXX. On the Utility of Examinations 309 



INTRO. 



INTRODUCTION. 

Mens rite nutrita fauftis fuh penetralibus,^ Hor. 

ON E of the firft ideas which will occur to 
a reader of my Treatife will be, the mul- 
titnde of books which has appeared on the fub - • 
jeft of education. The multitude of books on 
the fubjcft evinces its importance, but fuper-* 
fedes not the neceflitjr of an addition to the num- 
ber ; for, however the moft celebrated pieces on 
education have amufed the fpeculative reader in 
the retirement of bis clofet, I will venture to 
affirm, that they have afforded but fe\V valuable 
direftions to the real ftudent and the pradlical 
inflruftor. 

For the names, and abilities of Milton, Locked 
Roufleau, and of others who have written on 
the fubje<3:, I entertain all the refpec3: which 
is due to them. Their fyftems are plaufible, 
and truly ingenious. The world has, long 
placed them high in the ranks of- Fame, and 
with refpecSl to their general merit as writers, 
they indifputably deferve their honours. But, 
when they have written on education, they have 
fallen into the common error of thofe who at- 
tend to fpeculation more than to pradtice. In 
the warmth of the innovating and reforming 
fpirit, they cenfure modes of treatment which 
are right, they recommend methods which 
really cannot be reduced to prafticc, and which, 
if they could, would be ufelels or pernicious. 
B It 



ji INTRODUCTION. 

It is indeed eafy to cenfure prefent eftablifli- 
ments, and proje<ft new ones. The world 
is commonly tired of that to which it ha« 
been long accuftomed, and fondly attached to 
novelty. It is then no wonder, that vifionary 
writers on education are greatly admired, though 
their diredUons can feldom be purfued. 

Innovation is indeed fqund to be fo agreeable 
to the human mind, and is received by the un- 
experienced and injudicious with fuch avidity, 
that it becomes expedient to ftand up in defence 
of thofe eftabliftied pradlices, which, befides that 
they were originally reafonable, have been 
countenanced and fupported by the uniform de- 
cifions of long experience. 

I mean, then, in the following Treatife, to 
fpeak in favour of that antient * fyftem of edu- 
cation, which confifts in a claflical difcipline, 
and which has produced in our .jtjation many or- 

* Mr. Harris, fpeaking of Ingulphus, an En- 
gliihman, who flourifhed as an Ecclefiafticand Hif- 
torian fo long as the reign of Edward the Con- 
feflbr, makes the following remark, after having 
quoted a pafl'age from Ingulphus himfelf, in which 
it appears that he had been educated firft at Weft- 
minfter, and afterwards at Oxford. ** We Ihall 
only remark," fays Mr. Harris, ** on this narra- 
tive, that Weflminiler and Oxford feem to have 
been deftlned to the fame purpofe then as now^ 
that the fcholar at Weftminfter'was to begin, and 
at Oxford was to finifh, a plan of fducation 

WHICH STILL exists; WHICH IS NOT EASY TO 
PE mended; AND WHICH CAN PLEAD SO AN- 
TIENT AND SO UNINTcRRUPTED A PRESCRIP- 
TION." 

naments 



INTRODUCTION. 3 

Haments of human nature. Its own excellence 
has hitherto fufficiently reconnmended it; but 
the obfervers of the times have remarked, that 
a plan more fuperficial, and more flattering ta 
i Jlenefs and vice, has of late begun to prevail. 

I am the rather induced to defend that difci- 
pline which lays the foundation of improvement 
k\ antient learning, becaufe I think, and am 
not lingular in the opinion, that not only the 
tafte, but the religion, the virtue, and I will add 
the liberties of our countrymen, greatly depend 
upon its continuance. True patriotifm and 
true valour * originate from that enlargement of 
mind, which the well-regulated ftUdy of philofo- 
phy, poetry, and hiftory, tends to produce ; and 
if we can recal the antient difcipline, we may per- 
haps rccal the generous fpirit of -antient virtue. 
He who is converfant with the beft Greek and 
Roman writers, with a Plato, a X^nophon, and 
a Cicero, muft imbibe, if he is not deficient in 
the powers of intellect, fentiments no lefs libe- 
ral and enlarged than elegant and ingenious. 

Indeed this enlargement, refinement, and em- 
bellifliment of the mind, is the beft and nobleft 
cftedt of claflical difcipline. Clailical difcipline 
is not only defirable, as it qualifies the mind for 
this profeflion or for that occupation ; but as it 
o|>ens a fource of pure pleafure unknown to the 
vulgar. Even if it were not the beft prepara- 

^.iVlT'jV Tot Trargo? a.^o^yu(ti £%««^"> ^iiQuinv tV.' Ylhcrxq^ 

Alexander made bis expedition againft the Per^ 

nns luitb better fupplies from his mafier Ariftotky 

h an from bis father Philip . Plvtarch. 

B 2 tion 



4 INTRODUCTION. 

tion for every employment above the low and 
the mechanical, which it confefledly is, yet it is 
in itfclf moft valuable, as it tends to adorn and 
improve human nature, and to give the ideas a 
noble elevation. 

The pofleffion of an elegant, enlightened, and 
philofophical mind is greatly fuperior to the pof- 
feffion of a fortune * ; and I do not confider his 
lot as unfortunate, who enjoys but a fmall in- 
come, but has received the benefits of a liberal 
and philofophical education. I will point out an 
inftance taken from a department in life where 
inftances abound. The country curate, tho' his 
pittance is fmall, yet if he adheres to his charac- 
ter, and afFecSs not the fportfman, or the man of 
•jcpenfive and vicious pleafure, but has formed a 
tafte for the claffics, for compofition, and for 
the contemplation of the works of nature, may 
be moft refpeftable and happy f , The paf- 
fions will fometimes ruffle the flream of happi- 
nefs in every man ; but they are leaft likely to. 
difcompofe him, who fpends his time in lettere^i 
and who at the fame time ftudies virtue and itx-^V 



* 'o'tov iocu rcZ IIAIAA IIOAAOY AHIONT uvohi^ar,' 
x£» oyCiya xarxXiTTVif "aro^^a i^uze* He ivho hath ren- 
€ltred his /on a A very valuable man, though he 
Jhould bequeath hut lit tie ^ hath already hejionjoed a 
great deed* Xenophon. 

^«-. — Modicus voti, prefTo lare, dulcis amicis. 

Contented in a fnug little houfcy helo'ved by his 
friends * P £ r s i U5 . 

Qui pauca requirunt, non multis excidunt. 

They luho hav€ few wants ^ c^Lnnot ha^ve many dif 
iifpcintminu% Plautus. 

nocehce, 



INTRODUCTION. s 

nocence, which indeed have a natural connexion 
with true learning. 

Yet whatever may be advanced in favour of 
claffical education, they who cenfure it will al- 
ways find a numerous audience. The igno- 
rant and illiberal, who are feldom deficient in 
cunning, will endeavour, like the crafty animal 
in the fable, to perfuade others, that the orna- 
ments m which they are deficient, are of litrlc 
value. 

But I will venture to aflert, that clafEcal 
learning tends moft direflly to form the true 
gentleman ; an efFe£l of it, whi(:h men of the 
world will fcarcely allow. The bufinefs of 
forming the gentleman they arrogate to them- 
felves, and are too apt to feparate that charadler 
from the idea of a fcholar. But it is not a 
fafliionable drefs, nor a few external decencies 
of behavioui*, which conftitute the true gentle- 
man. It is a liberal and an embellifhed mind^ 
I will not indeed affert, that a man who un- 
derftands Virgil and Horace muft, from that 
circumftance, become a gentleman ; becaufe it 
is poflible that he may be able to conftrue and 
to explain the meaning of every word, without 
tafting a fingle beauty ; but I cannot help think- 
ing, that no man can tafte their excellences 
without a polite and elegant mind ; without' 
acquiring fomething more pleafing than the mere 
graces of external accomplifliments. Is it not 
reafonable to conclude, that he who has caught 
the fpirit of the polite writers of the politeft ages, 
and cities, muft poflefs a peculiar degree of po- 
lifh and comprehenfion ? 

B 3 An 



6 INTRODUCTION. 

An objector may perhaps urge, that there arc 
reputed fcholars, who have no appearance of this 
fupcriorityj and L will allow the affertion to be 
true ; at the fame time I believe it is eafy to af- 
fign a probable caufe^ Such perfons are, per- 
hiipji, reputed, and only reputed fcholars ; or^ 
it is poflible they may have attended only to the 
left elegant purfuits of literature, fiich as are 
abflrufe and not ornamental. Many have gone 
through all the forms of a l^earned education, 
nnd have aflumed the appearances of learning, 
whopoflcfs not enough of it to render the poffef- 
fion valuable. Such perfons bring learning into 
difgrace, fince they difcover the pride of it^-and 
profcfs to have purfued it, yet are able to dif- 
plsur no fuch fruits of it as are genuine and truly 
denrable. 

We every day meet thofe who have been 
placed at great fchools, and who are faid to 
have received a claifical education ; but who, at 
the fame time, not only exhibit no peculiar ad- 
vantages refulting from it, but are alfo very 
ready to confefs, that they have found it of little 
ufe. In all fuch cafes I muft obferve, what I 
have before fuggefted, that, though they are faid 
to have had a claflical education, they really 
have not. It is true, that they have been plar 
red at the fchools where it might have been had; 
but they have not received it. Either they had 
no parts, or they were univerfally idle, or they 
were taken away too early. One of thefe cip- 
cumftances will be applicable to aU of thofe (and 
I believe, in the prefent age, there is a great 
number), who have been placed in the claffi- 
cal fchools without receiving any advantage 

froia 



i^ntroduction; y 

from the claffical mode of education, and who 
Endeavour to bring it into difrepute, by alleging 
their own examples of its inutility. 

There are, I think, two kinds of education ; 
one of then! confined, the other enlarged ; one 
vi'hich only tends to qualify for a particulaf- 
fphere of a6lion, for a profeflion, or an official 
employment; the other, which endeavours to 
improve the powers of underftanding for their 
own fake ; for the fake of exalting the endow- 
ments of human nature, and rendering it capabre 
of fublime and refined contemplation. Thislaft 
is the kind of education which it is the primary 

Furpofe of the fubfequent pages to recommend. 
t conftitutes a broad and a ftrong bafis, on 
which any kind of fuperftruflure mav afterwards 
be raifed. It furniflies a power of nnding fatis- 
fiiftory amufement for thofe hours of folitude, - 
which every man muft fometimes know in the 
bufieft wa^ks of life ; and it conftitutes one of 
the beflr fupports of old age, as well as the moft 
graceful ornaments of manhood. Even in the 
commercial department it is greatly defirable; 
for befides that it gives a grace to the man in 
the aSive ftage of life, and in the midft of his 
negociations, it enables him to enjoy his re^ 
TREAT WITH ELEGANCE,' when his induftry 
has accumulated an ample fortune. 

Suppofing for a moment, that a truly claffical 
education were not the beft preparation for 
every liberal purfuit, as well as the moft effica- 
cious means of exalting and refining the mind; 
yet, as the greater number are ftill trained in it, 
who would chufe to be totally a ftrangcr to that 
B 4 kind 



J -INTRODUCTION* 

kind of learning, in which almoft every gentle- 
man has been in fome degree initiated i How* 
ever great may be his natural parts, a man 
ufually appears in fome refpeft inferior in truly 
good company, if his mind is utterly deftitute 
of that fpccies and degree of liberality, which a 
tindure of the claffics is found to beftow. 

I will not, however, injure the truth by in- 
fifting on too much. There are cafes in which 
claffical education may be properly difpenfed 
with ; fuch is that of a very dull intelJeft, or a . 
total want of parts 5 and fuch is that of the boy 
who is to be trained to a fubordinate trade, or 
to fome low and mechanical employment, in 
which a refined tafte and a comprehenfive 
knowledge would divert his attention from his 
daily occupation. It is certain that money may 
be acquired, though not liberally enjoyed with- 
out either tafte or literary knowledge. And 
indeed the good of the community requires, that 
there fhould be groffer underftandings to fill the 
illiberal and the fervile ftations in fociety. 
' Some of us muft be hewecs of wood apd drawers 
of water ; and it were hhppy if 4hofe could be 
felefted for the work, whofe minds have been 
rendered by Nature lefs capable of ornament. 

But, after all, if tafte, which claffical learning 
tends immediately to produce, has no influence 
in amending the heart, or in promoting virtuous 
..ili'ections^ if it contributes not to render men 
more humane, and more likely to be difgufted 
with improper behaviour, as a deformed object, 
an^ pleafed with redlitude of condu<S, as beauti- 
fuLin ; itfelf ; if it is merely an ornamental ap- 
pei>j;Jage, it muft be owned, that life is too fhort 

to 



I N T R O D U C T I O K. 9 

to admit of long attention to mere embellifh- 
ment. But the truth is, that polite learning is 
found by experience to be frfendly to all that is 
amiable and laudable in focial intercourfe : 
friendly to morality. It has a fecret, but power- 
ful, influence in foftening and meliorating the 
difpofition.. True and correft tafte diredly 
tends to reftrain the extravagancies of paffion, 
by regulating that nurfe of pafSon, a difordered 
imagination. 

Indeed, however highly I eftimate knowledge,, 
and however I admire the works of a fine fanry ; 
yet I will not eeafe to inculcate on the minds of 
ftudious youth, that goodncfs of heart is fuperior 
to intellectual excellence, and the pofleffion of 
innocence more to be defired than tafte. At the 
fame time I cannot help feeling and exprefling 
an ardent wifti, that thofe amiable qualities may 
always be combined, and that the nobleft of all 
fublunary objects may more frequently be pro- 
duced *, an all-accomplifhed man ! a character, 
perfectly polite, yet neither vain, affefled, nor 
fuperficial ; elegantly and deeply learned, yet 
neither fceptical nor pedantic ; that a graceful 
manner and a pleafing addrefs may be the refult,. 
not of artifice, but of a fincere and a benevolent 
heart ; and that all the lovely and valuable qua- 
lities, whether exterior or internal, may operate 

* Tanquam phoenix, ferael anno quingenteiimo 
nafcitur. That it may not, like a phoenix, appear 
but once in fi^ue hundred years, Senlca. 

Omnibus ornatum excellere rebus. To beerni*-- 
mntly accompjiped in every thing. 



B 



vi\ 



io INTRODUCTION. 

in augmenting the general fum of human hap.- 
pinefs, while they advance the dignity, and in- 
creafe the fatisfac&ons, of the individual. 

It is certain, that religion, learning, and vir- 
tue have fometimes worn a forbidding afpedl:^ 
and have appeared, by neglefl, unamiable. Ele- 
gant and ornamental accomplifhments have alfo 
fometimes loft tlieir value, becaufe they have 
been unaccompanied with the folid qualities. 
The union of polite learning, with ufeful and 
folid attainments, will add a luftre and a value ta 
both ; and it is one of the principal ends of the 
following Treaufe to promote their coalition,. 



.^ 



[ n ] 
SECTION I. 

ON ELEMENTARY DISCIPLINE. 



IfHufmodi res dicere ornate velle, puerile eft; 
plane autem et perfpicue expedire dofti et intelli- 
gentis viri. To affeS ornament onfucb a topic as this^ 
is puerile ; but to difpatch it <witb plainnefs andper^ 
Jpicuity^ is the mark of an intelligent and ivell-inform^ 
^dmaum Cic. 

ADiverfity of opinions has prevailed con- 
cerning the time at which education 
{hould commence. Many fuppofe that it is 
ufually begun too early. To determine the 
queftion with accuracy, difcernment muft be 
exercifed in difcovering the different degrees of 
expanfion which different minds difplay, even at 
an infantine age. Upon the principle, that the 
earlieft impreflions are the moft durable, and 
with a view to fave time for future improve- 
ments, I advife that a child may be taught all 
that it can comprehend, as early as poffible. 

To acquire the art of reading, is certainly 
difficult to a very young boy ; but we daily fee 
the difficulty furmounted at the age<pf five or fix. 
If it is not acquired about that time, we know 
that the difficulty increafes with increafing 
years. Many boys, neglected at this age, have 
written a good hand, and have made fome pro- 
grefs in the Latin grammar, before they have 
B 6 been 



12 ON ELEMENTARY 

been able to read with fluency. Their inability 
in this refpeft has difnirited thern^ by rendering 
them objedfs of derifioft to their juniors ; and 
this has given them an early difrelifh of books, 
and ^^s .led them to feek employment in 4iiii|^pa- 
tion. Early inferiority has had a fatal influence 
on their fubfequent proficiency^ 
- Education Ihould begin even in the nurferj2*j 
. and the mother and nurfe are, in the firft ftage, 
tb€ beft inftruftors* The tafk of teaching an 
infant the alphabet, is too painful for a man of •a 
very cultivated underflranding. It is indeed, iii 
the prefent age, not unufual among the rich, to 
folicit the care of fome ingenious perfons in 
teaching the very letters ; and the reafon aflign- 
ed has been, that children acquire from the ma- 
trons, who have commonly held this province, 
-little more than a difguftful monotony. This 
indebd is often true : yet the greater expedition 
with which a child will probably learn to read, 
under the females who are always with him, 
who have been ufed to manage him, and who 
can ftoop to his infirmities, than under a.learncd 
tutor, to whom the labour muft be irkfome, and 
therefore often ill-performed, is a fufficient rea- 
fon for adhering, during a few of the firft months 
of inftrudlion, to the old and eftablifhed me- 
thod. 

A fenfible and well-educated mother is, in 
every refpeft, beft qualified to inftruft a child, 
till he can read well enough to enter on the 

• Adeo in teneris confuefcere multum eft. Virg. 
Offo great con/equince is it to habituate him in his 
tender years* 

Latin 



DISCIPLINE. tj 

Latin grammar. I have indeed always found 
thofe boys the bcft readers, on their entrance 
on Latin, who had been prepared by maternal 
care. Neither let this office Ije cpnfidcred as 
degrading *. Boys thus inftrufted, have feldom 
had vulgar tones, f hut have read ^ith uA- 
ufual eafc and elegance. But even they wha 
have been taught to read by the more illiterate, 
by nurfes, and by aged matrons, and have 
acquired difagreeable accents, have foon loft 
them again on receiving better inftruftion, 
and on hearing better examples. And thefe 
early proficients in reading have always made a 
more rapid progrefs in their grammar, and in all 
clarfHcal learning, than boys who were kept back 
by fanciful parents, left they ihould be injured 
T?y too early application, or catch the inelegant 
enunciation of an illiterate woman. 

Let then the child be taught to read, as fodn 
as the infant faculties begin to exhibit fymptoms 
of improveable expanfion J ; his attention, aftive 

in 

• The Gracchi were educated, non tarn in gremio 
quamin fermone xhatris. ' Not Jo much in the lap, as 
in the converfation of a mother. 

t Ante omnia ne (it vitiofus fermo nutricibus ; has 
prixnum audiet puer, harum verba effingere imitan- 
GO conabitur ; non afTuefcat ergo, ne dum infans 
eil, fermoni qui dedifcendus eft. 

QuiNTILJAN. 

X '* No ;" fays RoufTeau, '* keep his mind idle 
as long as poflible. You will never make wife men, 
unlefs you can make boys idle and wild.** 

This fingalar man tells us with an air of wifdom, 
that neither fables, languages, hillory, geography, 

chronology^ 



H ON ELEMENTARY 

in the extreme, muft fix on a variety of objc£b. 
Let his book be one of thofe objefts, though by 
no means the only one. Let no long confine- 
ment, and no feverity of reprimand or corredion 
attend the leffon. A little will be learned at the 
earlieft age, and with the eafieft difcipline. 
That little will infallibly lead to farther im- 
provement; and the boy will foon, and with 
little pain to himfelf or others, learn to read ; an 
acquisition, confidered in its difficulty and in its 
confequences, truly great. He, on the other 
had, who is retarded, by the theoretical wifdom 
of his friends, till he is feven or eight years old, 
has this burdenfome tafk to begin, when habits 
of idlenefs have been contraiSled, and when he 
ought to be laying the foundation of claffical 
knowledge. 

It is much to be lamented, that mothers in 
the higher ranks of life, who are ufually bcft 
qualified for the tafk, feldom have time or incli- 
nation to take an aftive part in the elementary 
education of their own children. The happiefl 
confequences fhould flow from their immediate 
interpofition. But it mufl be confefTed, that 
the employment, though maternal tendernefs and 
a fenfc of duty may render it tolerable, is by no 
means pleafurable ; unlefs, indeed, under the 
particular circumflances of a remarkable doci- 
lity in the pupil, and an amiable difpofition. It 
may not, however, be irkfome to fupcrintend 

, chronology, geometry, nor any of the fludies in 
which boys have been ufually initiated in all ages 
by the greateft men, are proper for children under 
twelve or fifteen. Such do<5lrines do modern fages 
advance, for the fake of dillindion ! See Emilius. 

the 



DISCIPLINE-. IS 

the child's improvement under the govcrnefs or 
fcrvant of whatever denomination. 

To facilitate the acquifition of the art of 
reading, various contrivances have been invent- 
ed. The letters have been made toys, and the 
whole bufinefs of learning to read has been con- 
verted into a game at play. The idea is pleafing 
and pkufible ; but 1 never yet faw any great 
fuccefs attend the attempt. Loofe letters cut in 
ivory, arc apt to be inverted, and to puzzle the 
child by the different appearance they make in 
different pofitions. Reading, if it was a game, 
was flill fuch a game^ as the child liked lefs than 
his other diverfions. It was, indeed, x game at 
which he would never play if he could help it. 
I am not quite fure, that it is right to give 
him a notion that he has nothing to do but to 
play. Let him know, that he has bufmefs of a 
ferious kind ; and> by attending to it periodi*- 
cally, let him contraft a habit of application. 
A temporary attention to fomething by no means 
tedious or laborious, but which at the fame 
time he is not to confider as play, will make his 
diverfion more agreeable. Indeed viciflitude is 
neceffary to render diverfions pleafing. They 
become painful bufinefs, when continued with- 
out variety. We all come into the world to 
perform many duties, and to undergo many dif- 
ficulties ; and the earlier the mind learns to 
bear its portion of them, the le(s likely will it be 
to fink under thofe burdens which will one day be 
impofed upon it. To lead a child to fuppofe 
that he is to do nothing which is not conducive 
to pleafure, is to give him a degree of levity, 
and a turn for diflipation, which will certainly 

prevent 



i6 ON ELEMENTARY 

prevent his improvement, and may perhaps oe- 
caiion his ruin. 

It is not rigid to explode thofe fanciful modes 
©f inftruftion which injure, vehile they indulge, 
the inexperienced pupil. But it would be rigid 
not to unite the agreeable with theufeful, when- 
ever the union can be effefted. Books, there- 
fore, written for the ufe of children, fhould be 
rendered plcafing to the eye and to the imagina- 
tion. They fhould abound in cuts*, and 
{hould be adorned with gilding, and every af- 
traftive colour. The matter fhould be net only 
intelligible to the weakefl capacity, but interefl- 
ing. Fables are univerfally ufed, and with 
great propriety. No one wants to be in- 
formed how many, and how various, are the 
books in our language adapted to the ufe of 
children. Even the common fpelling-books, 
though they exhibit no great ingenuity in thetr 
compilation f , are fufficiently well calculated to 
teach the art of reading, and have been inftru- 
mentalin teaching by far the greater part of the 

* At firR. a plain alphabet, clearly and diftirn^Iy 

printed on fine paper, is the-moft advifeable ; for 

the child will not look at the letter when there is a 

print of fome more amu£ng objedt at its fide. 

When it can read a little, fo as to know fomething 

of the meaning of the prints, then they are proper. 

f Iflhcy were printed on a better type andpa- 

"•. I think they might fuperfede the ufe of all 

' initiatory compilations. Learning is under 

t obligations than fhe is willing to allow to 

• Dilwortli, Dyche, and other moil ufefol, 

'very illulbious, authors of fpelling- 

Q nation 



DISCIPLINE. 17 

nation, from their firft appearance. A * poetefs 
of our own times, remarkablv diftinguiflied by 
her tafte and g^niu^, has condefcended t6 com- 
pofe little books for the initiation of children in 
reading, and they feem well adapted to effedl 
her laudable purpofe. 

The greateft objeflion to the very early in- 
ftruftion which I recommend is, that, when 
injudicioufly diredled, it may injure the health 
of the tender pupil. But it may certainly be fo 
conduiled, as neither to injure health f , nor to 
preclude that lovely cheerfulnefs which marks 
and adorns the vernal feafon of life. All cor*, 
poreal punifbment Xy ^^d ^1 ioimoderate re- 

* Mrs. Barbauld, whofe condefc^niion in writing 
thefe little books, i&iu)t lefs aiaiable thanher inge- 
nuity. 

t '^ There is nothipg to hinder a child from 
acquiring ewery ufeful branch of knowledge, and 
every elegant accompliihrnent fuited to his age, 

WITHOUT IMPAI&IMG HIS CONSTITUTION ; but 

then the greateft atDentiAn muft be had to the 
powers of the body -and. tke mind, that they nei- 
ther be allowed to languish fo-r want of 
EXtRCiSE, nor hs MirUd htyond <wbat they cmn bear, ' * 

Dr. Gregory. 

This amiable writer has, however, ufed fome ar- 
guments, which, I fear, will induce very indulgent 
parents to put off inftrudion too long. What he 
fays is phufible. But I think he ufes fome argu- 
ments which I fhall call argumenta ad matres, 

<&OSrT0l Tl* 

CorrtB your littlfone^ fivinning arts 
Qffoft perfnafi-iH ; but for ear to grieve 
** Wis tender heart'. Menander. 

flraint. 



i^ ON ELEMENT A Rr 

ftraint, muft be prohibited. Praife, careflcs^ 
and rewards, are the be ft incitements to appli- 
cation. If thefe will not operate, the point- 
muft for a while be given up, A more favour- 
able feafon will foon arrive, under proper ma- 
nagement, Thefe motives, however, will feldom 
fail, when applied by the parents, or by thofe wha* 
with the reaJ intereft of the child at heart, have 
alfo integrity and diligence to promote it. Such' 
qualities are certainly more defirable in the firft 
inftru<9:ors^ than learning, and great al^ilities *• 

* Quidam litem iftftituendos, qui itilnorcs fep- 
tem annis efTent, non putaveront, quod ilia prima 
setas etintelledkim difciplinarunrcapere et laborent 
pati non poflit. 

Quid meliiks alioqui facient, ex: quo loqoi pote-^ 
rout ? Fadant enim aliquid necefTe eft. Aut cut 
hoc, quantulumcunque eft, ufque ad feptem annos 
lucrum faftkliaxnvs'? Nam certe quamlibet parum^ 
fit quod contulerit'setas prior, majoratamen aliqua 
difcet puer eo ipfe anno, quo minora didiciffer. 
Hoc per fingulos annos prorogatum in fummam 
proficit ; et, quantum in infantia prsfumptum eft 
temporis, adolefcentiae acquiritar. . . 

hfon ergo perdamus primum ftatim tempus' : 
atque eo minus, qu6d initia literarum fola memorra 
conftant ; quae non modd jam eft in parvis, fed turn 
etiam tenaciilima eft. 

Some have thought that none Jhould he inftruSied im 
letters nvho are under fe'ven years of agey becaufe that 
early period can neither comprehend learning nor endure 
labour. 

But 'what can they do better from the time at wjbich 
they are able to talk ? For fomething they muft do. 
Or ivhy Jhould nAje Jlight the gain y little as it is^ which 
accrues before the age of f even f For certainly ^ ho-w- 
gfver little that may be which the preceding age Jh all 

haiit 



DISCIPLINE. 19 

bit^e ccntrihuteii, yet the boy ivill be learning greater 
things in that 'very year^ in 'which he iajouU otherivi/e 
ha've been learning /mailer. This, extended to federal 
years y amounts to afum ; and lAjhate-ver is anticipated 
hi infancy y is an acquijition to the period of youth. 

Let us not then thronu aniuay e^en the njery firfi pe^ 
riod ; and the lefs fo^ as the elements of learning re^ 
quire memory alone y nvhich is not only found in little 
iujs^ but is very tenacious in them* 

QuiNTIHAN# 



[ 20 ] 

SECTION 11. 

ON DISCOVERING WHETHER OR NOT THERE 
EXISTS A NATURAL PROPENSITY TO 
LEARNING, AND ON FIXING THE DES- 
TINATION, ACCORDING TO APPEARAN- 
CES AT AN EARLY AGE. 

Ut fsepe fumma ingenia in occulto ktent ! . 
Hoiv oft the great eft genius lies conceaVd ! Pl a u T . 

MUCH has been faid on the aeceffity of 
ftudying the natural propenfity of the. 
pupil, and of direding him to thofe peculiar 
ftudies to which he appears particularly adapted 
by nature. Matters have been cenfured for 
giving their inftruftions without a due difcrimi- 
nation, and for training a great number of boys, 
of different tempers and deftinations, exa6lly in 
the fame method. The cenfure is often mif- 
placed ; for it feldom happens that the opinion 
of the matter has any influence in determining 
either the future profeflion of the boy, or the 
particular modes of preparation for it. The 
parent, for mttance, who has friends in the 
Church or in the State, fends his child to the 
gram mar- fchool, where he is to be qualified for 
the univerfity. Perhaps chance, or the caprice 
of the child, or an opinion that he is not likely 
to make his way in any other road, determine 
the father in felefling him for a learned or a cle- 
rical life. The njafter receives him into his 
fchool. He can feldom have a competent trial 
of him, previous to admiffion. Tp refufe him, 
even if he defpaired of his fucceeding as a fcholar,, 

would 



ON NATURAL PROPENSITY, &c. 21 

would perhaps, in many refpe£ts, be imprudent; 
and very likely, if the fchool is an endowed 
foundation, it would be unjuftifiable. In this 
fchool there ufually is, and there ought to be, a 
regular plan of ftudy. According to this plan,, 
every fcholar muft, for the moft part, proceed. 
TTiere cannot poffibly be adopted as many dif- 
ferent methods of inftrucSlion, as there are di- 
verfities of gejiius among the numerous indivi- 
duals who fill a fchool. The parent is com- 
monly apprifed of the uniformity of the plan, 
and is not eafily convinced that his fon is lefs 
fit * than others to fubmit'to it. At leaft, the 
previous determination, that he fliall be brought 
up to fome preferment which may be made a 
finecure in the Law or the Church, makes him 
carelefs about literary attainments, provided the 
boy is enabled, by a fuperficial improvement, 
to pafs from the fchool to the univerfity, and 
to go through thofe forms, without which he, 
cannot obtain the lucrative office which yvaits 
for his acceptance. 

Even where intereft is not in view, the pa- 
rent, without experience or examination, often 
dilates the general plan of ftudy in which his 
fon fhall proceed : and would be not a little 
offended, were a mafter to refufe to admit, or 
advife to remove from his fchool, the boy who 
is placed under his care. Indeed, in the pre- 
fent ftate of things, matters are unfortunately 

• — Culpa docentis ' 

Scilicet arguitur, quod^ Ixvk in parte mamillae 
Nil falit Arcadico juveni. Jus. 

The fault is laid on the mafter^ ivhen the natural 
fiupidity rf the fufilpre'vents his improvement, 

neceffitated 



z%z GN DISCOVERING THE 

«neceflitated to confider themfelves under an o]>- 
Kgation to the parent, and gonfequently to re- 
prels or fubmit their own judgment, when it 
does not coincide with paternal authority. 

But fuppofing that mafters were appealed to, 
and their judgment followed, in determining 
whether or not a boy is fit for a learned life, 
and in pointing out the means which are the 
likelieft to lead to fuccefs in it ; and alfo 
tliat, after a long trial, they were difinterefted 
enough to acquaint a parent with a fon's ina- 
bility J yet there would be many miftakes com- 
mitted in this important decifion. For though 
mafters, from their general experience, and 
from their particular knowledge of the boy 
placed under their infpedlion, are indifputably 
the moft competent judges j yet, from the na- 
ture of things, they muft often be miftaken. 
The appearances, from which they muft judge, 
are deceitful. A boy, during three or four 
years continuance at fchool will appear ftupid, 
and will make little proficiency. Keep him 
there another year, and perhaps his parts break 
forth on a fudden ; his emulation is ftrongly 
excited : ha feels a pleafure in his progrefs, and 
foon outftrips thofe who went before him. 
This revolution often takes place. On the 
other hand, he who is cried up as a. prodigy of 
infant genius, fometimes becomes dull, con- 
trails an averfion to learning, and at laft arrives 
at no valuable attainment. The mental facul- 
ties, in different conftitutions, difplay them- 
felves earlier or later, according to fome inter- 
nal organifation, as difficult to be obferved as 
explained by human fagacity. The parent, 

THEREFORE, 



" V 



NATURAL PROPENSITY, tec. 23 

THEREFORE, MUST FOLLOW THE DICTATES 

rOF COMMON SENSE AND PRUDENCE IN THE 

DISPOSAL OF HIS CHILD, AND LEAVE THE 

RESULT TO Providence *. Suppofing him 
divefted of all parental partiality, he cannot, 
form fuch a judgment of a child, at that early 
period at which his future profeffion is often 
fixed, as can fully be relied on j but he may 
fee clearly the faireft profpefl: of temporal ad- 
vantage, and he may purfue the ufual methods 
of qualifying his fon with a degree of con- 
ftancy, vigilance, and induftry, which may, in 
fome meafure, fupply the defeats of nature, 
ifanyexift. This will be the wifeft conduft, 
notwithftanding what has and will be faid, by 
thofe whofe wildom originates in theory uncon- 
trouled by practice, on the neceffity and thp 
poffibility of difcovering in childhood the pre- 
dominant defeds or excellencies which point 
,out the intention of Nature f* 

Chu/e the beft life^ andcuftom swill render it agreeable* 

Plutarch. 

f The marks of a proper difpofition. for a fcholar 

are thefe, according to Socrates^ in Plato de Rep. 

He mud QC?, fv^on?) ^r.^jMHy (^iX^^aSrc, <^»Xo'7roK><, (^tXij- 
«oor, ^«7y,Tt*of, ^iXwrotovoc. Naturally ivell-formedf of 
a. good memory t fond of learning, fond of labour, fond 
of bearing inftruSiion, curious y and a lover ofpraife^ 
But we know not how to afcertain, in a very young 
child, the infallible figns of thefe qualities/ See 
Upton's note on Afcham. 

This pailage is taken from Afcham, who has not 
quoted it faithfully from Pkito, though he hae made 
uo material alteration. 

8 All 



34 ON DISCOVERING THE 

All human creatures, not in a ftate of real 
idiotifm, are capable of making fome advances 
in knowledge * j and it is fomething ta proceed 
a little way t . Idiotifm, however, and all very near 
approaches to it, are vifible to a common ob- 
ferver ; and he may be fufpefted to be in that ftate 
himfelf, who fhould feleft a fon under this. mis-, 
fortune for a ftudious life. But there is no good 
reafon, why all who poflefs a common (hare of 
common underftanding, &ould not have a fair 
probation J. At any rate, it is probable they 
will make fome improvement. It is pofSble 
they may make a great one. For no one can 
forefce, to what extent that fliare of underftand- 
ing may be dilated, by the co-operation of a fe- 

• ** Could I chufe, fays RoufTeau, I woi}ld prefer 
an ordinary underftanding . . . common men only 
require education . . . others will acquire know- 
ledge, let us do what we will." I leave the reader 
to form his own opinion of this fage. There is 
truth however in the aflertion, that men of genius 
will often educate themfelves. Emilius. 

f Eft quodam prodire tenus. Hor, 

J Befides, there is a mediocrity of excellence, 
which is very defirable : Ovh ya^ MtXa;v l'ao,%«*, >^ 

Tijf KTViffibXi* ova ccTrhuq ccXKovrnoq rviq hi^i^tXna:, ^lecrviv 
ctrroyvijs-iv ruv ax^uvf aiptra/^ceOa. I Jhall never be^ilo^ 
and yet I do not negleil my body. Nor Crce/us, and yet I 
do not negleSi my property ; nor do <we decline any other 
care^ through a defpair of arriving at the fummit of 
excellence, Arrian. Ep. 

Exigoitaque a me, non ut optimis par iim, fed 
ut malis melior. / require of myfelfy not that I 
Jhould equal the befi^ but be better than the. bad, 

Seneca. 

cret 



TiATUKAL PROPENSITY, &c 25 

^cret and jnternal vigour with favourable circum- 
fiances. 

I wiih to guard ;par«nts a^ainft a common, 
ftiifiake. They arc apt to think early vivacity 
and loquacity marks of genius, and* confe- 
quendy to di^nfe witb application. I would 
-defpair of none but ideots ; bi»t I would ibonwr 
iiefptir of a remarkably vivacious child, than 
fof one whofe referve and filcfice exhib^^ caie*^ 
Jcfs obfervcrs the appearance of dulnew^*- 

* Iliad ingenioram velut precox genos non per- 
venit ad frugem .... Placenthaec annis compa- 
rata, deinde ftat profedlus, admiratio decrefcit. 
•Titf/ eafij ripe iind of underftanding Joes net come io 
much • • . ^befe things plea/e us 'when we compare 
them fufith the hoy*s age ; then improtvement fiands 
ft ill t and admiration gradually decr^afes. 

QUINTILIAK. 

** Wc arc ^pt to reckon thofe children the 
*'* fprigh tiled who talk the mod ; and, as it is not 
••' eafy for them to think and talk at the fame time, 
•** the natural cffedl of their too much talking is, 
«• too little thinking." Dr. Bbattie. 

•* Nothing is more difficult than to difHnguifti in 
** childhood real dulnefs and want of capacity, 
*' from that ieeming and deceitful dnlnefs, which 
■** 1% the mgk of a profound genius." 

Rousseau. 

Cato was dull in childhood ; but Caefar, Alex- 
.ander, Pafcal, Pope, and many other eminent per- 
:lbns, are recorded to have been lively. 

** Among the Englifli poets, Cowley, Milton, 
and Pope, might be faid to lisp in numbers; 
aiid have given fuch -early proofs, not only of 
powers of language, but of comprehenfion of 
uings^ as to more tardy minds feems fcarcely cre-» 
C dible. 



26 ON DISCOVERING, ice. 

diblc. Sat of the learned puerilitieB of Cowley 
there is no doubt> fince a volume of his poems was 
not only written bat printed in his thirteenth year ; 
containing, with other poetical comi)ofitions, the 
tragical hiftory of Pyramus and Thifbe, written 
when he was ten years old ; and Conftantia and 
PUletus, written two years after.'' 

Dr. Johnson. 
With refpeft to early proficiency, we may fay in 
the well-known words of an antient, sat cito^ $i 
f AT BENE ; /con tnougb, if fwell enough. 



[ *7 3 

SECTION III. 

ON THE QUEStlOir^ WHETHER A PUBLie 
OR A PRIVATE EDUCATION IS TO BE 
PREFERRED ? 



Non enim vox ilia praeceptoris, at cona, miniit 
pluribtis fufiicit ; fed ot fol, univeriis idem lucis ca* 
lorifaue largitur. For tbt mafier^s inflru^iont, 4* 
not iecomit Me a dinner 9 infufficient for more than m^ 
certain and limited number ; but^ like tbefuH^ dijj^enfe 
a like degree of beat and light to all. 

Quintilian; 

FR O M the time of Quintilian to the pre* 
fent day, it has remained a queftion, 
whether public or private education is die more 
conducive to valuable improvement ? Quinti- 
lian approved of public education, and has fup* 
ported his opinion, as indeed he ufually does, 
with reafons which carry with them irrefiftible 
convi£tio;i. From the arguments which he 
has ufed, and from the dilates of obfervation, 
I am led not only to prefer public, but entirely 
to difapprove private, education ^, imlefs under 

• By private, I mean only domeflic and folitary 
education ; I do not mean the education of thofc 
fchools, which, though they are called private, have 
all the advantages of public fchoois; fucb as a num- 
ber of boy s« emulation, 5rc« 

Ca the 



28 ON PUBLIC AND 

the particular circumftances which I fliall pre- 
fently enumerate. 

Thought vipoti the whole, I p^fer the edu- 
cation of fchools, yet I know that much licen- ' 
tioufnefs has often been found in thenu The 
prevailing manners of the age, and of the worUl 
at large, are apt to infmuate themfelt^ into 
thofe feminaries of learning, rwbtch, by tbeir 
fcclufion from the world, might be .fiippofed to 
be exempted from Its corruption. The fcho- 
lars often bring the infeftion from, home 5 and 
perhaps the mailers diemfelves at length ac- 
quire a tinge from the predominsmt colour o( 
the times. From whatever caufe it proceeds^ 
it is certain that fchools often degenerate witk 
the community, and contribute greatly to in- 
creafe, by difFufing, at the moft fufceptible pe- 
riods of life, the general depravity. Th« old 
fcholaftic difcipline relaxes, habits of idlenefe 
and intemperance are contrafted, and the fcho- 
lar often comes from them with the acquifltion 
of eflfrontcry alone to compenfate his ignorance. 
When I recommend public fchools, therefore, 
I muft be underftood to mean places of educa- 
tion where the intention of thcx pious founder 
is not quite forgotten^ and where a degree of 
the more practicable part of the original difci- 
pline is ftin retained. Such, I truft, maybe 
found, and fuch will increafe in number, when 
the general diffipation, which, it is confeflcd, 
has remarkably prevailed of late, fliall be cor- 
reSed by public diftrefs, or by fome other dif- 
penfation of Divine Providence. 

The 



PRIVATE EDUCATION 29 

The danger which the morals are^* faid to 
incur in fchook, is a weighty objeftiop, I 
moft cordially agrec^ with Qiiintilian, and with- 
other writers on this fubje£^^ that it is an ill 
exchange ta give up innocence for learning. 
But perhaps it is not true, that^ in a well-dif- 
ciplined fchool (and it is only fuch an one 
which I recommend), there is more danger of 
a corruption of mords than at home^ I am 
not unacquainted with the early propcnfity of 
the hunlan heart to vice, and I am well aware 
Itet boys contribute greatly to each other's 
corruption^ But I knowy that the pupil who 
is kept at home cannot be at all hours under 
riic immediate eye of his parent or his inftruc- 
tor. It muft, happen, by chance, necefflty, or 

JlCgle(9'r *bflt he -will nftpn aflTociate with menial 

&rvants, from whofe example, efpecially in 
great and opulent families, he will not only 
catch meannefs of fpirit, but vice and vulga- 
rity* ffut luppofing him to be reftrained from 
liich communication,, the examples he will iee 
in the world, and the temptations he will meet 
with in an intercourfe with various company 
at an early age, will zfk& his heart, and caule 
it to beat with impatience for his emancipaticii 
from that reftraint which muft be removed sit 
die approach of manhood. I'hen will his paf- 
fions break forth with additional violence, as 
Ac waters of a ftream which have been long 
confined. In the courfe of my own experience, 
I have known young men nearly ruined at th^ 

* Utinam falsd jadtaretur. 

J luijh it njsere falfely reported* Q^ i n t i l i a k . 
C 3 ttniverfity^ 



30 ON PUBLIC AND 

unirerfky^ who attributed dieir wrong conduA 
to the immoderate reftraint of a domdHic edu* 
cation. The fweets of liberty never before 
tailed, and the allurements of vice never before 
witbftood, become too powerful for refiibuice 
at an age when the paffions are ftrong, rea- 
fon immature, and experience entirely de- 
ficient. 

After all the confinement and trouble of a 
domeftic education, it is probable that the boy 
will at laft be fent to the univerfity. There 
he will find the greater part of his ailbciates, 
confifting of young men who have been edu- 
cated atfchools ; and if they have any vices, he 
will now be in much greater danger of moral 
infeAion, and will fuffer worfe confcquenccs 
from it, than if he had not been fccluded from 
boys at a boyiih age. He will appear awk* 
ward, and unacquainted with their manners. 
He will be negleded, if not defpifed. His fpi- 
rit, if he poflefles any, will not fubmit to con- 
tempt; and the final refult will be, that he 
will imitate, and at length furpafs, their irre- 
gularities, in order to gain a welcome recep- 
tion. From adual obfervation I am convinced^ 
that this voluntary degeneracy often takes place 
under thefc, or under fimilar circumftancef. 
That happy conduft which can preferve dig- 
nity and efteem at the univerfity, without 
any blameable compliances, mufl arife from a 
degree of worldly wifdom and experience, as 
well as of moral reditude, rarely pofieiled by 
him who has been educated in a clofet. It is not 
enough, that the mind has been furnifhed with 
prudent maxims^ nor that the pureft principles 

have 



PRIVATE EDUCATION. 31 

Iiav^ been inftilled into the heart, unlefs the un- 
derftanding has itfelf colledled fome pra£tical 
rules, which can only be gained by aftual inter* 
courfe with others of the fame a^e, and unlefs 
that degree of fortitude is acquired, which per- 
haps can only arife from frequent conflicts ter- 
minating in vi<flory. 

With refpeit to literary improvement, I think 
that a boy of parts will be a better fcholar, if 
educated at a fchool thaii at home. In a fchool 
many circumftances co-operate to force his own 
perfonal exertion, on which depends the increafe 
of mental ftrength, and confequently of improve- 
ment, infinitely more than on the inftrudlion of 
any preceptor. 

Many of the arguments in fupport of this opi- 
nion muft be common, for their truth is obvi- 
ous. Emulation cannot be excited without 
rivals ; and without emulation, inftruftion will 
be always a tedious, and often a fruitlefs, labour. 
It is this which warms the paflions on the fide 
of all that is excellent, and more than counter- 
balances the weight of temptations to vice and 
idlenefs. The boy of an ingenuous mind, 
who ftands at the head of his clafs, ranks, in the 
microcofm of a fchool, as a hero, and his feel- 
ings are fcarcely lefs elevated. He will fpare na 
pains to maintain his honourable poft ; and his 
competitors, if they have fpirit, will be no kis 
affiduous to fupplant him. No fevcrity, ^no 
painful confinement, no harfli menaces^ will be 
neceffary. Emulation will effed in the beft 
manner the moft valuable purpofes ; and at the 
fame time will caufe, in the bofom of the fcholar, 
a pleafure truly enviable. View him in his feat, 
C 4 turning 



32 ON PUBLtC AN D 

turning his lexicon with the grcatcft alacrity; 
and then furvey the^ pupil in the clofet, who». 
with languid eye, is poring, in folitude, over a 
leflbn which he naturally confiders as the bane 
of his enjoyment 5 and concerning which feels no 
other wiih, than to get it over as foon as he 
can with impunity. It is true, a private tutor 
may do good by praife; but what is folitary 
praife to die glory of ftanding in a diftinguiflied 
pod of honour, the envy and admiration of a 
whole fchool ♦ ? 

The fchool -boy has the beff chance of ac- 
quiring that confidence and fpirit which is ne« 
ceflary to difplay valuable attaimnents. Excef- 
five diffidence, baflifulnefs, and indolence, re- 
tard the acquifition of knowledge,, and deftroy 
its due eSc&, when acquired. They are the- 
caule of pain to their pofleflbrs, and commonly 
do injuftice to their real abilities^ and hurt their 
interefts. It i$ one circumftance in public 
fchools, which tends to give the fcholars a due 
degree of confidence,, that public examination 
or eledion'days are ufually eftabliflied in them % 
when, befides the examination, which, if under- 
gone with credit, infpires courage, orations 
are fpoken before numerous auditors. This 
greatly contributes to remove that timidity,, 
which has filenced many able perfons brought 
tip to the bar and the pulpit. The neceffity of 
making a good appearance on public days, 
caufes a great degree of attention to be paid, to 

* Duccre vcr6 claflem multo pulcherrimum. 
But to take the Uad iti thi clafs is the bigheft bo-* 
nour, Qy i ntil i a n. 

the 



PRIVATE EIMTCATION. 33 

the ^rt of {peeking ; an art, which^ from the de- 
fed of cfarly culture, has been totally wanting 
in fome of our beft divines ; oiaay of whom ne- 
ver gave fatisfa^tion to a cotpmon audience, in 
preaching thofe compofltions, which, when 
publilhed, have been admired in the clofet. 

The formation of connexions *^ which majr 
contribiite to future advancement, and of friencU 
Ihtpe M4iich canne^t eafily be 4iflblved, h^s al- 
ways been a powerful argument in fuppc^t i^f- 
the preference of public fchools. Such con- 
nextons and (uch friendOiips have been, Bnia 
may be formed. The opportunity which public - 
fchools afford, is certainly an additional cir* 
cimiflance in recommendation of thein* . But JE 
cannot omit expreffing my difapprobatixxn of the 
pradice which has fometimes prevailed, of fend- 
ing a fon to School merely. to form connexions.. 
One reaibn is,. that a fon, in fuch caiesy.has" 
been ufually inftruded^. at home, to pay afer- 
vjle deference to thofe of his fchool-feliows wha> 
are likely to be diftinguifhed by future rank or 
fortune. By this fubmiffion, he has acquiwi a 
meannefs of mind highly difgraceful to a man of 
liberal education. He has entered into a vo- 
luntary flavery^ the felf-abafement and inconve-, 
iMCnces of which no emolument can compen&te^. 

♦ Miyx v^vK ^iXiocv >tj to crofl^o(poy... 9*^ bi iducdud 
tegetber xontriiutn much tofriendfiif^ A ri s t o t . 

Mcmor 
A£be» non alio rt^^ puertiae« 

Remembering the having /pent the puerile age under 
the fame mafter, Hon. 

C 5 aad 



3+ ON PUBLIC AND 

and be has not imfrequently been fniftrated in 
hisexpedadon even of profit $ for it fo happens, 
that the fervililj uriiich accommodates the great 
man, often renders the voluntary ilependent con^ 
lemptible in his fight. After many years fervi-^^ 
tude, the greedy expectant is often difinifled, as 
he deferves, unrewarded. But let him gain 
iRfhat he may, it will, in my opinion, be dearly 
purchafed at the price of die confcious dignity 
€f a manly independence *• Thofe difintereft- 
cd friendihips which are formed at public 
fchools, from a real congeniality of fendments 
and tafte, will certainly Contribute much ta 
comfort, and perhaps to advancement. Expe- 
rience proves, that they are more durable than 
die indmacies which are contrai^ed at any fub- 
fequent period. 

A great degree of bodily exercife is necelEuy 
for bo3rs. Nature has taken care to provide for 
this neceflity, by giving them a propenfity ta 
play. But they never enter into the puerile dr- 
verfions with proper fpirit, but with boys. He 
then who is placed at a fchod, has the beft op- 
portunity of anfwering the intentions of nature, 
in taking that conftant exercife which at once 

* Prandet Ariftoteles ^nando Philippo lubet ; 
Diogenes, quando Diogeni. AriftotU goes U diwmir 
njoben PbiUp pleajti ; Diogenes , nuben Diogenes. 

Miferum eft alien i viverc quadra. 

// // njoretcbed to live at anotber man^s table % J u v.- 

Ho*iv mncb bappier, OANTA nz eEAEI HOIEIN. 

fti) KuKutar^cu fAr,S^ avayttai^ta^Mf to do as one pUofis^ 

UNDER THE CONTROUL OF REASON^ HOt tO be bin^ 

elered nor compelled, £ F x c t, 

contributes 



PRIVATE EDUCATION- 35 

contributes to ftrength of body and vivacity of 
mind* 

I may add to the many arguments in favour 
of fchool-education, the pleafure and enjoyment 
of the pupil*. Placed in a little foctety of 
members like himfelf, he. finds ample fcope for 
the exertion of his various powers and prppenfi- 
ties. He has friends and playfellows conftantly 
at hand ; and the bufy fcene paffing before bim, 
is a never-failing fource of amufement f* 

The private pupil languEQies in folitude, de-*. 
privedof manyof diefe advantages, or enjoying 

* ** As it 28 ufual with me to draw a fecret nnen- 
vied pleafare from a thoufand incidents overlooked 
by other men, I threw myfelf into a ihort tranfjporc» 
forgetting my age, and fancying myfelf a fcnool- 
boy. This imagination was ftrongly Bivoared by 
the prefence of fo many young boys, m whofe looks 
were legible the fprightly paffions of that age^ 
which raifed in me a fort of fyropathy. Warm 
blood thrilled through every vein. The fading 
memory of thofe enjoyments, which once gave me 
pleafure, put on more lively colours^ and a thoaftnd 
gay amufements filled my mind. It was not with* 
cot regret that I was forfaken by this waking dream. 
The cheapnefs of puerile delights, the gnutlers joy 
they leave upon the mind, the blooming hopes that 
lift up the foul in the afcent of life, the pleafare 
that attends the gradual opening of the imagination^ 
and the dawn of reafon, made me think moft men 
found that ilage the moft agreeable part of their 
journey.'' Guardiak. 

t O fortunatos nimiiim, Jkafihonm norint! 

O happy beings i IF THEY KNiW WHEN THEY 
WERE WILL. ViRO. 

C 6 them 



36 ON PUBLIC AND 

them itnpcrkEdf. He feeh but little emulktiiM ;: 
he contradls diffidence ; he makes few friend* 
fhips, for want of opportunity ; he is fecl^ided 
from the moft healthy exercifes ; and his early 
youth, the pleafant fpring of life^ is fpent in a. 
painful connnement. 

But yet there ace a few circumftances whicb 
will render private education the moft proper.. 
Thefe are, uncommon meeknefs of difpofitioh,, 
natural weaknefs of underftaading,. bodily in- 
firmity, any remarkable defefl; of the fenfes, and: 
any lingular deformity. Boys in thefe circum- 
ftances (hould be treated like thofe tender plants,, 
which, unable to bear the weather, are placed 
under glafles, and in the flielter of the green- 
houfe.. The oak will fiourifh. bdl in an open, 
cxpofure*. 

^ The principal obje£tion offered again ft. the edu*- 
cation of £:hoolsy when compared with private tui- 
tion, has always been, that the morals are in greater, 
danger at fchool than at honie. But let us hear a* 
fcnfible poet of antiquity. 

Plurima font, Fufcine, ct famadigna finirtra — 
QnaemonftraBtipfipoeris traduntque fakentes ..• 
Sic Natura JAibet :. *velaciuf et ci/iut nos 
Corrumpant vxTionuM exbmpla.domestica . • 

Unus et alter. 
Forfitan hsec fpernant juvenes, quibus arte benigna^ 
Et meliorb luto pinx'it prjkcordia Titaj«i^. 
Sed reliqat)s fugienda patrum veftigia ducunt ;. 
Et monftrata diu veteris trahit orbita culpae. 
Abftineas igitar daxnnandis ; hujus enim vel 
Una potens ratio eft, ne crimina noftr^ fequantur- 
Ex NOBIS GENiTi : quoniam dodles imltandis^ 
Turpibus ac pravis omnes fumiis. Jvv. Satr. r4.. 

nerf 



TRrVATE ElrtrGATrON. sf: 

Then are many reprehenfihU things tahich ibe fa- 
rents themfel*ves point out and hand down to their 
children ... So nature orders it; the examples vf' 
n/ice 'which wue Jee at home corrup us fooner than any., 
^hers. • • • One or tiuv, «whofe hearts Titan ha^^ 
formed of heifer clay, and ivith a partial hand tnajf^^ 
indeed, e/cape the influence offuch example ; but the ■ 
refl are led into thofe footfteps of their fathers ivhicb - 
ought to he Jbtmned ; and the path of fome hahitual 
mice panted out for a long timey hy a parent, dra^wi 
them into it. Ahftain therefore from impropef con-' 
duS\ ifitiAiere only for this reafon, left our offspring 
J?ould foUo*w^ our 'vices ; Jtnce njue are all too teachable^ 
in learning to imitate lahat is hafe and ^wicked. 

Add to this, that Lycurgus, Plato, and many 
•ther wife men of antiquity, as well as of. modern < 
times, have preferred a pablk education* 

Quod quidem, cam iis a quibus c]arifiimaram.>i 
civitatum mores funt inditati, turn eminentiffimis^ 
audoribus video placuifTe; Which, indeed, x< 
14ND, WA« APPROVED, as Well by thofe whO' 

ESTABLISHED THE MANNERS AN*D CUSTOMS OF ' 
THE MOST CELEBRATED STA^TES ; AS B.y TH»- 
MOST EMINEJJT. AUTHORS. QuiNT. 

I refer my reader, on this ftib]c6l, and indeed, 
on almoft all fubjefts which, concern education^, 
to the excellent Quintilian. His book might fu-- 
^rfede all others of the kind, if it had not been 
limited ta the iingle obje6l of forming an oratgr- 
£br the tribunal. He writes like a father ; while 
at the fame time he difplays the ingenuity and. 
iblidity of a moil judicious and long experienced, 
preceptor.. 

Rollin, who i« indeed another Quintilian, bas 
publiihed a moft agreeable abridgment of this vir- 
tuous and learned Antient. This book is one ofr 
thofe which I recommend as conilant companions 
both to the mallei and the iichokr, 

6. I wifb 



'\ 



58 ON FDBUC EDUCATION, te. 

I wifli I ooold ^Mmt duit Qaindlian gio6l/ iat* 
tered the emperor Domicuii. His hopes or his 
lears overcame hb fjpmu Let the young ftadent 
pity and fomTe, but not imitate^ his meannels is 
this diigraccnl iniaaoe» 



C 39 3' 
SECTION IV. 



ON GRAMMARS, AND IKTROBUCTORY BOOKS 
TO TH£ LATIN. 



Pfus hftbet opens qnam oftentationis* 

This hufintfi has tnore of labour in it than of fiewm 

Ql^INTILlAN* 

OF no books has there appeared a greater 
variety than of Grammars. Almoft every 
mafter of eminence feems^ at one time, to 
. have thought that he could improve or faciK* 
tate the elementary parts of the Latin language. 
Many of their produdlrons were really ingeni- 
ous ; but the multiplicity of them tended to 
retard) rather than to promote, a general im- 
provement. 

An uniformity of grammars in all grammar- 
fchools is of great importance to the public; 
and fo it appeared to King Henry the Eighth^ 
and to fucceeding monarchs, w^ho ftridly en- 
joined the univerfel ufe of that excellent com- 
pilation which pafles under the name of Lily, 
though he was not the only compiler of it. 
Of fuch material confequence was this uni- 
formity efteemed, and fuch were the pains taken 
to prc&rve it^ that biihops were obliged to en- 
quire 



^ <W BOOKS INTRODUCTORY 

quire at thetr vifitationSv ia tKe reign of Eli- 
zabeth^ ^nd fince^. whether there were any 
other grammar taught in any icfaod within their 
ref^dive diooefesy. than that which was fet 
iforth by King Henry the Eighth, and has fince 
isontinued in. ufef Other grammars have,. in- 
deed, occafionally been ufed during the lives of 
their authors, and in the fchool for which they 
were intended:; but none of them have re- 
mained long, or become generaU i will there- 
fere confidently recommend a continuant of 
this grammar, becaufe the experience of more 
than two centuries has evinced its utility, and . 
becaufe I am fure there is none better accom- 
modated to fchools^ Time has decided on it; 
and it is often no lefs injurious than prefumptu- 
ous to controvert his decifions* 

In the old editions- of Lily's grammar, there- 
were a few miftakes;. fuch as tend to prove - 
die remark, . that nothing is begun and brought: 
to perfeflion at the fame time j. yet fuch as do 
not miflead the learner in any truly important 
article. But every thing fliould certainly be 
rendered as perfedl as human abilities can ren- 
der it;, and therefore the ingenious Dr. Ward 
has very properly publifbed a new edition, with: 
notes and correfiions.^ Boys do not often at- 
tend to notes in the grammar; they are ufually* 
fittjisfied with the text. Yet it is right that, 
where there are errors or omiffions, there 
ihould be notes to correal and fupply theih» 
They may do good, they can do no harm v 
and therewre it is proper to advife the general 

reception. 



TO THE LATIN. 41 

reception of Ward's edition of this ancient 
grammar *. 

The Eton IntroducSlion f is an ufeful abbre- 
viation, and perhaps very juftly preferred, upon 
the whole, to the more Jproh'x original. No- 
thing militates againft the reception of it, but 
a wim to preferye the uniformity of grammars;, 
and Lily's has hitherto prevailea with good fuc- 
cefs. For the fame reafon, I would not adopt 
Ruddiman's Rudiments, nor any of thofe va» 
rious Introdudions which are ufed in fome fe- 
minaries* I do not in any refpedl cenfure them ;; 

^ '' Of all the various Granmars now taught im 
thefchools about towB, Iwould. recommend only 
the old common .one; I have forgot whedier Lily's* 
or an emendataoa 9I hiau The otheia ma^ b^-im-- 
provementss-bot foch improvements feera to be; 
only mefe grammatkal-mceties,. no way influencing 
the learner, but perhaps loading him with trifling 
fnbtiltiesy which, at a proper age, he mnft be at 
fome puns to fqrget.'* Goldsmith. 

These are, however, it maft be confefled, fome 
iuperflaities in this grammar. 

MiMMtiit ought not to be attended to in flrft go* 
ing over the Grammar. Many mafters^ compel their 
boys to attend to the miuuti^of Grammar fo long 
and fo clofely, that one would think they were 
teaching the fiieuce of grammar only, and not a. 
language, to the attainment of which the grammar 
ir but an inftraa^ent. 

+ I call this Lily's Grammar, for it is only an 
epitome of it, with a few alterations^ 

X Verum ut huj.ufmodi jpraecepta fateor necefl!aria,ita 
velim efle, qu^^m pauciinma, modo fmt optima; nee 
vnquam probavi hteratorum, vulgus, qai, in his in* 
Cttlcandis complures aanos, remorantur. £rasmvs* 

I onl/ 



42 ON BOOKS INTRODUCTORy 

I only think them unneceflary, and avoid diem 
for the fake of prelcrving uniformity. 

Nor is this regard to unifermity founded on 
caprice, but on many folid. reafons. Among 
others, it may be remarked, that boys are fre- 
quently removed from one fchool to another. 
If they change their grammars, the injury 
they receive by removal is great. They muft 
inevitably lofe time. Happy if that is the worft 
confequence ! A perplexity of mind often en- 
fues, fatal to their farther advancement. That 
mafter has had but little experience, to whom the 
ill effedls of a change in grammars are unknown. 

But whatever grammar may be ufed, I would 

not have the attention of the young fcholar coo* 

fined during a very long time to the. grammar 

- only. I mean, ; that as foon as poffible he (hould 

be mtroduced to ibt parting * and conftruing of 

fome 

* *' When one hears a boy analyfe a few fen* 
fences of a JLatin author, and fhew that he not only . 
knows the general meaning and the import of the 
particular words ; but alfo can ioftantly refer each 
. word to its dafs,, enumerate all its terminations^ 
' fpedfying cvtry change of fenfe, however minute^ 
that may be produced by a change of inflexion or 
arrangement, explain its feveral dependencies,, dlf- 
tinguifh the literal meaning from the figurative, one 
fpecies of Egure from apother, and even the philofo^ 
phical ufe of words from the idiomatical, and the 
vulgar from the elegant,, tecollefting occa/ionally 
other words and phrafes that are fynonymous or 
contrary^ or of different though fimilar fignifica- 
tion, and accounting for what he fays, either from the 
. reafon of the thing, or by quoting a rule of art, or a 
claflical authority, one mu&.beien£ble that» by fuch 

an 



TO THE LATIN. ^j 

fonic cafy Latin author, in order to exemplify, by 
a<fhial reading, the many rules he every day com* 
mits to memory. This not only enables him 
to underftand them more clearly, and to remem- 
ber them better, but renders the ftudy of gram- 
mar, which to a young mind, is of neceffity dry, 
lefs unentertaining. I have known boys quite 
wearied and difgufted with learning the grammar, 
for a whole year, without any variety. Neither 
were they fo well grounded as others who had op- 
portunities of applying the various rules, by read- 
ing leflbns in fome eafy author. 

The grammar is by no means to be neglefted 
or deferred. If a grammatical foundation he 
not laid deep at an early age, it will not often 
be laid in fuch a manner as to bear a large fu- 
perftruAure. Let me then be clearly under- 
Aood. TK» gratntnar fbould be daily and 
hourly ftudied; but in order that it may be 
fiudial with more fuccefs and more pleafure, I 
wifh the eafieft and moft entertaining Latin 
author^ that can poffiUy be found, to be read 

an exerdfe, the memory 13 likely to be more im« 
proved in ftrength and readinefs, the attention bet- 
ter £xed, the judgment and taile more fuccefsfuUy 
exerted, and a habit of reflexion and fubtle difcrt- 
snination more eafily acquired, than it could be by 
any other employment equally fuited to the capacity 
«f childhood. J year paffti in this falutary exerctje 
muiUbi found t9 culti'vate.the human faculties ^ more than 
BE VEN ffent in prattling that French lubich is learne<t 
hy rote. Dr. Beattie. 

See his Eflay on the Utility of claflical Learning, 
where the reader will find many excellent obfcrva-^ 
tioQs. 

with 



44 ON BOOKS INTRODUCTORY 

with it. This reading fhould commence as fbon^ 
as the nouns, pronouns,, and verbs are perfe£l]y 
learned- It is certain- that a boy will improve 
much fafter By thefe means, than by labouring 
invariably in the fame courTe, till he has pafled- 
through the grammar in all its parts > a method- 
not uncommon. 

I know it is a frequent objedion to- the rc-- 
ceived grammars, that the rules are in Latin. 
It has been called abfurd to begin, as it werc^. 
with the end,, and to learn Latin by tbofe rules- 
which prefuppofe a knowledge of Latin ah-eady 
acquired. Tiie objedion appears plauftble to 
thofe who are not properlv acquainted with the 
fubjed.. But it muft be remembered^ ibar 
there is fubjoined to the end of the Latin gram* 
mar a literal tranfiation, and' tliat^ by learning 

the rules in Ladn^ the mooning o^moiiy. wvid9 

is difcovered to the fcholar, which would be 
unknown to him if he learned them in Ene* 
lijQionly; that he is initiated by thefe in tne 
art of conftruing y and,, to fum up die whole 
in a few words, that more good fcholars have 
Been formed in this method than by others,, 
which, indeed^ have generally been invented, 
and pradifed by the vain or the vifionary. The 
long duration, the \miver(ality, the fuccefs, anil 
the reafonablenefs, of the prance of learning 
Latin rules, will probably continue it,, notwitfa^^ 
ftianding the attacks of thofe who derive their 
ideas chiefly from fpeculation. 

Parents, indeed, who have not had a claffi- 
cal education themfelves, and who are unac- 
quainted with the true means of obtaining its 
advantages, and perhaps with the nature of 

tiiema. 



TO THE LATIN. 4* 

'ithtm^ are apt to be impatient in the expe£lation 
.of their appearance *. When a boy begins to 
learn Latin, they immediately expe£t him to jfhew 
ibme evident iuperiority over others in all the 
j>uerile purfuits. Perhaps he appears inferior to 
theiA* His attention to his grammar may caufe 
a temporary negle£t of kfs important, but more 
ibining, attainmentsJ What he is learning 
has nothing of fhew in it. It makes no appear- 
ance in the eyes of the fuperficial. It is, as 
Quintilian obferves, like ^e foundation of a 
building, which, though the moft important part, 
lies concealed under the earth. Parents mu{t 
not cxpeSt the crop in the feafon of planting. 
They muTl form an analogical argument, from 
coniidering the nature of vegetables. Thofe are 
feldom the mofi valuable, durable, or beautiful^ 
which emerge from the ground, or expand their 
bloflbm, at a very early feafon. But others, which 
are fcarcely feen at the firft approach of Spririg,. 
are often, during-their apparent ina^ion, ipreading 

* There are not wanting thofe who are ready 
to take advantage of credulity in this, as well as in 
other very important matters. They generally 
produce wonderfnl ftorics of prematnre itaprovc* 
ment. fiat " thofe who tell or receive thofe Ho- 
nes/' fays the iblid Johnfon, *' /hoald coniidtr, 
that nobody can be taught faftar than he can learn. 
The speep o-p ^the sEiiT ho^rsema-m #(.vbt ps 
xiMiTBD BY.TiiE POWER OP Jiis HORSE* Every 
-xnan who has ufijdertakeii to iniVrctdt oth^, can tell 
. what flow advances he has been ai^ie to make, an4 
Jiow much patience it requires to recal .vagrant in- 
attention, to ilimulate dvLgpih indii{iprei|0(, aod to 

Ohcir 



46 ON BQOKS INTRODUCTORY 

their roots deeply and widely, in order to diiplay^ 
at a maturer period, a promfe luxuriance. 

At great grammar-fchools, little attention can 
be paid to this impatience of the injudicious pa-, 
rent. A regular plan is ufually diere eftabUfh- 
ed ; fuch an one as, from the earlieft times; has 
been attended with fuccefs. The great and lead- 
ing principle of that plan is, to lay a firm and 

DURABLE FOUNDATION IN GRAMMAR. I hope 

no parental indulgence, -and no relaxation of 
difcipline, will avail to bring into negleft diis 
lefs fplendid, but indifpenfably neceilary, attain* 
ment. When the grammar is learned inaccu- 
rately, another juvenile ftudies, if profec«tedat 
all, will be profecuted inaccurately; and the re- 
fultwill bcj imperfed and fupernciai improve- 
ment. The exercife of mind, and the ftrength 
of mind acquired in confequence of that exercife^ 
are fome of the moft valuable efiefts of a ftri£^-a 
long, and a laborious ftudy of grammar learnings 
at the puerile age *• A t that age, grammatical ftu - 
dies muft be difficult ; but the difficulty is every 
day conquered, and the conqueft has given ad* 
^litional ftrength and confidence, and facilitated 
the acquiiition of further vidories f. 

* A ftady abfolutely neoeflary, bat abiblutely 
dlfguftfttl to a riper age ; therefore more proper rar 
childhood|( which cannot be better employed. 

Father Girdii. 

f Mr. Cowley u (aid to have learned jmmmar 
by books, and not books by i^ammar. To apply 
to both at the fame time, is certainly beft, even 
from the Brfk entrance on Latin* 

5 — >alteriu9» 



TO THE LATIN. 47 

— alterius fie 
Altera pofcit opem rei.— — «' 

HoR* Art Poet. 

Sut muiuallj tbey travt each others aid, 

Roscommon^ 

Oa tbe fiibje^^ of initiating children early in 
the languages^ read the fentimenuof the judicious 
Broyere. 

'* One can fcarcely burden children too much with 
the kaowkdge of languages. They are ufeful to 
men of all conditions, and they equally open the 
entrance^ either to the mod profound, or tne more 
eafy and entertaining parts of learning. If this 
irkfome ftody be put off to a little more advanced 
age, young men either have not refolutlon enough 
to Apply to it out of choice, or fteadinefs to carry it 
on. And if any one has the gift of perieverance, it 
13 not without the inconvenience of fpending that 
time opon language, which is deftined to other ufes: 
And he confines to the ftudy of words that age of 
his life that is above it, and requires things ; at 
leafl, it is the lofing the beft ana moft beautiful fei- 
fon of one's life. This large fbondation of lan- 
guages cannot be well laid, bat when eiery thing 
ma&s an eafy and deep impieAon on the mind ; 
miihiu thi wumny ufrefify reaifyt^ndtinmiUiu \n»heu 
iti hiod amdbiort mte Mi jit fra fir^m carets paJfUms^ 
amdJifigms ; amd thofit •» mmm fh tbiUdgfiudSf ba'ue 
m9th§ritj iSMOigt toktif Urn eM t$ a mg-continued 
eMlicktioth I am perfuaded that the fmall number 
dt truly letmedy and the multitude of fnperficial 
ffttcmicn^ is owbg to the ne^lcA of this.*' 

Brvtirs. 



:t 4» ] 

SECTION V. 

}V 5CHOOL-BOOKS, DICTIOKARISS^&C* 



Pueris quae maxime ingenium alant, atque anl« 
«num augeanty pnelegenda. IFitJIf boysy tbofi things 
^u)bicb tend mofi to nourijb the genius^ and to enlarge 
itbetnindf dre ^ro^er to be rtad. .Quxntiiian. 



TT* the more cdArateS fchocds, die proper 
books are already chofen ; becaufe the maf- 
ttprs of them are, and hare been, men of judg«- 
.«ment and learning. But as I wifl^ to compre- 
liend every thing that appears ufeful, I truft k 
AyiU not be 4pre(iimptuou6 to make a few re- 
4naiks on «Ccheol-books, and the editions of 
r Aem which ace beft calculated ta accelerate tha 
/improvement of ichi^rs. 

The choice ef a 4idionary is not quite un^ 
^important. I need not fey that Ainfworth^f 
and the Abridement^ are Ae only diAionarics 
i-to be ufed in me higher daflfes ; but it is cer* 
tain that one of their excelle;iciest their copi- 
oufnefs, is an oUedion to them in the lower. 
When a boy, jufi out of his accidence, begint 
to read the Latin Teftament, he is under the 
jieceffity of looking out almoft every word in the 
.difiionary. He fearches for them in Ainfworth*s^ 
a book, which even abridged, is^ from its bull^ 

very 



ON -SCHOOL BOOKS, &€• * 49 

very inconvenient to a very little boy j and 
there, after much labour and lofs of time, he 
finds the Latin word he fought. Under it he 
finds twenty meanings, Befides phrafes and au- 
thorities. He reads them all as well as he can, 
and when he has done, he is as much at a lois 
as at firft. To avoid this very great obftacle 
to improvement, I ftrongly recommend, for the 
firft two or three years, the ufe of a little port- 
able di<Sionary, compiled by Entick. When 
it is improved^ and a little augmented in an- 
other edition, it will be, from its convenient 
fize and concifenefs, the beft calculated for very 
young fcholars of any extant. I muft repeat, 
left I fhould be mifunderftood, that this fhould 
only be adopted during the two or three firft 
years, and that Ainfworth's is the proper die- ' 
tionary to be ufed by the fenior fcholars. The 
Abridgment of Ainfworth is undoubtedly bet- 
ter adapted to fchools than the original work. 
If any prefer Young's, or Cole's, there is no 
obje£lion to the ufe of them ; though perhaps no 
good reafon can be given for the prefcrence4 

Schrevelius's Lexicon is, with great pro- 
priety, every where ufed. It is particularly 
adapted to the Greek Tcftament, and to Ho- 
mer ; and is well fuited both to the beginner, 
and to the proficient in Greek. Hederic's 
ought, however, to. be always provided in the. 
fchool, for the common ufe of all the Greek 
fcholars j for fometimes a word will occur in 
reading, not Included in Schrevelius. Scapula's 
Lexicon is juftly difufed in fchools, fince his 
method is perplexing to a learner, though his 
book is excellent. ^ 

D I would 



yo ON SCHOOL BOOKS, &c. 

I would banifh ' all Nomenclators, parfing 
Indexes, Synopfes, the Clavis Homerica, and 
the Clavis Virgiliana. The didionary,. the 
' grammar, and the iiving instrxtctor, con- 
ftantly near, are the only allowable auxiliaries* 
The other * contrivances generally ferve either 

to 

* The following is the opinion of archbiihop 
Markham on the fubjedl of the facilitating 
METHODS. His opinion deferves attention as he 
was a scHooxMASTESLy and therefore (peaks from 
experience. 

•* It is natural., indeed, for common minds to 
look to thofe things which are obvious, and fuper- 

ficial. It is NATURAL ALSO TO AVOID LABOUR, 

and to feek for compendious methods. We 
may, with very little application, acquire the opi- 
nions of thofe who have gone before us ; and if our 
PURSUITS are mean, they may fcrve ouFpurpofe* 

But NO high POINT OF EXCELLENCE WAS EVBR 
ATTAINED, BUT BV A LABORIOUS EXERCISE OF 

^he MIND. I do not fay, that abridgments, {yf- 
terns, and common places, with the other ailift- 
ances, which modern times have fo abundantly 
furnifhed, may not have their ufe. At the fame time, 
it can fcarcely be denied, that they have con- 
tributed VERY much to languid AND INEF- 
FICIENT STUDIES. The advantages of rational 
mathematics have perhaps been much abridged by 
the ufeful invention of algebra. And in divi- 
nity, PHYSIC, AND LAW, WHATEVER PROMISES 
TO SAVE US TROUBLE IS GENERALLY A COR- 
RUPTOR, AND LEADS US ONLY TO SUPERFICIAL 

ATTAINMENTS. The fame it is, in the inferior 
profeffions. Whatever facilitates the art , 
TENDS TO THE DECAY OF IT. To obviate thefc 
corruptions, our beft fecurity feems to be in a li- 
beral 



ON SCHOOL, Boots, ^c. 51 

to confufe the ftudent, or to increafe^ by en* 
couraging his idlenefs. The revivers of learn- 
ing, who had none of thefe affiftances, have 
never been excelled in the knowledge of the an- 
tient langoages. 

I have already mentioned th^ grammar moft 
■commonly approved, I have preferred Clarke's 

\)cral education ; in which, by frequently conver- 
fing wich thofe great authors of antiquity, who arc 
-diftinguifhed for just an'd clear cokcep- 

TIONS, THE MIND ACQUIRES THE HABIT (t 
THINKINO AS THEY DID, AND IS TEMPTED TO ' 

TRY ITS OWN POWERS. Thc profciJion ofphyfic 
is one of the mofl liberal and ufeful ; it has a con- 
nexion with learning and fcience of every kind ; it 
has great opportunities of adding to the common 
(lores of knowledge, and has ufually been particu* 
larly converfant in elegant letters ; without the aid 
X)f which, it can neither ufe its befl fources, nor 
communicate its difcoveries with any advantage. 

«* It is to be lamented, that many attend only to 
the technical and vulgar kind of education; ufeful, 
indeed, as the rules of arith metic are to the tradefman ; 
they facilitate the pro'cefsof his bufinefs, but never 
apply to his fentiments or manners. It is to be la- 
mented, that fo many in the practice of phyfic have 
h>oked to this part only; and have contented them- 
feJves with thofe mechanical acquirements, which a 
|)crfon may eafily poflefs, without having the lead 
lindurc of any thing that deferves the name of edu- 
cation. A fmall acquaintance with languages, 
enough perhaps for common currency, with a few 
couries of lectures in the medical branches, arc 
thought to form a fufficient ftock." 

Dr. Markham in a fermon before 
the Uni'verjiij of Oxford* 

D 2 Introdudlion 



52 ' ON SCHOOL BOOKS, Sec. 

Introduflion for beginners, becaufe the Latin 
is furniflied oh one fide of the Engllfh. Perr 
haps that circumftance is an objeftion to its ufe 
among the higher clafles. Let then the Eton 
Exempla Moralia, or Wyllimot's Particles, be 
fubftituted in its place. 

With refpedl to chufing the Latin and Greek 
books proper to be read in fchools, and adapt- 
ing them to the age and clafs of the fcholars, no 
judicious and experienced mafter will want di- 
reftions. But I will beg leave humbly to offer, 
and not to obtrude, my fentiments on this fub- 
jc(5l, as it is a fubjeft of importance. 

Suppofe then the fchool to be divided, as it 
often is, into eight clafles. In the firft or 
lowefl: clafs, the grammar only will be ufed ; in 
the fecond, let Cordery's Colloquies and the 
Latin Tefliament be introduced ; in the thiid, 
let the books confift of Cornelius, Nepos, Phae- 
drus, and the latter part of Cordery; in the 
fourth, of Ovid's Epiftles, Erafmus's Dia- 
logues, and PhaedriJS continued ; in the fifth, of 
Ovid's Fafli and Metamorphofes, Virgil, and 
Cael^;r ; in the fixth, let Greek be commenced, 
and let the books confift of the Greek Tefta- , 
nient, Virgil, and Cicero's Letters ; in the fe- 
venth, of the Greek Tcftament, Lucian, Vir- 
gil, Cicero de OiHciis ; in the Eighth, of Ho- 
mer, Dcmoflhenes, Xenophon, Virgil, Horace, 
Juvftnal, Cicero's Orations, and his golden 
trcatifes De Amicitia and De SenccSute. The 
books may certainly be varied with propriety 
according to the judgment and tafte of the 
teacher j and I only enumerate thefe, becaufe 

I think 



ON SCHOOL BOOKS, &c. 55 

I think it right, as I have elfewhere faid, to de- 
(bend to particulars in a.pradical treatife. 

General removals fhould take place through- 
out the fchool twice a-year. The beft fcho- 
]ars fhould be promoted to the next clafs, and 
the others remain where they were, another half 
year. The books fhould be read in regular ro- 
tation, and with the moft fcrupulous regard to 
method and' regularity. 

The editions of fchool-books in Ufum Del- 
phini, are almofl univerfally received. I con- 
fefs I do not approve them. I know that the 
interpretation is always more attended to than 
the. text. The eye and mind of the young 
ftudent are confufed with a page crowded with 
that, and with annotations. The mafler 
flipuld, indeed, have a comment before him, to 
aflifl. and facilitate his bufmefs of explanation ;' 
but I wifh the fcholars to have editions with- 
out notes, or with very few notes. The type 
and paper cannot be too beautifij. Thefe al-' 
lure and pleafe the eye. With fuch editions, 
let the boy difcover the meaning of his lefTons, 
propria Martey by his own efforts, and the ufe 
of di6tionaries. It will be difficult at firft. 
The mafler will have additional trouble. But 
the fcholar will derive great flrength of mind 
from being obliged to exert himfelf, and will 
infallibly improve much fafler, and retain ,his 
improvements longer, than if he were ailifled 
with thofe inventions, which, though they were 
defigned to introduce the fludent to his books 
with greater eafe and fuccefs, are always abufcd 
to the gratification of indolence. 

D 3 I will 



54 ON SCHOOL BOOKS, &c- 

I will not clofe this feftion without deckring^ 
that, in pointing out books, or editions of books,. 
I neither mean to diftate, nor to promote the in« 
tereft of any felfi/h editor. I write what I think,^ 
and I ofFer diredions on this topic, unneceflary 
indeed to the profoundly learned, but fuch as 
may poffibly fuggeft fome ufeful hints to the in- 
experienced inftruftor *• 

* Since the above was written, I have had the 
fatisfadion to find, that I am not lingular in difap^: 
proving fchoolrbooks with annotations. Sec, FeU 
ton has the following pafTage in his Difiertation on 
the Claflics. 

** The celebrated Dr. Bujby ftriaiy forbad the 
'* ufe of notes^ and, for our Greek and Latin aii-«. 
*' thors, we had nothing but the plain text in a!^ 
** corred and chafte edition.'* 

*' Vera emendate loquendi facultas opttme para? 
tur, cum ex caiHgato loquentium colloqoio, convic-« 
tuque, tum ex eloquentium auAommaflidaa ledtione^ 
e quibus ii primum funt imbibendi, quorum oratii^>. 
praeterquam quod efl caftigatiilima^ argnraenti qno-^ 
que illecebra aliqua difcentibus blandiatnr.*' 



.- r 55 I * 

SECTION VL 

ON WRITING EXERCISES. 



Stylus optimus magiftcr. 

^kii fen is the bejt mafigr» Q\e. 

TO enfure improvement, it is not enouglv 
ID bo paffively atteiuive to inftruiSioii, 
Opportunities muft be given to the fludent to 
difplay.his attaiaments^ He muft learn to re- 
duce theory to pradice.. He muft exemplify his 
fuks. He muft be exercifed in thinking. He 
muft be accuftomed to folitary ftudy, and a ha* 
bit muft be formed of literary labour ^.^ 

Forallthefe reafons, it has b^en the cuftom 
of our beft fchools to exa£l from the fcholars a 
written exercife^ to be brought every morning 
on entrance into.the fchooL Under proper re- 
gulations, and duly attended to, both by the 
iaBttuStoT and the pupil, this pra<Stice has been 
produ^aive of effeAs greatly beneficial. I there- 
tore recommend it to be univerfally purfued, as 
foon as the pupil fhall be capable of writing ea- 
fily and legibly. ^ 

From the age of eight to ten, no exerci&s 
can be done with more propriety than thofe of 

*<I>t«ri?, /lAafiiKTK. a<rx*?crif. To Complete the work^ 
there mult be united nature, inftrudtioni and exef- 
cifc. 

D A Clarke's 



56 ON WRITING EXERCISES. 

Clarke's Introdudlion *• I think it would be 
fuperfluous to go through the whole of that 
book, and that the moft fuccefsful method is 
to go through a page or two only of each chap- 
ter, in order to exemplify the rules of Syntax ;. 
and to repeat them three, four, or five times, 
according to the boy's capacity, and improve- 
ments. This method, f am convinced by ex- 
perience, will give the fcholar a clearer idea of 
his bufinefs, than a regular and laborious ap- 
plication to the whole book, in the order in 
which it is left by the author. Care fliould be 
taken that the rules prefixed to the chapters ^rc 
carefully read,^ arid fully explained before the 
chapter is begun. Half the ufual labour, and 
half the ufual time, will produce more than, 
double the improven^nt, if fuch methods are' 
praftifed from the firflr, as tend to give the fcho- 
lar clear ideas. 

After the age of ten, provided the bov*s im^ 
provements are adequate to his age,. I advife 
that he fhall begin to compofe nonfenfe Laitin 
verfes. I wifli to begin this exercife early, ber 
caufe it wifl infenfibly, and in a very fhort 
time, acquaint him with the quantities of La- 
tin words, without a knowledge of which he 
will not be able even to read Latin with pro- 

* Garretfon's Exercifcs are very ufefnl, and if 
they were printed like Clarke's Introdudlion, in 
columns, and with the Latin on one fide, which is 
now publifhed in a feparate volume, called Hermei 
Romanus, I fhould recommend Garretfon, as it 
app,;ais to be fufiiciently well calculated for the 
purpole. 

priety. 



ON WRITING EXERCISES, £7 

priety. It is not, however, neceflary that thi5 
fhould be done every night, but alternately with 
exercifes adapted to the age and acquirements, 
Clarke's Introduction, or fome other exercife 
book, muft ftill furnifh the exercife once or 
twice a week. Indeed, it is not to be entirely 
relinquiflied till a very confiderable progrefs is 
made in Latin compofition. 

At the age of thirteen, fuppofing, as we did 
before, that the abilities and improvements of 
the pupil are adequate to the age, I would gra- 
dually introduce him to compofe in Englifli* 
If it fhould be aiked, why not before ? I an- 
fwer. That if the boy has parts, he may begin 
at ten ^ but, generally fpeaking, it will be found 
that boys have not colicdled ideas, or language 
enough to compofe any thing before twelve or 
thirteen. His firft effort fhould be, to write 
from memory (bme of ^fop's Fables iji his 
own words,, grammatically correft. When he 
can do this tolerably weU, let him write for 
his exercife, once or twice in the week, a let- 
ter on a familiar fubjeft, to a parent, a. brother,, 
a fifter,. or an acquaintance. 

At fourteen, and long before, if he pofle/Ies 
parts, let him enter on Englifh themes. But 
in order to facilitate this bufinefs, to gain a 
copia verborum*y and a colledlion of ideas, he 
muft be diredled to read every day, as his pri- 
vate fludy, the Roman Hiftory, Plutarch/s 
Lives, and the Spectator. Other books ma)^ 
Be adopted in proper fucceffion. But I would, 
begin with theft, becaufe I have ' found thenx 

*• A flow of words. 

D 5 peculiarly 



58 ON WRITING EXERCISES. 

peculiarly ufeful. Plaglarifm muft be difcou^ 
raged. And in order to difcourage it^ I think 
it beft not to be too feverely ftrift in remark- 
ing and punifhing the many and egregious 
miftakes which will appear in the firft attempts.. 
When a boy finds* that no fault is forgiven, he 
will be tempted to fteal from authors,, to avoid 
correction. And when this pra£lice is be- 
come habitual, it will defeat all our intentions 
of promoting his improvement in Eriglifli. 
compofition. For the mind, naturally indo- 
lent, will not beftow the labour of invention,, 
when it finds it can efcape with impunity with- 
out fuch labour, and that it incurs punilhment 
by offering to the eye of the mafter its own im- 
perfed, though laborious, produdlions. 

From fourteen to eighteen or nineteen * (and 
I would by no means advife, that the ftudent, 
who is to make a folid improvement in learn- 
ing, ihould leave his fchool till he is about that 

* We have but one youth, and one opportunity 
of education ; therefore, as Seneca fays. Quod faepe 
fieri non poteft, fiet diu. That <whkb cannot he done 
tften^ muft he long in doing* This time, I find, is 
thought by many unreafonably long; and fo it is, if 
nothiug elfe is fought but fhewy, fuperficial, triflipgy. 
and common attainments ; but let it be duly no- 
ticed, that I fpeak of a fludent who is to make a folid 
improvement. 

'* Youth would have caufe to complain, if they 

were condemned to fpend eight or ten of the 

beft years of their life in learning, at a great ex- 

pcnce, and with incredible pains, one or two lan- 

8 guage» 



ON WRITING EXERCISES. 59 

age), I recommend tkai the fcholars week fhall 
be thus employed : Monday evening, in Latin 
themes : Tuefday evening, in Latin verfe ; 
Wednefday evening, in Englifh or Latin let- 
ters; Thurfday evening, in Englifh verfe; 
Friday evening, in Latin verfe, or in tranflat- 
ing Ifcnglifli into Latin j and the interval from 
Saturday to Monday, in a Latin or an Englifh 
theme. The days and the exercifes may in- 
deed be changed at the difcretion of the judi- 
cious matter ; and I only fet down this plan for 
the fake of precifion. I repeat, that in a prac- 
^tical treatife, fuch as this profeiles to be, it 19 
proper to defcend to particulars, which I do 
without the leaft intention to diftate. 

It muft be remembered, as we proceed, that 
the books felefted both for private reading and 
fcholaftic fludy, in the courfe of this progrefs, 
aiufl be fuch as have an immediate relation to 
the exercifes to be performed. The befl mo- 
dels of compofition raufl be placed before the 
eyes of the ftudent at all times, but more par- 
ticularly while he is engaged in the work of 
imitation. And to imitate well a Virgil, a 
Cicero, a Pope, and an Addifon, indicates a 
mind which has imbibed a portion of their men- 

^nages of little ufe . . . But the end of maflers In 
the long courfe of their fludies is to habituate 

THEIR scholars TO SERIOUS APPLICATION^ tO 

make them love and value the fciences, and to cpl- 
civate fuch a tafie as fhall make them thirll after 
them when they are cone from school.'* See 

ROLLIN. 

D 6 tai 



60 ON WRITING EXERCiaES. 

tal excellence*. No method is fo likely ta, 
caufe this moft defirable participation of their 
fpirit, as repeated and continued efforts to ex- 
hibit, injuvenileexercifes, fome refemblance of 
their femiments and their ftyk> 

This aifiduous and unremitted attention to 
cxercifes will, I apprehend, be confidered by 
the fuperficial as too great a taflc, and as too fe- 
vere an exadion. To fuch I can only fay, 
that if they will not fufFer their fons. or fcho- 

* Many modern writers have renounced imitation 
as beneath their genius. But there is one excel* 
IBNCE;, as there is one truth and one sun* 
They who have difcovered this excellence, and ex- 
hibited it in their writings, muft be imitated by 
thofe who wifh to partake of it. To deviate from 
the flandardy when it is once acknowledged, is to 
deviate into abfurdity. ** What has been the con- 
feq^uence, fays an ingenious author, of leaving the 
beaten path of the antients? Have we not plunged 
ourfelves into affeftation, antithefes, playing with? 
words, into bomball;, into all the defefls which 
other ages have always experienced when caprice 
has been fubllituted to imitation ? • . • In vain 
has the graceful, the fmiling Fontenelle ftrewed 
his elogies with the ftowers of rhetoric. They can- 
not cover his quaintne/Tes. He fiirprifes us at the 
firil reading, but fatigues at the fecond. He feems 
more attentive to difplay himfelf, than explain the 
I'ubjed ; whereas the great talent in writing is, that 
the work fhouJd fo much engrofs our ideas, as to 
make us forget the author . . . It is however true^i 
that a finical ftyle may have its admirers in a crowd 
of bufy people, who read merely to amufe them- 
felves." Father Gerdiu 

lars. 



ON WRITING EXERCISES. 6t 

lars to fubmit to it, they muft npt expeA any 
great and lafting effe£ls from that which is com^ 
xnonly called a good education. How few, in- 
deed, do we fee bring a knowledge of the an- 
tient languages from their fchools, /ufficiently 
extenfive or profound to be ufeful in any great 
degree, or even to be retained by them through- 
out their lives \ What is the caufe ? Undoubt- 
edly, an indolence in therafelves-, and a loo 
great indulgence in their fuperintendents or pa- 
rents, who will not let themr fubmit to any 
degree of application which is painful. But I 
will venture to repeat a truth, which has been 
colle£led and confirmed by revolving ages : It 
is, that fuch is the appointed condition of hu- 
man affairs, that no objed^, really and durably 
valuable, can be gained without labour and diffi- 
culty *. This is the price at which Providence 
has decreed, that the fatisfa6tion and advantages^ 
arifing from the pofleifion of any extraordinary 
degree of excellence fhaU be purchafed... 



• 



Nothing is eafy ^without previous toil 
y© mortal man, nor ei'en to demi-gods, 

Phocylides* 

Ten tbcufand labours mufl concur to ratfe 
Exalted excellence, • M £ n a N d E R> 

Nil fine magno 
Vita labore dedit mortalibus. 
Nothing hath life bejlowed on man^ unhought 
By ferj'e<uering la kur. Horace* 

But^ 



iz ON WRITING EXERCISES^. 

But, indeed, the labour of compofitibn is 
not always painful. I have known boys of 
parts take great delight in compofing themes 
5md verfes. The natural pleafure of invention, 
and the confcioufnefs of increafing ftrength of 
mind, alleviated all the labour of the work * ; 

and 

* Juvat ipfe labor. 

The *uery tcil is a plea/ure. Mart. 

The ftudy and imitation of the ancients is the 
ftrongeft. barrier that can be oppofed to the depra- 
vation of tafte. It will ferve as a prefervative to 
middling writers, and enable great geniufes to 
make themfelves models for pofterity. A taste 

FOR WRITING GOOD LaTIN SHOULD THEN BE- 
ILEPT UP IN A NATION, WHICH CANNOT BE, UN^ 
&ESS IT IS STUDIED AT AN EARLY AGE." 

Father Gerdil. 

Fabricando Fabri fieri difcimus. 

By ^working tn the art <we learn to he artifts^ 

MORHOP. 

Non defunt, quiomnemcompofitionem fermonis 
Latini in puero damnant, ec ad maturiores annos 
feponunt, quibus ego nunquam aflentire potui. 
There are tho/e nvho condemn all Latin compojition in a 
hey, and foftpone it to riper years y ivith ^who/e opinion 
I never could agree . M o r h o f . 

Novi fane vires in omnium autojum leftione, in 
difciplinis omnibus verfatilTim OS, cum ad fcriptionem 
ventum eft, afperos, hiulcos, omnique elegantia 
deftitutos. I kno^w men 'ver/cd in all authors and in 
all learning, fwhff, ivhen they come to ivrite, exhibit a 
Jlyle rough y gaping^ and dejlitute of all elegance. 

. Mqrhof. 

The 



ON WRITING EXERCISES^. 6f 

anJ the praifes and encouragement they receiv* 
ed, gave their ingenuous minds a glow of de- 
light, which none of their ufual diverfions. 
could confer. When once a hoy feels an emu^ 
lation to excel in his compofitions^ his improve* 
ment is fecure. 



The writing of Latin exerjcifes, and indeed many 
other moil ufeful practices of the old fchools,.are of- 
ten exploded by the inftitutors of modern acade- 
MiBs. Manyofthefe perfons have deluded well- 
meaning, but ignorant and weak parents, by pre- 
tending, with an air of mystery and import- 
ance, to a NEW method of their own ; ac- 
cording to which young gentlemen are to acquire 
in iijhortttme^ and in xkiQ eafieft and moft agreeable 
manner^ all the accompliihments which tend to ^ua* 
Ufy them for the uni'uerfity ^ for trade ^ or for the army. 
No bait is found fo effectual as pretentions to a new 

METHOD. 

It is indeed this unreafonable aifedation of no- 
velty, which renders it neceflary that a writer on edu- 
cation ihould vindicate the ufeful eflablifhments of 
preceding ages. ** Inftead," fays Goldfmith, ** of 
giving us fine but empty harangues upon this fubjeft; 
mftead of indulging each his particular Sindivhimfcat 
iyflems, it had been much better if the writers on this 
itibjedlhad treated it in a more fcientific manner, re- 
prefTed all the fallies of imagination, and given us 
the. refult of their obfervations with didadlic fimpli- 
city. Upon this fubjeft the fmalleft errors are of 
the moft dangerous con fequence; and the author 
&ould venture the imputation of flupidity upon a 
topic, where his llighteft deviations may tend to 
injure the rifing generation. However, fuch are 
the whimfical and erroneous produftions writtea 

upon 



S^ ON WRITING EXERCISER. 

Bpon this fubjcft. Their authors have iludied to 
be UNCOMMON, not to be just; and at pre- 
sent WE WANT A TREATISE ON EDUCATION, 
NOT TO TELL US ANY THING NEW, BUT TO EX- 
PLODE THE ERRORS WHICH HAVE BEEN INTRO- 
IXUCEP BY THE ADMIRERS OF NOVELTY.'* 

GOLDSMXTa.. 



[ ^5 I 
SECTION VIL 

€N WRITING I.ATIN VERSB^ 



Interim fa tis eft, fi puer omtii curact fumma, 
qaaiHum ilia setas capita, labore, allquid probabil^ 
icripferit : in hoc afluefcac, hujus rci naturam fibi 
faciat. In the mean time^ it is enough if the boy^hall 
have ^written njoith all his attention^ and<with as much 
iahour as his years will beary fomething tolerable ; to 
this let him be accuftotned till ht makes the habit a /e* 
€OMd nature* Quintilian. 

Det primos Terfibus annos. 

Let him devote his firjl years to *ver/es. Arbiter*. 



SOME writers on the fubjeft of educatioit 
have exprcfled themfelves againft the gene- 
ral praflice of compofing Latin verfc at fchools^ 
with a degree of acrimony, which has led their 
> readers to conclude, that they themfelves were 
ignorant of the art, and without a tafte for its 
beauties. I fhould imagine, too, that fome of 
them never had a truly claffical education at a 

})ublic fchool, or were members of either Eng- 
ifh univerfity j^ for both our fchools and uni-- 
Yerfities are often the objetSs of their pointed^ 
but oblique fatire. 

However they may have gratified their fpleen, 
or promoted their intereft, by cenfuring in ge- 
neral 



66 ON WRITING LATIN VERSff. 

neral the methods of public fchools, they have 
ailed in this inftance without candour, and in. 
©ppofition to experience, Mr. Burgh is one of 
the writers who have attacked, with great free- 
dom, the plan of public fchools. I refpedl his 
memory greatly, as that of a man of fenfe and 
virtue, and of one who promoted the caufe of 
virtue, by his Dignity of Human Nature. But 
I think, that in his cenfure of the pi:a(SHce of 
compofing, Latin verfe -and Latin profc at 
fchools, he appears to be under the influence of 
prejudice. He has, indeed, declaimed againft 
it With plaufibillty, and in a manner likely ta 
pleafe and convince a certain cUfs of readers.. 
It is eafy to produce many arguments * againfb 
what he has advanced ; but I would only refer 
thofe who are his converts, to the decinons of 
long experience. Let them read Wood'a 
Athenasy and the Biographia Britannica. 'They 
will there find, that the ornaments of our na» 
tion, of letters, and of mankind, were in- 
ftrudled according to the ufual methods ; that 
is, were early tindlured with the clafllcs, ac- 
cuflomed to compofe in Latin verfe and proie^ 
and fent from their fchool ta the univerfities^ 
They will be led to conclude, from thefe and 
from many living inftances, that the claffical 
mode of inftru6lion received in public fchools,. 
is the beft foundation for future improvement 
in every department of learning* Science, pro* 

* One may aflc, among other queftions. How can 
we read profe without learning profody ? Thus f ' 
TSos Germani non coram us quaatitatem fyllaba-^ 
rum. 

perly 



ON WRITING LATIN VERSE. 67 

perly Co called, may be afterwards acquired.. 
Claffical learning opens an avenue to this, and 
every objeft of liberal purfuit ; and he virho fets 
out without it, will find many obftruftions ia 
his pafTage. I think myfelf diverted of preju- 
dice, when I declare^ that I never yet knew a 
writer who appeared to great advantage in his 
ftyle, or who was well received by perfons of 
allowed tafte,^ whatever might be his fcientific 
attainments, if he were totally ignorant of 
claffical learning. Such an one might write an 
ufeful, but feldoni an agreeable, book.. 

It appears then from the obfcrvation of real 
fadls, that there is no reafon to fuppofe the long 
eftabliflied methods of public fchools unable to 
produce, as they have produced,^ the moft ac* 
complKhed charai^ers^ Indeed,, when I fee 
many among the great, and among others, who 
have been educated according to the fchemcs of 
innovators, exhibiting an ignorance of antient 
learning, and fcarcely retaining even the fuper- 
ficial qualifications which they acquired under 
innovating inftru6lors ; I am inclined to attri-^ 
bute much of the levity of the prefent age, to a 
preference which has been given, by thofe whof^ 
example is feducing, to an education totally un-^ 
claffical *.. 

It 

♦ " But as my Lord Bacon charges it for a fault 
on princes, that they are impatient to compaf* 
ends, without giving themfelvcs the trouble of con- 
fulting or executing the means ; fo perhaps it may 
be the difpofltion of young nobles, either from the 
indulgence of parents,^ tutors, and governors, or 

Uieir 



6g ON WRITING LATIN VERSE. 

It is certainly fafeft to adhere, for the molt 
part, to the eftablifhed methods^ rejedipg no- 
thing 

their own ina^livity, that they expeft th^ accom-- 
plilhmcnts of a good education, without the leaffc 
cxpence of time or ftudy to acquire them^ 

" What I faid laft, I am ready to retraft ; for ther 
cafe is infinitely worfe ; and the very maxims fet up 
to dire£l modern education, are enough to deftroy 
all the feeds of knowledge, honour, wifdom and 
virtue, among us» The current opinion prevails^ 
that the ftudy of Greek and Latin is lofs of rime ;. 
that public fchoob, by mingling the fonsof noble- 
men with thofeofthe vulgar, engage the former in 
bad company; that whipping breaks the fpirit of 
lads well born ; that univerfities make young men 
pedants ; that t© dance, fence, fpeak French, and 
know how to behave yourfelf among great perfon9 
of both fexes, comprehends the whole duty of a: 
gentleman. 

*' I cannot but think this wafe fyft^m pf educa- 
tion, hath been much cultivated among us by thofe 
worthies of the army,, who, during the laf! war,, re- 
turning from Flanders at theclofe of each campaign, 
became thediftators of behaviour, drefs, and polite- 
nefs, to air thefe youngfters who frequent choco- 
late, coffee, gaming-houfes, drawing-rooms, operas, 
levees and afferablies ; where a colonel by his pay, 
perquiiites, and plunder, was qualified to outftiine 
many peers of the realm ; and by the influence of 
an exotic habit and demeanour, added to other 
foreign accomplifhments, gave the law to the whole 
'town, and was copied as the ftandard-pattern of 
whatever was refined in drefs, equipage, converfa- 
tion or diverflons, 

** I remember in thofe times an admired original 
of that vocation, fitting in a coffee-houfe near two 
gentlemen, whereof one was of the clergy, who 

were 



ON WRITING LATIN VERSE. 69 

thing but evident abufes. As a part of the efta- 
bliflied methods, I wifli to retain the pradice of 

teaching 

-were engaged in feme difconrfe that favoured of 
learning. This officer thought fit to interpofe, and 
profeffing to deliver the fentiments of his fraternity, 
as well as his own (and probably ciid fo of too many 
among them), turning to the clergyman, fpoke in 
the following manner, " D— n me, dodor, fay 
what you will, the army is the only fchool for gen- , 
tlemen. Do you think my Lord Marlborough beat 
- the French with Greek or Latin ? D— n me, a 
fcholar, when he comes into good company, what 
IS he but an afs? D— n me, I would be glad, by 
G— d, to fee any of your fcholars, with his nouns, 
and his verbs, and his philofophy, and trigonome- 
try, what a figure he would make at a fiege, or 

blockade, or rencountering f D-^n me, &c." 

After which he proceeded with a volley of military 
terms, lefs fignificant, founding worfe, and harder 
to be underllood, than any that were ever coined by 
the commentators upon Ariftotle. I would not here 
be thought to charge the foldiery with ignorance 
and contempt of learning, without allowing ex^- 
ceptions, of which I have known many; but, how- 
ever, the worft example, efpecially in a great majo- 
rity, will certainly prevail. 

** I have heard, that the late Earl of Oxford, in 
the time of his minillry, never paffed by White's 
chocolate houfe (the> common rendezvous of in- 
famous (harpers and noble cullies), without beftow- 
itiga curfe upcn that famous academy, as the bane 
cf half the EngliJJj nobility,^ I have likevvife beea 
told another paifage concerning that great miniller, 
which, becaufe it gives a humorous idea of one 
principal ingredient in modern education, take as 
followeth : Le Sack, the famous French dancing- 
mailer, in great admiration, afked a friend, whe- / 
* thcr 



70 ON WRITING LATIN VERSE. 

teaching boys to compofe Latin verfe f. But 
let me not be nufunderftood. I agree with Mr, 

Clarke^ 

ther it were true, that Mr. Harley was made an 
Earl and Lord Trcafurer ? ahd finding it confirmed, 
faid; " Well, I wonder what the devil the ,Queeii 
«ould fee in him ; for I attended him two years, 
<and he was the greateft dunce that ever I taught.'* 

" Another hindrance to good education, and 1 
think the greateft of any is that pernicious cuftom 
in great and noble families, of entertaining French 
tutors in their houfes. The wretched pedagogues 
arc enjoined by the father, to take Special care that 
the boy be perfeft in his French | by the mother, 
that mailer mufl not walk till he is hot, nor be fuf^ 
fered to play with other boys, nor be wet in his 
feet, nor daub his clothes, and to fee the danc- 
ing matter attends conftantly, and does his duty; 
fhe further inMs, that the child be not kept too 
long poring on his book, becaufe he is fubje£t to 
fore eyes, and of a weakly conllitution. 

** By thefe methods, the young gentleman is in 
'every article as fully accomplifhed at eight years old 
as at eight and twenty, age adding only to the 
growth of his perfon and his vice ; fo that if you 
ihould look at him in his boyhood through the 
magnifying end of a perfpeftive, and in his man- 
iiood through the other, it would be impoffible to 
fpy any difierence ; the fame airs, the fame ftudy, 
the fame cock of his hat, and pofture of his fword 
(as far as the change of fafhions will allow), the 
fame underftandi.g, the fame compafs of know- 
ledge, with the very fame abfurdity, impudence, 
and impertinence of tongue. 

" He is taught from the nurfery, that he muft 
inherit a great eilate, and hath no need to mind his 
book, which is a leflbn he never forgets to the end 
of his life. His chief fblace is to Heal down, and 

play 



ON WRITING LATIN VERSE. 71 

Clarke, Mr, Burgh, and all their partifans, 
that, when a1)oy is defigned to fill a fubordinate 

fphere 

.play at fpan-farthing with the page, or young 
•black-a-moor, or little favorite foot-boy, one of 
which is his principal confidant and bofom friend. 

** There is one young lord in this town, who, by 
an unexampled piece of good fortune, was mira- 
culouily fnatched out of the gulph of ignorance, 
•confined to a public fchool for a due terra of years, 
well whipped when he defcrved it, clad no better 
than his comrades, and always their play-fellow on 
the fame foot, had no precedence in the fchool, 
but what was given him by his merit, and loil it 
whenever he was negligent, it is well known how 
many mutinies were bred at this iinprecedented 
treatment, what <:omplaints among his relations, 
and other great ones of both fexes ; that his ftock- 
ings with filver -clocks were raviftied from him ; 
that he wore his own hair ; that his drefs was un* 
diftinguiftied ; that he was not .fit to appear at a ball 
or affembly, nor fufFeredto goto either : and it was 
ivith the utmoft difficulty, that he became qualified 
for his prefent removal, where he may probably be 
further perfecuted, and poffibly with fuccefs, if the 
iirmnefs of a very worthy governor, -and his own 
good difpofitions, will not preferve him. I confefs, 
J cannot but wifti he may go on in the way he 
began, becaufe I hav6 a curiofity to know by fo 
lingular an experiment, whether truth, hone%, 
julSce, temperance, courage and good fenfe, ac- 
quired by a fchool and college education, may not 
produce a very tolerable lad, although he Ihould 
happen to fail in one or two of thofe accomplifli- 
ments, which in the general vogue are held fo im- 
-^ortant to the finiihing of a gentleman. 

*• It is true, I have known an academical edu- 
cation to have been exploded in public aifembhes ; 

and 



72 ON WRITING LATIN VERSE, 

fphere in commercial or a£livc life, to trouble 
him with Latin verfiiication, is t^ipvafie his va- 
luable 

and have heard more than one or two perfons of 
high rank declare, they could learn riothing mode 
at Oxford and Cax bridge, than to drink ale and 
fmoak tobacco ; wherein I firmly believed them ; 
and could have added fome hundred examples from 
my own obfervation in one of thofe univerflties ; 
but they all were of young heirs fent thither, only 
for form, either froTi fchools, where they were not 
fufFered by their careful parents to flay above three 
months in the year, or from under the management 
of French family-tutors, who yet often attended 
them to their college, to prevent all poffibility of 
their improvement :* bat I never yet knew any one 
perfon of quality who followed his (ludies at the 
univerfity, and carried away his juft proportion of 
learning, that was not ready, upon all occafions, to 
celebrate and defend thatcourfeof education^ and. 
to prove a patron of learned men. 

** There is one circumftance in a learned edu- 
cation which ought to have much weight, even 
with thofe who have no learning at all. The books 
read at fchools and colleges are full of incitements 
to virtue, and difcouragements from vice, drawn 
from the wifeft reafons, the ftrongetl motives, and 
the moft influencing examples. Thus young minds 
are filled early with an inclination to good, and an 
abhorrence of evil, both which increafe in them, 
According to the advances they make in literature ; 
and although they may be, and often are, drawn 
by the temptations of youth, and the opportunities 
of a large fortune, into fome irregularities, when 
they come forward into the great world ; it is ever 
with reludance and co.r.pun6Uon of mind, becaufe 
their biafs to virtue ftill continues. They may flray 
fometimes out of infirmity and compliance, but 

they 



ON WklTING LATIN VERSE. 7) 

luable time. Such a mode oF gaining an inti* 
iaztt knowIe<]^e of the claffics, is defirable to 
thofe only who are to aflume a profefBon, or 
adorn a fortune. 

they will Toon return to this right road» and keep it 
always in view. I fpeak only of thofe exceifed 
which are too much the attendants of youth and 
warmer blood ; for, as to the points of hbnour^ 
truths jnfBce, and other noble gifts of the mind, 
wherein the temperature of the body hath no con- 
cern« they are feldom or ever known to be wild. 

. • . • • ** fThj Jhould my fin he a fcholar^ luben 
it is not intended that be Jhould live hy his learning ? 
by this rule^ if 'what is commonly /aid be true^ that 
money ^n/twereih all things y nvby Jhould my /on be 
k^nefit temferaiey juji or charitable, Jince he hath no 
intention to depend upon any 0/ the/e qualities /or a 
fnmntenanceV^ . Dr. Swift. 

*' I ihall detain you no longer (to ufe the worda 
of Milton) in the demondration of what we fhould 
not do» bntftrait condudtyou to a hill iide, where I 
will point you out the right path of a virtuous and 
noble education ; laborious indeed at the firfl af- 
cent» butelfe fo fmooth, fo green, fo full of goodly 
proif)e£l» and melodious founds on every iide, that 
the harp of Orpheus was not more charming." 

This paflage is taken from Milton's Tradlate, 
which, though it contains fome impradicable rules, 
is an admirable com portion. 

+ " If I might adviff, 1 would have boys kept 
wholly from this fort of exercife." Mr. Clarke. 

All thefe objedions appear very plaufible to illi- 
terate perfons, and thofe very many who know not 
what a clailical education means, or what advan- 
tages it tends to produce. 



To 



74 ON WRITING LATIN VERSE, 

To perfons in fuch circumftanccs, and with 
fuch liberal views I ftrongly recommend an 
adherence to the plan which includes Latin vcr- 
fification. I am not fo unreafonable as to re- 
commend the praflice, merely becaufe it has 
been long eftablifhed ; but I own I derive an 
argument for its excellence, from its long cfta- 
Uifhment. And I will add, that I know, from 
a£iual experience, that it is the beft method of 
giving a ftudent a refined tafte for claffical ex- 
preffipn *. The neceffity of compofing Latin 
verfe, renders the ftudent more careful in re- 
marking and felefling elegancies, than he would 
be, if he were only to read without imitating a 
Horace or a Virgil f- 

They 

• Cowley, Milton, Addifon, Gray, Jortin, and a 
great many other men, of fine tafte as well as pro- 
found learning, were eminent in Latin vbrsb. 
Effects well known and indifputablc arc the cri- 
teria by which one ought to judge of the modes of 
education. Mr. Locke fays, '* He whofe defign is 
to excel in Englifh ppetry, would not, I guefs, 
think the tvay to it were to make his firft eHays in 
Latin verfes,'* Yet the moft eminent writers have 
done fo. 

f See fome good remarks on writing Latin verfe 
and Latin profe, and on n\any particulars of claffi- 
cal education, in Dr. Beattie's Eiiay on the Utility 
of claffical Learning. 

Mr. Clarke, who is a great oppofer of the prac- 
tice of writing Latin verfe, tells us, •' he thinks 
Mr. Locke's EfTay, and Mr. Chillingworth's De^ 
fence, preferable to twenty Iliads or j^neidsput to- 
gether.'^ What occafion is there to make any com- 
parifon between works fo different in their nature^ 
The inelegant didion of Mr. Clarke's writings 

proves 



ON WRITING LATIN VERSEi 7$ 

They who think difFerendy from rte^ may 
very Hkdy be right, though they appear to me 
to err. But I believe the greater part of the 
regularly educated, think as I do on this fubjefl. 
I have, however, found, upon enquiry, that in 
fome c^ our moft popular fehools, Latin verfe 
is attended to as an exercife, too early, too 
conftantly, and too indif^riminately *; For the 
fake of gaining prizes, and for other lefs de^ 
fenfible reafons, it is made the first object, 
which it cettatnly ought not to be. Boys who 
happen to have no tafte for it, however excel* 
lent their underftandings in other refpe&s, have, 
at thofe fchools, no encouragement. . But, 
omitting to expatiate on a fubjeA rather in- 
i^idious, I will proceed to fpecify that plan 
which I judge moft likely to facilitate the ac- 
quifition of this elegant, though fubordinate 
attainment. 

A common method is, to fufFer boys at firft 
to write verfes formed of words combined, 
without regard to meaning or grammatical 
conftru£^ion, but, at the fame time, with a 
clofe attention to the rules of profody. This 
method certainly contributes to facilitate the 
purfuit, though it is not univerfally approved. 
It (hould not indeed be contbued very long $ 

proves that be was iincere in flighting the truly 
claiBcal education. He appears, however, to have 
been a very ^ood man* and certainly made fome va- 
luable additions to our catalogue of fchool books. 

* It is abfurd to confine a dunce« who can hardly 
compofe a profaic fentence grammatically corre^, 
40 the li^ata oratie, to metrical compofition, where 
the difficulties are greatly increaftd. 

£ a but 



66 ON WRITING LATIN VERSE. 

ixut it is aiT excellent mode of introdudlon to 
an Alt which is confcBhdly attended lokh (bme 
difficulty. ; 

. I^ftra^rs differ much in opinion refpeding 
the ' propriety of allowing their pupils a G^radus 
ad Parnajlum. I am one of thofe who think^ 
that the facilitatijig methods often contribute to 
retard advancement by indulging iiadblence ♦. 
-But"this is certain; if you forbid the: ufe of 
^he Gradus in a place of education, your pro^ 
hibition will be fruftnted by the clandeftinc 
introdudldn of it. It is a book eafily procured, 
and bd^s i^o the fenior clafTes will not be^tL- 
•out it. I have known it -permitted, and ufed 
with judgment, by boys, who have received 
ignsat improvement from it. When the pupil 
-poflef&s ^n uncommon ihare cff pzrtSy he will 
afcend ParnafTus without this ftep to help him. 
I have feen excellent copies of Latin verfes 
compofed by boys who were never openly in- 
dulged with the ufe of the Gradus j and I think 
that the improvement made without it, will be 
Snore permanent and folid. The misfortune is, 
thai ther. art appears fo difficult at 6t& f, that 
the greater part of boys are likely to be de^ 
^rred a)Kl <{ifgufted, if they are denied this af«> 

/iftaacV ' '- • 

When the quantity of words is pretty well 
"KftSWh, Ilteve found it a very good method 
*i6 place die words of one of Martial's Epi* 

* Tpm 'dfei5ic(ire utiliflima eft exercitationis dii&- 
eulias, The/v/ry difficulty of the exercife is highly 

nfefuL -^ ''" ' QUINTILIAN. 

i kocUva ri %oi\x. ' H^at is biautiful is difficult. 

■: . grams. 



GN WRITING LATIN VBR^SB. jrj, 

grams, or of any beautiful paflage in the La« 
tin poets, out of their metrical order, and to 
require the fcholar to form them into verfcs, 
I liave lijcewife fometimes given him literal 
EngUih ^tranflations fxom a Latin poet, written 
in lines correfponding to each line in the poet, 
and defired him to tr anflate them into Latin v^si^^ 
WheQ this was done, the original was read, 
and compared with the pupil's produdion *. 

But I have no great opinion of exercife$ 
condfting merely of tranflations. It is beft to 
exercife. the boy's invention. As foon, there •* 
fore, a^ he cau write hexameters and p^nta- 
fneters, lo^hiH^have a Aibjed given bim. JLe( 
}iim be m^A^ acquainted with th« nature of an 
cpigrafD. Let him b^ told, it is to coi>fii[l: of 

• It has been made ao cbjeftion to the pratftice 
of writing Latin vttky that the modems ntwei can 
attain to antient purity. ButMuretus deceived tha 
^rest Scaliger, by publifinng feme v^-^ of his own 
under the name of an Antient ; and if the oaoderns 
do not quite equal the antieots in this particular, 
they come vtry near thenu I appeal to the writings 
of Fracaftorius, Sannazarius, Vanier, Vida, Bouriiie, 
and many polite Icholars educated in the grammar 
A:hooIs of England. Dr. Johnfon fays, rather 
ftrongly, '* that the Latin poems of Milton are 
lufeiomfly dcgaflt; bat that the delight which they 
aibrd is rather by the ex^uijite imitations »f the an*- 
tsmt ivn'ters, by the purity of thie didion, and the 
harmony of the numbers, than by any power of in- 
vention or vigour of fentiment.*' Ut tranfeundi 
fpes Don fit, magna tamen eil dignitas fubfequendi. 
though lAje have no hopes of getting before theft great 
men, the antients, yet there is great merit anU 
honour in following clofelj after them, 

QUIWTILIAN. 

£ 3 "onb 



7« ON WRFITNG LATIN VERSB: 

one thought. The fearch after this thought is 
attended witlr jnany collateral advantages. The 
nind.iivpunuit of it c^en ranges, as well as 
it ("an, .through the moral and phjrfical world. 
Men^ noanners, and things, whatever he has 
Jread^ heard, or feen, come under the ftudent's 
confideration. A great improvement is derived 
to the mental powers from this pradice, and» 
at the fame time, a habit of- refle6lion gained, 
and knowledge of various kinds extended and 
eonfirmed. Let any one impartially examine 
die LuAii WHlmoqafterienfes, Mufse £tonen«^ 
.fes, and feveral other publications a^ well as 
manufcripts of this fort, and he will iee the 
juftnefs of my obfervation. Epigrams, Odes, 
and various Poematia (hould alternately con* 
ftituteexercifes in the higher clafies. Accuracy, 
copioufnefs of invention, a depth of thought, an 
dcganccrof ftyle,and many other advantages, I 
baxe- knowil derhfed, from this method to every 
kind of writing in which thefcholar afterwards 
employed himfclf. I have feen it ; and therefore 
am not induced to alter my opinion by the de- 
clamation of thofe, who, from a defea in their 
own education, are not competent judges on this 
queilion. Neither am I deterred from continue 
ing die pradice of exercifing boys in poetry, 
by the tiitf remark, that a poet is born*, aiid 

not 

* Many inllances might be p rod aced, in modern 
as well as aniient times, of very eminent men, who 
hegan with the ftudy of poetry. To add authority to 
my opinion, I will quote, as I often do with that 
yiewa ^ pafT^ge from an antient : a^|<zfui^ ^i etma 



OK WRITING LATIN VEIrSE. 79 

not made. No one tnows the genius of a boy 
tiJI he is tried. The moft unpromifing * have 
often fucceeded beft, when called forth by op- 
portunity or neceffity. 

Bin ^mcvhhfy wax TiTstRunq iv xaii^Z fi.iT»Su Beginning 
mfiih tbi beft poets ^ and halving read tbem under in^ 
JtruQvrSy pa/s 6n to tbe orators ; andy being nourijhed 
fy the nuorks of botb tbe/e, proceed in due time to tbe 
^wrifings of ^bucydides and Plato • L u c i a n • 

The author of Fitzofborne's Letters, who has 
written vcy flrenuoufly againll modern Latin vcrfe, 
acknowledges, at the clofe of his letter, that to be 
Dulled in the mechanifm of Latin verfe, is a talent 
extremely worthy of a Pedagogue; as it is an 

BXERCISK OF SIKGULAR. ADVANTAGE TO HI9 

PUPILS. We thank him for the conceflion. 

♦ Dr. Ifaac Barrow's father ufed to fay, that if 
it plealed God to take from him any of his children, 
he hoped it might be Ifaac, as he was the leaft pro- 
mifing. For three years, fay his Biographers, 
which he fpent at the Charter-honfe, he was re- 
markable for little elfc but fighting, negligence of 
his clothes and of his book. So vain a thing is man's 
judgment, they obferve, and fo unfit our providence 
to guide our own affairs. 

I remember once, when I was a fchool-boy, and 
happened to be in the company of Dr. Goldfmith, 
to have heard him fay, that he never was particu- 
larly attached to the Belles Lettres till he was thirtyj 
Poetry had no peculiar charms for him till that 
age ; and he believed, he faid, that his geniuf, 
when a boy, was rather unpromifing. 

Thefe remarks arc offered with a view to prevent 
parents from haftily giving up their fons upon verv 

KARLY UNFAVOURAELE APPEARANCES. Many 

a child has been fent to fea, or put out as an ap« 

prentice, who might have Qione eminently in let- 

£ 4 ters. 



9o ON WRITING LATIN V^RSR 

%^13^ if bis parents had not been inclined todefpair 
too foon, from their ignorance of the nature ?ind tl^e 
operations of the human mind, and from their inat* 
tention to the biographical accounts of eminent 
literati. 

On the other hand, parents mufl not consider 
early profligacy and idlenefs z$ fy-mptoms of genius ; 
for this is a moil fatal miflake. Bad boys hav* 
fometimes become g^od men ; but the inftancei are 
rare, and therefbre taken notice of | while by far 
the greater part of bad boys go on from bad to 
worie^ and, at an early age, arc ruined and forgot* 
ten. 



■ ; ....... J 

SECTION VIII. 

OK WRITXKG LATIN PROSr.. 



Scribendum quam diligentiOime et quam plun*, 
mum. Let him compofe tAJith the utmoft care^ ani_ as ' 
mucbas pojjihh. Quintilian. 

AMONG mahy cftabliflicd praftices m 
public fcliools, which the lovers of inno- 
vation with to aboliih, is that of compofing iri 
Latin profe. When they affert that they knovr 
not its ufe, they will readily be believed ; for ' 
fuch innovations as this commonly proceed', 
from thofe who either have not had the oppor- 
tunity of a truly liberal education,, or who» 
from idlenefs or frodn dulnefs,. have not availed 
themfclves of its advantages. Perfons under 
thefe circumftances cannot form an adequate 
idea of the utility of claffical inftrudlion in all 
its parts and confequences. Their ideas are 
ufually confined to commercial obje6ls, or to 
thofe which have little in them of a refined and 
a purely intelleftual nature. That accomplifli- 
ment which has no apparent tendency to lucra* 
tive advantage, or which does not make a con- 
fpicuous figure in bufy life, they cannot un- 
dcrfland, and they confider as contemptible. 

But the compofition of Latin profe, confi- 

dercd merely as- an exercife, naturally contri- 

E 5 hute»^ 



la ON WRITING LATIN PROSE. 

butes to increafe, and to confirm, an intimate 
knowledge of the language. He who can write 
a language, will not often be at a lofs in read* 
ing the authors written in it. He will under- 
ftand the delicacies and the beauties of the Ian- 
guage^ both . when he confiders it in its fingle 
and feparate words, and when he views it in 
CQnftru(Slion. When words and ideas pals im- 
mediately under the pen, in the aft of compo- 
fition, they are confidered more diftindly and 
maturely than when they are only perufed in a 
volume. 
' Befides this advantage, to be able to write 
Latin, qualifies the ftudent to correfpond with 
the learned in all countries *, Latin has long, 
been the univerfal language of learning. The 
books, which, from their extenfive fubjeft^ 
fcem to intereft mankind at large, have ufually 
been written in Latin. They are not fo com- 
monly written in Latin in the prefcnt age ; a 
circumftance which plainly indicates a tefs de- 
gree of attention to that learned language, than 
was paid to it at the revival of letters. Yet 
fcientific fubje6ts of all kinds are ftill oftea 
difcufled in Latin ; and it is unbecoming a 
fcholar to be unable to exprefs his ideas in a^ 
language, in which learned foreigners not only 
write, but frequently convcrfe. 

Add to this motive, that if the ftudent pro- 
ceeds to either of our £ngli{h univerfities, and 
really wiihes to appear and be a icholar^ and 

* Latin letters fliould. form one of the evtnin^ 
ezercifes at Ochogl ^ for which Cicero affords ad- 
mirable modeki 

wot 



ON WRITING LATIN PROSE. «j 

not merely a man of pfeafure, he muft acquire 
the habit of compofing in Latin. Latin themes^ 
Latin declamations, Latin leftures, are con- 
ftantly required of academical fiadents; It is 
true that the idler and the man of fafhion, a» 
he calls himfelf, always procure thefe exercifes> 
cither from friends, from books, or from col- 
ledions of old compofitions ; but, though they 
may pafs through the forms of an univerfity by 
fiich mean fubterfuges, they cannot acquire 
credit, or acquit therafelves to their own fiitif- 
faftion. Indeed, if they take the degree of 
mafter of arts in one of our univerfities, they 
are bound by their oaths to recite publickly in 
the fchools Latin declamations of their own 
compofition. 

Nor is the practice of exafling Latin exer- 
cifes in die univerfities, to be considered as ori- 
ginating from prejudice in a dark age, and con^ 
tinued by a fond attachment to ancient cuf- 
toms, but as producing, and as intended t& 
produce, valuable efFefts. It contributes greatly 
to keep awake an attention to the chflics,^ and 
confcquently to all ancient literature. Mahy a 
lively young man would negleft his ftudies in 
Latin, if he did not fee that his negle^ft would 
ezpofe him to contempt or trouble, by difab- 
Kng him from performing thofe public exer* 
cifes which muft be performed for the attain- 
ment of academical honours. Many members 
of the univerfity are rnduced to keep up, by 
conftant application, the habit of reading and 
imitating the more elegant claflics, becaufe 
they may be required on ibme occafion to fpeak 
publicly in Latin.. If- thfe cxercifes were re- 
£ 6 quired 



l4 ON W^fvlTlNG LATIN PROSE. 

quired only . in Englifii, | am , furetbat tbe 
ftudy and knowledge of the Latin language 
would greatly decreafe. Indeed, all who wifli 
Xo innovate in this particular, indicate a deiiga 
to render the univerfity a place of educatioa 
merely for men of the world, and to baniih the 
J^ufes, that tHe Gracjefs may reign alone; yet 
it is certain, that^ without the Mufes, the 
Graces will lofe much of their beauty. J£very 
Scholar ought to be a gentleman ; and indeed 
I can hardly conceive a true gentleman, by 
which I underftand a man of an elegant, a li- 
beral, and an enlightened mind, who is not in 
fome degre? a polite fcholar. 

It is another argument in favour of the Latia 
exercifes in our ieminaries, that it has a na« 
tural tendency to improve the ftudent in Eng- 
lifh compoiition; He who has been accuftomn 
^d t6 make Cicero his model, will infenfibly 
exhibit fomething of his beauty, in whatever 
language he can compofe with facility. That 
habit of accuracy, and that care in the col- 
location of words, which is required m La* 
tin works, will infcnfibly extend its good 
cfFcfts^ to every produftion. To write Latin 
in youth, is an excellent preparation * for that 
vernacular com pofiti on, which fome of tb^ 
profeffions indifpenfably. require f • It ought 

* But hear an innovator.. •* I carefklly avoided 
the conunon method of employing my boy in txtr^ 
ti/es of any kifui i for, after all the ftir we make 
about the Latin tongue, it Uno more than any other 
language.** Tanaquil Faber. 

t ** It always gives perfedion to have the excr^ 
cife harder than iM ordinary u/e. " B a c q n ^ 

^therefore 



ON WRITING LATIN PROSB. f j 

therefore to be continued in our &hooIs.; but it 
will not often be attended with fuccefs, unlej& 
the pupil remains there long^ and applies clofe- 
ly under the infpe&ion of an experienced in- 
firu&or. Much pradice and long habit are ne» 
ceflary, to give excellence and facility. 
. Therf is no argumient brought againft the^ 
praftice, which is not founded in that prevail- 
ing averfion to difficulty of all kinds^ which is* 
injurious to fociety in general^ and particularly 
hurtful in the courfe of education *. But 
while I infift on its general utility, I muft al- 
Ipw, where boys are intended to acquire only 
a fuperficial knowledge, and to be .removed 
early from their femiiiary to the warehoufe and 
accompting-houfe, or to be introduced into any 
mode of adtive life incompatible with contem- 
platton, that then they will not be able to ac- 
quire an eafe in Latin compoTition, and that it 
will not be neceiTary.. 

• •' Enough has been faid," faya Dr. Beattie, 
** to evince the utility of that xnode of difcipline» 
which for the mod part is, and alivays^ in nty opinion^. 
•ugbt to hi, efiablijhed in grammar fchooU. If the 
leader admit the truth of thefe remarks, he will be 
iatisfied that the ftudy of the claffic authors does «ot 
acceflarily oblige the fludent to employ too much 
time in the acquifition of words; for that, by means 
of thofe words, the mind may be (lorcd with valua- 
We knowledge ; and that the acquisition of them» 
prudently conducted, becomes to young pcrfons one 
of the beft infiruments of inteUeilual proficiency^ 
which, in the prefent flauof human fociety^ it it 
poilible to imagine." 

• 7 About 



S6 ON WRITING LATIN PROSE. 

About the time of the revival of learninr, 
every fcholar vras early taught to compofe in: 
Latin ; and to excel in it was one of the firft 
objects of his ambition. Many moft honour- 
able teftimonies are extant, of the fucCefs of 
thpfe indefatigable ftudcnts ; and I believe, if z 
tafte for the. manners and purfuits of that age 
were adopted, that it would be a circumftance- 
equally favourable to virtue and to letters. Sim- 
plicity and a moft ardent love of learning, ex- 
cluded many vices, and debilitated many fatal 
paiHons. 

With refpeft to the ftyle which is chiefly ta 
be imitated, I fliall not hefitate to recommencf 
that of. Cicero*. The imitation of Cicero 
has, indeed, been often carried to a ridiculous 
^cefs ; and a ftudent deficient in judgment 
may fometimes refemble him, without difplay- 
ing excellence. His more diffufe and Afiatic 
manner is not to be imitated. But the ftyle of 
his Letters, his Offices, his Philofophical Con- 
vcrfations, his book on the Oratoi*, his treatife 
on Friendfhip and on Old Age, with a few of his 
Orations, abounds with fweets, from which 
the induftrious bee m^ay load himfelf vnth honey. 
I am aware that fome of the learned,, wearied 
with the uniformity of the Cice;xioian period^ 
have imitated, and recommended as fhs^dts^ the 
ftyles of Quintilian and Tacitus. 'Thefe are 
excellent in their kind ^ but they have not the: 

* Ille fe profecifTe feiat cui Cicero vald« placebit*. 
tet^ him be ajfuredtbat be has made a great proficitncy^ 
nuho. is much fkafed luith reading Cicero. 

. QyiNTlLIAlfJ 

trac* 



ON WRITING LATIN PROSE. gj 

grace and fwcetnefs of Cicero. They pleafe 
and ftrike a mature tafte, but they are not 
well adapted to allure a young ftuaent to the 
labour of imitation. 

The praftice in our old fchools and univer- 
fities, of exafting Latin themes and declama- 
tions on fubjeds of morality and biftory, is then 
attended with many ufeful confequences • 5 
and I hope it will be more generally admitted 
into places of a truly liberal education. Many^ 
modern fchools have very properly beftowetf, 
or profe^d to beftow, much attention on- 
teaching the Englifh language, I may ven- 
ture without prefumption, to fuggcft to their 
tnftitutors and managers, that a judicious ftud^ 
of Latin compofition will greatly facilitate the 
acquifition of an elegant ftyle, and of an inti- 
mate knowledge of Englim. I believe I may^ 
fay, though not without danger of offending 

* Among others, it tends to keep up an inti- 
MATB knowledge of Latin in the nation; which, 
would not be preferved io perfedion,, if all were 
■contented merely with undesftanding authors.— 
Csefar, Cicero, Virgil, Horace, Livy, Saliuft, have 
kept their rank, as ftandards for imitation,, during, 
eighteen hundred years ; and a careful imitation of 
them has produced fuch writers in Italy as Dante» 
Boccace, Petrarch,. Ariofto,. Cafa, Galileo ; ia 
France, Racine, Moliere, Boileau^ BoiFueti, Fene- 
]on ; in EneUnd, Milton ^Dryden, Addifon,, Pope» 
and a thou^nd others^ who, altogether^ have im« 

£ roved and innocently delighted myriads of the 
uman race. And (hall a modern pbihjopbtr^ 
nuho umderftanis meitber Greek nor Latin {which i& 
often the cafe;» prohibit this imitation I 

tic 



It ON WRITING LATIN PROSE. 

the conduSors of Englifh academies^ that no 
snan who does not underiland Latin, can un- 
derftand Englifh. Almoft all the polyfyllabic 
words in our language are of Latin ob Greek 
CXtra£lion« Clascal grace may in. fome mea- 
iUre he transfufed, from the elegant writers of 
Qreece and Rome^ to the lefs harmonious Ian* 
giiages of northern Europe, by a ftudent who 
has been ufed to imitate the clafEcs, and whofe 
ideas are ftrongly coloured by the channel in 
which they have flowed. The improvement of 
the Englifh language *, therefore, as well as 
of the fcholar, greatly depends on the conti- 
i^uance of Latin compofition as a fcholaftic ex- 
ejxife^ 

. ** No man tinderftands his own language better 
than Cicero did his ; yet he adhered to Greek ex- 
ercifes till he obtained the Prxtorfhip ; ad Prac- 
toram ufque Graece declamavit. Sue. on. When 
a boy, he was kept from a celebrated mailer, who 
only taught his own language r equidem memoria 
teneo, pucris nobis primdm Latin} dccere ccepiiTe 
Plotium quendam, ad quem quum fieret con- 
curfus ; dolebam mihi idem non licere. Continebar-- 
autem do^ijjimorum hominum autoritatt qui exiflima- 
bant Gracis exercitationibus ali melius ingenia 
pof]!e. / remember nuhen I uuas a boy, one Plotius firfl 
began to ttach the Latin language ^ and as it nuat tie' 
falhiott to attend his leSiureSy I wjas uneafy that I tjjai 
not permitted to go too. But I tvas pre^vcnted by the 
authority of fome very learned men, lA^ho fwere ofopi^ 
nion, that the underftanding might be better culti'vated 
by exercifes in Greek, Cic. ad M. Titinium. 

It has been faid by peribns who have not a proper- 
idea of the grace and elegance of the Latin lan- 
guage, that it is learned in a bet(er> as well as more 

com* 



ON WMTING JvATIN PROS^. 89. 

coti)pen4ious manner,, by fpeaking than by writing 
It. I think differently, and am happy to coincide 
with the opinion of the celebrated San^us. 

Quis porro ladimagifter grammaticus non fab- 
inde pueris crepat ; vel male vel bene loquere ? 
Tanta eft fhiltorum hominum ignorantia, perverii* 
tas et pertinacia. ' At ego, apud qaem pluris eft 
re6tae radonis pondus, qua;xi moltorum praefcriptum^ 
afTerp, nihil peftilentios pofTe juveni linguas Latinas 
copidoevenire, quam aut verbis Lacinis efFutire co- 
gitata, aut loquentium profluentiae intereffe . . • 
rlon difcimns Hebraca, vel Grasca, ut loquamur, fed 
«t da^ efficiamur. . Cur igitur in Latinis non idem 
cfficiemus ? quandoquidem jam nulla natio eft^ quas 
Latin^^ ant Grxc^ loquitur. Stvlusexercendus eft 
diligenter: hicenim; ut M. Tulhus^ity eft egregias 
dicendl magifter ; hie vere nos docebit,, communi 
ifeniuillos carere, qui linguam in Plateis aut euai^ 
in Gymnafiisj miris ^npdis conantur dilacerarc, 
What fchodmi^er is not for ever repeating iff the ear^ 
tfbis hoys this command : Speak Latin, it Jignifies nq^ 
lAjhitherillor.nv'eUt/peak it ? $0 great is the ignoranc^f 
perwerfenefsy and ohftinacy of the/efoolifi perfons* Buf 
/, nuith <whom righf reafon has more 'weight than tif 
injunctions of the many^ ajferty that nothing can happeif 
mure injurious to a young man ^vho aims at ajkitl in 
the Latin language y than to /pout his thoughts in Latin 
iMfords, or to be cowverfant ^th the prattling of Latin 
talkers . • • We do not learn Hebrenv or Greek in or» 
der tp J^eak them 5 but to become learned in them^ 
Whyfiall we not do the fame in the Latin f Since therf 
is nonv.no tf^ion fwhich fpeaks Latin or Greek* The 
pen is to be diligently exercifed ; for it is this^ as TuUy 
fays, which is the beft inftruBor in the art of fpeaking \ 
but this will teach us to difco*ver that they are defitute 
of common fenfe, who attempt to tear the language im 
pieces, in thejlreets asidfcbools^infofirangeamanmr^ 

Sanctius» 
See 



^ ON WRITING LATIN PROSE, 

See many ananfwerable arguments againft talking 
Latin, at.the concluiion of mis author's admirable 
Minerva* 

Many other authorities ofequal weight againft the 
pradlice of fpeaking Latin in the courte of education 
might be produced. But our ear and taHe will con- 
vince us of its inexpediency, if we Men to thofe 
foreigners who have been taught to fpeak Latin from 
their infancy. In their mouths Latin becomes 
more barbarous than any modern language. No 
ear can bear the horrid jargon, unlcfs it be the ear 
of a Dutchman or Boeotian. 

Double tranflations, or tranflations from Latin 
into Englifh, and then from Englifh into Latin ^ are 
very juSly recommended as an excellent method of 
acquiring a facility and elegance of ftyle in writing 
Latin. •* Queen Elizabeth" fays Afcham, " by 
*' this double tranflating of Greek, without miffing, 
«<'evqy forenoon, and of Latin every afternoon, 
'* hath attained to fuch a perfed underftanding in 
•* both tongues, and to inch a readjr utterance of 
" the Latin, and that with fuch a judgment, as 
•* there be few in nomber in both the univerfides; 
** or elfewhere in England, that be comparable to 
** her majefty.'* 

Rollin recommends this mode ; and fo do many 
other very judicious mafters in the art of teaching. 
I have never feen it praftifed with perfeverance; but 
I fhould imagine, that it cannot fail of improving 
the ftyle: lam, however, rather partial toexercifes 
ivhich excite the powers of invention. ' 

«* A perfon," fays Mr. J. Clarke, '^ who was 
all his lifelong to an advanced age a fchoolmafter, 
affirmed, that it was impoJJihU to make a boy at 
fchool njorite Latin with any tolerable propriety*** 
It is certainly magna molts of us* 



C 91 J 



SECTION IX. 



off USING TRANSLATIONS. 

Cam hxc i^aviae fubiidia fimul et incitameom 
in promptu habeat^ parcius viribus ingenii utetar 
fui ; ntillam porro in re grammatica, nullam in 
kxicographis impendet caram ; opibus alienis ad- 
jatus nihil de Aio promet ; nihil demum martepro- 
prio iibi elaborandum tffc cenfebit : et velut in re- 
gione ignota hofpes inelegans ducem fecutos alir 
qoando faifum, faspe faliaceniy hue illdc texhere 
circumvagabitor. IFien the hoy has theft helps and 



ittiitements to idlenefs at hand^ he mjill make le/s u/e of 
bis own poFwers of underftanding. Henceforth he 'will 
not attend to the grammar or lexicon. Ajffifted by tha 
^wealth of others, he ivili hrin^ nothing from his owtt 
ftore* In a iwfrdy be avill thtnk it no longer neceffary 
that any thin^fhould he done by his o^wn perfonal exer^ 
tions ; and, like an inelegant fir anger in an unAno'wn 
country y fubmitting to be led by a blundering and 
treacherous guide y he ivillnAjander about tvithout kno*W' 
ing luhither he is going. Joannes Burton* 

IT may perhaps appear paradoxical to aflert, 
that many of the modes which have been 
devifed to facilitate the acquifition of learning, 
have contributed to retard it ♦. Yet there arc 

proofs 

* Pater ipfe— - 

Hand facilem eile viam voIuit~- 

Cur IS AC u ENS mortalia cord^ 

Nee torperc gravi pafius faa regna vETERNOi, 

ViRO. 



92 ON USINa TRANSLATIONS. 

proofs, and thofe very numerous too, which 
might be adduced to fupport the opinion ♦. 
There was, it will en all fides be confefled, a 
very fmaH number of auxiliary books at the re- 
vival of learning; but there were fcholars^ 
who, in the accuracy and extexkt of th«ir know- 
ledge in the ancient languages, have not been 
loqualled in any fubfequent pjcriod. The con- 
-quefts obtained in the regions of learning tt 

The father of mankind did not chu/e thai th* ^wy 
feeuld be eafy ; hut dejigned to Jharpen the *wie ofma^ 
iy cares ^ nor 'would be fuffer hisfubjeB nMorldPo gro^ 
forf id through Jlotb. ViRO* 

• ** As 1 deliver my thoughts,** feyi Goldfmitk, 

]*^ witkpat method or dDnnedion, fo the reader mdt 

^0ot be fufprifed to find me once more addreffing: 

fchoolmaflers on the prefent method of teaching 

'the learned languages, which it commonly hy li- 

TSUAL TRANSLATIONS. 

" I'woald aft fiich,if they Were to travel ajoar* 
ney, whether thofe parts of the road in which they 
found the grcatcfi , difficulties, would not be the 
tnoft ftrongly remembered ? Boys, who, if I may 
contint^e the allafion, gallop through one of the 
*antients with the aiHflance of a tranflation, can 
have but a very flight acquaintance either with the 
anthor or his language. It is hy the exercife of the 
mend ahne thai a lat^uage is learned % but a literal 
iTMiifauions on the of po£te page, leaves no exercife 
§^ the n^mory at all. The boy will not be at the 
&tigue of remembering, when his doubts are at 
once fatisfied by a glance of the eye ; whereas were 
every word to be fought from a didlionary, the- 
learner would attempt to remember it to fave him- 
Iclf the trouble of looking out for it for the futurc.'*^ 

Goldsmith. 

that 



ON USING TRANSLATIONS. 93 

that period, were obtained with difficulty ; but 
a degree of force was acquired and excrcifed in 
the conflict, which extended and fecured the 
fubjugated territory. 

In common life a remark has become obvi« 
ous, that the fortune which is bequeathed or 
acquired at an eafy rate, is more likely to be 
diffipated than the fruits of laborious induftry. 
It is the fame in learning. Ideas colle£led 
without any great effort, make but a flight im- 
preffion on the 'memory, or the imagination. 
The refieffion, that they may be recalled at 
pleafure, prevents any folicitude to preferve 
them. But the remembrance, that the degree 
of knowledge already acquired has coft us 
dearly, enhances its value, and excites every 
precaution to prevent it from being loft. I 
would compare the learning acquired by thi 
facilitating aids of modern invention, to the ve- 

iretables raifed in a hot-bed j which, whatever 
ize or beauty they may attain to in a flhort 
time, never acquire that firmnefs, and durable 
perfe£Uon, which is gradually collected by the 
flow procefs of unaffifted nature. 

For thefe reafons, and indeed from expe«p 
rience, I am led to difapprove thofe tranilations, 
which, in many fchools, are conftantly ufed» 
I believe that few caufes have contributed more 
to impede the fcholar's progrefs, than the ge- 
neral adoption of tranflations. The human 
mind is naturally indolent, and particularly fo 
at the early feafon at which education is com- 
menced. At all times it is averfe from unne- 
ceilary labour, and rejoices to facilitate the 
means of arriving at its end. When, there- 
fore. 



^4 ON USING TRANSLATIONS. 

fore, a tranilation is prefented to the eye on die 
fame page with the original *, it is not likely, 
that for the fake of a remote advantage, it 
{hould negleA prefent eafe ; that it fhoiild turn 
from the meaning- which is offered to its no* 
tice, and willingly purfue it in the mazes of a 
Lexicon. The boy learns to conftrue his lef- 
fon by the £ngli(h printed at its (Ide, and takes 
care to remember, it during half an hour, whea 
he win probably have faid it to his inftru£tor ; 
and after which he will let it flip away with- 
out relu£):ance, confcious that his collateral 
tranflatibn will enable him to go through the 
fame bufmefs on the morrow, without punifli-* 
ment, and without the pain of recollection. I 
hope it is not uncandid to fuppofe, that tranf- 
lations have often been ufed to fave the trouble, 
or conceal the ignorance, of the inftruiSlor. 

Inftances have occurred to me, as they muft 
to others, of boys who came froqn fchools where 
tranflations were ufed, and who have been ad- 
vanced to the higher claifics with tranflations ; 

• Mr. Phillips, author of ** A compendious 
Way, Sec.** fays, J£ forae of the claflxc authors were 

publifhed with INTERLINEARY TRANSLATIONS^it 

would be a great service done to the fu- 
BMC." I grant, that after a iludent has learned 
one language very accurately, he may ac- 
quaint himfelf superficially, in a (hort time, 
with others, by means of tranflations. Bat to 
BOYS, who always ufe them without judgment, they 
are certainly pernicious. Has the public receivea 
great fervice from interlineary or collateral tranfla- 
tions ? Are the languages better underflood than 
before they abounded ?" 

3 ^^^ 



ON USING TRANSLATIONS. 9} 

lut whO) without thofe affiftances, were totall/ 
ignorant of the rules of conftrudHon, and, in 
order to make any folid improvement, were 
compelled to begin at the very elements of the 
Latin language. If they have been fo unfor* 
tunate as not to ^ have been remoyed from the 
injudicious difcipline which allows tranflations, 
tiiey have generally deceived the expe<3ations of 
!their friends, and brought grammatical inftruc* 
tion into difrepute. The knowledge they have 

fained of the claflics has been little and fuper- 
cial ; feldom fufEcient to enable them to tafte 
the beaijties of the ancient authors, and never 
extenfive or profound enough to qualify them 
for profeffional eminence. When neither plea- 
fure nor advantage has been derived to them, 
it is not to be wondered at, if the unfucceflf- 
ful ftudents have condemned that ^laflical edu* 
cation in general, which they never rationally 
purfued* 

The exertion of mind neceflary in learning 
to conftrue a leflbn without a tranflation, is 
one of the moft defirable confequences derivable 
from the leflbn. A habit of attention is ac- 
quired by it ; conjectural ingenuity called forth ; 
a degree of penetration, and patience of lite- 
rary labour, a moft defirable acquifition, infen* 
fibly produced. Whatever difficulty it may be 
attended with, will be overcome b^ the boy 
who poflefles parts ; and he who poflefles none, 
will never make any valuable proficiency with 
or without thefe indulgent affiftances. He may 
indeed be allured by them to throw away his 
time, and reap nothing in return but difgrace. 

The 



96 ON USING TRANSLATIONS. 

, The ufc of tranflations is not, howtrer, 
deftimte of advooftes in its favour, Mr. 
Clarke, the author ojf the Introduction to mak- 
ing Latin, is a very warm one. I hope his 
zeal in their defence arofe from a more honour* 
ftble motive, than the wifli to promote the fale 
of thofe editions, with tranflations, of which 
he had pubKlhed a confiderable ntimber* It 
might arife from a fincere convi£Eion of their 
utility ; for Mr. Clarke was one of the firft , 
who recommended their general ufe; and die 
introducer of an innovation is commonly tn^- 
thufiaftic in his recommendation of it. .Hiis 
arguments, though urged with vehemence, carry 
little intrinfic weight with them, and are abun^ 
dandy refuted by experience. 

I believe it will not be controverted, diait 
good Greek fcholars have feldom been fo' nu- 
merous as good Latinifts. What (ball we af- 
fign as the caufe ? Greek is not more difficult 
in its elements than Latin. Its authors are 
equally, perhaps more inviting. It is ufually 
entered on at a lefs puerile age than Ladn, at 
an age when the underftanding has acquired 
ftrength enough to overcome any grammatical 
•difficulty. Nothing has impeded the equal ad- 
vancement of Greek ftudies, of late at leaft, 
but the univerfal praftice of publifliinff all 
Greek books with a Latin tranflation*. Some 

candid 

• ** The ftudy of the original text can never be 
fufficiendy recommended. It is the Ihorteft, fareft, 
and mod agreeable way to all forts of learning. 
Draw from the fpring head, and take not things at < 

fecond- 



ON UStNG TRANSLATIONS. 97 

candid editors have been fenfible of this truth, 
and have often added tranflations with apparent 

-Tecond-hand. Let the writings of the great maf- 
ters be never laid afide : dwell apoii them, fettle 
them in your raind, and cite them upon occafion ; 
make it your bufinefs thoroughly to underftand 
them in their full extent, and in all their circum- 
ftanccs : acquaint yourfelves fully with the princi- 
ples of original authors: bring them to a confift- 
«ncy, and then do you yourfelf make your deduc- 
tions. In this Hate were the firfl commentators ; 
and do not you reft until you bring yourfelf to the 
fame. Content not yourfelf with thofe borrowed 
lights ; nor guide yourfelf by their views, but 
where your own fails you, and leaves you in the 
dark. Their explications are not yours, and will 
give you the flip. On the contrary, your own ob- 
fervations are the produd of your own mind ; where 
they will abide, and be ready at hand upon all 
occafions, in converfe, confultation, and difpute. 
Tjofe not the plcafure it is to fee that you were not 
ilopped in your reading, but by difficulties that are 
invincible, where the commentators and fcholiafts 
themfelves are at a ftand, and have nothing to fay ; 
thofe copious expofitors of other places, who, with 
a vain and pompous overflow of learning, poured 
out on paflages plain and eafy in themfelves, are 
very free of their words and pains where there is no 
need. Convince yourfelf fully by thus ordering 
your ftudies, that it is nothing but men's lazinefs, 
which hath encouraged peda itry to cram, rather 
than enrich libraries, and to bury good authors 
under heaps of notes and commentaries ; and you 
will perceive that floth hath afted, in this inftance, 
againft itfelf and its own interert, by multiplying 
reading and enquiries, arid encreafmg the pains it 
endeavoured to avoid. " B r u y e r e . 

F regret. 



98 ON USING TRANSLATIONS. 

regret. Their convidion has been over-ruled 
by a fpecies of argument very forcible on thcsfc 
occafions, and which I fhall name the Biblio- 
poll an. The bookfeller has urged with great 
truth, that without concomitant tranflations, 
Greek books have ceafed to be a faleable com- 
modity. When Greek fcholars were fcarce in 
Europe, a few tranflations contributed to faci- 
litate the introdu£tion of the language : this 
expediency introduced the cuftom, which is 
not likely to be abolifhed, though it is moft 
inimical to Grecian literature, and,, for that 
reafon, to the prevalence of a good tafte. The 
Greek poets, as well as the philofophers and 
hiftorians, have been read and criticifed by thofe 
who could only read them in the lanie ftyle of 
a literal tranflation, who acquiefced in fo wretch- 
ed a fubftitute for the original, but who pro- 
bably would have ftudied the Greek, and un- 
derftood it, had they not been led aftray in their 
youth by that powerful incitement to indolence^ 
a collateral tranflation *• 

To 

* Omnibus \errionibus de lingua Graecain La- 
tinam, de ucrav'i:> in vernaculas, quibus hanc cum 
dodlorum incredibilem paucitatem, turn ienil-doc- 
torum et fciolorum multitudinem pra:cipue, di fal- 
lor, debemus, capi talis hoilis fum, et hunc ridicu* 
lum morem adjungendi libris Grxcis Latinas inter- 
pretationes Gf«carum literarum labem et perni« 

ciem extitifle femper cxiftimaverim 

Compendii Bibliopola? habenda ratio erat; qui 
contirmavit, Grzcum codicem, incomitatum ver- 
i\ox\e Latina, omnium malorum mercimoniorum 
long^ indivendibilifiimuin ; quare fe magnopere 

mihi 



ON USING TRANSLATIONS. 99 

To the ufe of tranflatlons, and to the vari- 
ous modes of facilitating puerile fiudies, I may 
venture to attribute the decline of folid learn- 
ing, and of that juft tafte which the antient 
models tended to edablifh *« Together with 

fliihi auflorem fupplicemque e^e, ut peftiferum il-* 
lad confiliom abjicianiy &c. To mil tranflations 
from -Gretk into Latin, from either into Englijh^ ti 
njuhich I think iM ewe t/je tuonderful paucity of the 
trulj learned, and the multitude of the half learned ^nd 
^fciolifit, 1 am a declared enemy ; and I have always 
ieen of opinion, that this ridiculous praSlice of adding 
Latin tranflations to Greek booh, is the difgrace and 
deftruQion of Grecian literatttre. , . . Butlnvasob-^ 
iiged to ba*ve a regard to the bookfeller* s profit ; <iuh9 
tiffuredme, that a Gr^ek book^ ^without a Latin tranf* 
iation, nvas of all bad commodities by far the moft un* 
faltable ; for ivbicb reafon he moft earneftly begged 
and prayed mt to lay ajide that ruinous intention ^ as hi 
called it. 

Thxrlbaus In Pncfat. ad Juflin. Mart. 

• " Should we ever, by idle prejudices again ft 
pedantry, verba! accuracies, and we know not what, 
come to flight their art (the critics art), and rcjcft 
them from our favour, it is well if we do not alio 
flight thofe claffics, with whom criticifm converfes, 
becoming content to read them in translations, 
or (what is dill worfe) in tranflations of tranflations, 
or (what is worfe even than thr.t) not to rfad 
THEM AT all; and I Will be bold toafltrt, if that 
fhould ever happen, we fliall fpeedily return into 
thofe days of darknefs, ovt of which we happily 
emerged upon the revival of aniient lite a- 
TUR£." Harris. 

F 2 tranflations, 



too ON USING TRANSLATIONS. 

tranflations., I wi(h: it were pofliUe to baniih 
Ithofe editions in which the order of conftruc-> 
tion is given on the fame page with the text^ 
I am convinced, that to the order alone the 
boy's attention is ufually given ; and that cob« 
fequently all the beauty of an elegant difpofltion 
of words, one of the moft fl-riking in die claC- 
fics, muft pafs unnoticed^ It tends alio to en- 
ervate the mind, by rendering exertion unne- 
ceflary. The moft unexceptionable method of 
rendering the clafScs eafy to the younger fcho- 
lars, is to fubjoin, as Is fometimes pra£tifed, 
a vocabulary at the end of the volume. Even 
the interpretation in the editions in Ufum Del- 
phini, which are univerfally ufed, tends. in my 
ppinion to corrupt the ftyle, and to vitiate the 
tafte, by drawing off the attention from the ele- 
gant language of a Virgil, to the bad Latin of 
a modern commentator. 

The younjg ftudent cannot too early be 
taught to exert his own powers, and to place a 
xnodeft confidence in their operation. This 
will increafe their native vigour, and give him 
Jpirit to extend them as far as they will go on 
every proper emergency. Accuftomed to de- 
pend upon himfelf, he will acquire a degree of 
courage necelVary to call forth that merit which 
is often diminiftied in value to its diffident pof- 
feflbr, and totally loft to mankind. The little 
fuperficial learning of him who has been .ufed 
to the facilitating inventions, may be compared 
to a temporary edifice, built for a day ; while 
the hard-earned* knowledge of the other may be 
iaid to refemble a building, whofe foundations 

arc 



ON USING TRANSLATIONS. ibi 

are deep and (Irong, and equally to be admired 
for dignity and duration *• 

* Mr. Clarke's Diflertation on the Ufefulncfs of 
Trandations, affixed to his IntroduSlicn (a book de- 
servedly and, generally received), has probably in- 
duced many to ufe Tranllationi; yet it appears, 
that maikrs in his time difapproved the practice ; 
•• for, fays he, it is amazing, after fo much has 
been (aid on the fubje^, that a great many Mafiers 
fliould (hew fo flrong an aver (ion for what is fo ma- 
nifeflly calculated for their eafe. ..... In order 

ro open the eyes of fuch, if poilible, upon a matter 
fo much for their quiet, intercfl, and credit, I have 
thought fit to prefent them with this DifrertatioA 
gratis.^^ I cannot compliment Mr. Clarke on his 
diiintereflednefs, when 1 fee, on a fubfequent pare, 
an advertifement of nine fchool books with tran na- 
tions, all by the late Mr. C. of Hull.-*I will here ad^ 
vife all who have refolved to have their idlenefs en^ 
couraged, and their hopes of improvement raifed» 
by iMfirical promifes and pretentions, to (hut my 
book* I will fay, in the words of Dr. Felton, ** £ 
do not mind what fome Quacks in the art of 
teaching fay ; they pretend to work wonders, ^nd 
to make young gentlemen mafiers of the languages, 
before they can be mafiers of common fenfe." Let 
this be laid down as an axiom, that great ivr> 

FKOVEMENT IS A WORK OP LONG T1M£ AND 
GftEAT LABOUR. 

Nothing great is done on a judden, A R R i A jx\ 



F cj 



[ 102 ] 



SECTION X- 



ON LEARNING THE CLASSICS BY HEART* 



Pucri, qaorum tenaciffima memoria eft, <yTAK- 
PLURiMA "EOISCANT. Let boys^fiftce thtir mtmmy 
is ufuiiUy 'very tenacious , learn by heart as much as 
pojfible, QuI^TILIAN• 



IT is agreed on all hands, that no faculty of 
the mind is capable of more iinpfx)vement 
than the memory, and none more in danger of 
decay by difufe. Every pradlice which tends 
to ftrengthen it, (botild be encouraged and C(mi- 
tinued ; and it is therefore a very judicious inftt- 
tution in our grammar -fchools, obferved from 
the earlieft times, which obh'ges the fcholars to 
commit large portions of the beft claiScs to 
memory- 

I am forry to obferve, that in private educa- 
tion, and in fome fchools, this talk is often 
neg]c(5led as too laborious. The decay of claf- 
fical knowledge, if it is decayed, muft in a 
great meafure be attributed to this caufe. The 
jieglecl, indeed, originates from the general re- 
laxation of difcipline, y<?hich pervades all orders 
in fome degree, and which militates againft- 
learning no lefs than again ft virtue. 

That 



ON L E A R N I N G, &c. 105 

That the talk is laborious, is no valid ob- 
jeftron *. Labour ftrengtheiis the mind* What? 
is acquired by labour will not eafily be loft. 
The imprcflion it makes is deep and lafting^ 
But, in truth, it is not fo laborious a ta(k to 
a boy t as it may appear to a parent, or to any 
other adult, who has had neither experience 
nor obfervation in this department. The boy 
who has been habituated to the talk X^ will 
learn thirty or forty lines, as an evening exer- 
cife, with great eafe, and with apparent plea- 
furc. This is really done three or four nights 
in a week, in our beft fchools. 

Even thofe among boys who apprehend 
quickly, are feldom difpofed to refleS much on 
.what they have read, to review the fentiments 
.and the language with attention, or to fix them 
deeply in their memory. They read a beau- 
tiful paflage, they underftand it ; they admire, 
and feel its beauties ; but if they do not ftudi- 
ouily commit it to memory, it pafles over their 
minds as a (hadow over the earth, and leaves 
no trace behind. 

There arc many paflages in the claffics which 
a polite fcholar is expected to have by heart as 
perfefily as his alphabet. They naturally ob- 

* Chi bene mal non puo fufFrir, a grand honor 
non puovenir. He ivbo cannot fubmit wjellto e^ils 
cannot arri've at great hcncur. Ital. Adag. 

f Neque ullaa^tas minus fatigatur. There is 710 
time of life -which is hfs eajtly fatigued, Qu int. 

X bee the Seftions on Praclice on Habits, in 
Locke's Conduct of the Underftar:ding ; a far bet- 
ter book, in my opinion, than his Thoughts on 
Lducacion. 

F 4 trud« 



I04 ON LEARNING THE 

trude themfelves in eonverfation with fcholars^ , 
they occur on almoft every fubjeit, and they 
are in themfelves well worthy of being trea* 
fured in the mind for their inlrinfie value.- Ta 
quote paOkges from authors, is perhaps un-^ 
fafhionablc in thofe circles, where a fmooth in- 
iipidity of nianners precludes every thing whicfai 
requires an exertion of memory,^ or of iroagi^ 
nation ; but among perfons of the profeffionSj, 
and of a truly liberal education^ it is both com- 
mon and agreeable *, 

Exercifes in Latin verfc> and in Latin profe^ 
are ufual in our bcft fchools, and at the. univer-« 
11 ty. They are attended with very deilrable 
cfteds, and pave the way for improvement iu 
every kind of vernacular compofitioii* Sup^ 
pofing, for a moment, that they have no in-* 
Huenc6 in elevating and refining the tafte aii4 
itnagination ; yet to be totally deficiMit ii^ 
them, is, in fome degree, a difgrace to thole whp 
are deftined to fupport a literary chara^r^ 
But in order to excel in Latin compofition^ 
poetical or profaic, a great number of words 
and phrafes muft be colledled and laid up in 
the ftorehoufe of the memory. To effeft thif 

* " But to learn whole eclogues and odes by 
heart, is to no other purpofe than to forget theni as 
foon as learned ; or to provide matter for ridicule or 
pedantry, in all mixed companies^'* 

Phili5ps*s Compendious Way'. 

Thefe authors of Compendious Ways bring to 
the mind a homely, but, at the fame time, a true 
proverb ; The longell way about is the Ihortefi: way 
home. Fia trita, liia iuta, 

purpofcj^ 



CLASSICS BY HEART. lo; 

purpofe, it will riot be enough to read the claf- 
ficsj; they muft be committed to memory at' 
that age which eafily admits," and long retains, 
all impreifions which have been once properly- 
enforced. ; 
I know of' nothing advanced againft thij 
eftabliihed praSicej which ought to have 
weight*. It is common to declaim againft 
loading the memory. But what (hall be done f 
The memory of boys in general is abundantly 
capacious. If it is not filled with valuable fur- 
niture, it will be crowded with lumber. It 
will be the repofitory of trifles, of vanities, 
and perhaps of vices. How much more de- 
firable, that it Ihould be ftored with fine fenti- 
ments, and beautiful diftion, feleded from the 
nobleft writers whom the world ever produced ! 
Honour, fpirit, liberality, will be acquired, by 
committing to memory the thoughts and words 
of heroes, and of worthies, who eminently 
ihone in every fpecles of excellence. Its ef- 
fefls in polifhing and refining the tafte, are too 
obvious to be called in quell ion. 7'here are 
abundant inftanccs, living as well as dead, of 
its peculiar influence in embellifhing the mind, 
and giving it a gracefulnefs which no other or- 
naments can fupply. 

♦ " Emilius," fays RoafTeau, * fhall learn no- 
ticing by heart, no not even fables, not even thofe 
of La Fontaine." Can Rouflean, or his admirers, 
afiign a fatisfaflory reafon for this prohibition ^ 
The world fecms pretty well convinced by this time 
that Rouflcaa was a madman. 

F 5 • As 



•o6 ON LEARNING tHiS 

As Toon, therefore, as the grammar is per-- 
fc&\j learned by heart, I advife, that the prac^ 
ticc of our. ancient fchools fhould be univer- 
£illy adopted, and that pallages of the beft 
claflics, conArued as a leflbn on the day, (hould 
be given as a ta(k to be learned tnemoritir at 
night. Habit will render it no lefs eafy than it 
is beneficial *. 

* I will cite a fpecimen of the ancient fcholaftic 
difcipline in France, in which ic appears, that great 
attention was paid to learning the claffics by heart. 
Henry de Mefmes fays of hinjfelf, " At fchool I 
learned to repeat; . . . fo that when I went froia 
thence I repeated in public a great deal of Latin, 
and two thoufand Greek verfes, made according to 
vay years, and ccuid repeat Homer by heart from omt. 
end to the other, ► . . We rofe at four, and, having 
faid our prayers, began our ftudies at five, with our 
great books under our arms, and our inkhorns and 
candlellicks in our hands. For diverfion after din* 
ner, we r^ad Sophocles, Euripides, Demcfthenes, 
&:." RoLLrN. 

This Henry de Mefmes exhibited, in his life, 
thofe noble and generous fentiments, which a fuc- 
cefsful ftudy of the fine writers of Greece 'and Rome 
. ufaally infpires. He refufed a lucrative place offer- 
ed him by the King, that he might not fupplant a. 
perfon againfl whom the King had conceived an 
unjuft difpleafure, 

Rollin, from whom the above example of de 
Mefmes is taken, may be juftly called the Quinti- 
lian of France. I will recommend his Belles Let- 
tres, as a work well calculated to fill the young 
mind with virtuous fentiments, and at the fame 
time to inrfpire a love of learning and a clafficab 
talle. There is indeed much which might be 
<^mitted as ufelefs to an EngliQi fchoolboy \ fuch as 

thofc 



CLASSICS BY HEART. 1-07 

thofe parts which comrern the French 'univerfities, 
and are addre/led rather to mailers than to fcholars. 
A feledion might be made from the very copious 
aflembi age of matter, which, though it might not 
amoant to more than half the quantity of the pre- 
fent work, would form a very defirablc abridgment 
for the life of cla£ical fchools. Rollings Belles Let- 
tres were put into my hands at a very early age, ai^d 
I have al^ys thought myfelf greatly indebted to 
them. 



F 6 



[ ro«f I 
SECTION XL 

ON IMPROVING THE MEMORY^ 



fnfmory keflo'ws the am, hut if is not itfelf to be learn^ 
e J By art. Philostratus. 

TH E great and obvious utility of the me- 
mory has urged the ingenious to devife' 
artificial modes of increafing its power of re- 
tention. The great orator of Rome, whofe: 
judgment and experience, as well as his genius, 
give great weight to hi« opinions on didaflic 
fubjeSs, has fpoken rather favourably of the 
memoria technica^ or artificial memory. Bur, 
iiotwithftanding the authority of him, and of 
other trui^y ingenious writers, the art is rather 
to be confidered as a curious than an ufeful con- 
trivance, and it is rejefted by Quintilian, Few 
have really availed themfelves of it ; and many 
who have attempted to acquire it, have only 
added to the obfcurity of their conceptions. 

That mode of improvement^ then, may be 
totally laid afide, and may be numbered among 
the fanciful inventions, which ferve to amufe 
the idle and the fpeculative, without being re- 
ducible to general and practical utility. The 
only infaUible method of augmenting its powers, 
is frequent, regular and well*dire<Sled exercife \ 

fuch 



GN IMPROVING THE MEMORY. 109 

fuch cxercife, indeed, as it is commonly led ta 
life in the claffical fchools, where a night fddoiir 
pafles without a tafk appointed for the exercife 
of the memory. 

In order to improve the memory. It is ne- 
ceflary to acquire a confidence in it. Many 
render it treacherous by fearing to truft it; and. 
a pradJice has arifen from this fear, really in- 
juriouSy though apparently ufeful. It is the 
praftice of committing to writing every thing 
which the ftudent remarks and defires to re- 
member. Nothing is more common^ and no- 
thing more efFe<ftuaIIy fruftratcs the purpofe it 
means to promote *. It is better that many 
things (hould be loft, than retained in. the tabfe- 
book, without confiding in the memory. Like 
a generojas friend, the memory will repay habi- 
tual confidence with fidelity. 

There are injudicious and illiterate perfons^ 
who confider the cultivation of the memory as 
the firfl objeft in education. They think it is 
to be loaded with hiftorical minutiae, and with 
chronological dates. They entertain a mean 

• Ilia, qua; fcriptis repofuimus, velut coftodire 
deiinimus, et ipsa fecuritate dimittimus. Thofi 
things nuhich nue ha^e once committed to 'writings <wa 
ceafe^ as it luere^ to guard, and nue lofe them by 
thinking them in no danger of being loft. 

QuiNTILIAN* 
Mi7'ir>J ^ ^tXaxD TO MH TPAO^IN, aA\ iJrptarScwctr* 
uv yoL^ 10 Ta ypocpii'a /xij cvx. h^■rr^3'LT7■ 7he fureft me-* 
tbod of keeping nxihat ive twijh to retain is, not to 
COMMIT IT TO WRITING, but to truft it to theme'* 
mory ;- for it is fcarcely pojjible that 'written memo^ 
randa JhQuld pot ftip from thi^ mind. Plato* 

opinion 



lie ON IMPROVING THE MEVrORY^ 

opinion of the fcholar, who cannot recite mat*' 
ters of fad, however trivial, and fpecify the 
yeaf of an event, however doubtful or infigni- 
m«nt. They expe£l to have the chapter and 
verfe mentioned on every citation, and arc more 
pleafed with that little accuracy, than with a 
iuft recollection of a beautiful paflage, or a 
nriking fentiment. But to labour to remem* 
ber unideal dates and uniliterefting tranfa£lions, 
muft ever be an irkfome ftudy to a lively ge- 
nius ; and he who fhall train young perfons in 
this laborious track, will give them a difguft 
for literature. It is to feed them with the 
hufks of learning, which, as they are both dry 
and hard, afford neither pleafure nor nourifh- 
ment. Let the reading be pleafant and ftrik- 
ing, and the memory will grafp and retain all 
that is fufficient for the purpofes of valuable im- 
provements 

There is one circumftance which has had an 
unfavourable influence on afpiring at the ex- 
cellence of a retentive memory. An idea has 
prevailed, that memory and genius are feldom 
united. To be poflefled of memory, in a great 
degree, has led fome to conclude, that genius 
was deficient ; and all pretenfions to memory 
have been readily facrificed for the credit of 
pofleflJng genius. Pope's famous linef, in which 
he fays, that the beams of a warm imagina- 
tion diflblve the impreffions on the memory, 
feem to have induced thofe who wiihed to be 
thought to poflefs a fine imagination, to ne- 
gleft tKeir memory, in order to poflefs one 
fymptom of a fine imagination. But I believe 
the remark of the inconfiftency of great genius 

and 



ON IMPROVING THE MEM RY. in 

and great memory, is not univerfally true* 
There are inftances, among the living, as well 
as the deady which prove fomethlng againft its 
.univerfality. It is, however, often true ; and 
Pope's* opinion is authorifed by Ariftotle*.. 

it cannot be denied3 that nature has made 
a difference in difpenfing the power of retafn- 
ing ideas. If we may believe fomc accounts^ 
{he has fometimes formed prodigfes in this fpe- 
cies of excellence; Muret relates, that he le- 
ciied words to the number of thirty-fix thou- 
fand^ fome of them without meaning, to a 

Jfoung man, who repeated them all immediate- 
y, from the beginning to the end, and from the 
end to the beginning, in the fame order, with- 
out a moment*s hefitation, or a fmgle miftake. 
Miraculous^ and even incredible, as this may 
appear, Muret tells us f, there were innumerable 
witneflTes to the truth of the fa<3, and mentions 
many names of refpeftable perfons who were 
prefent at the repetition. Many other inflances 
might be fele£led from authors of allowed ve- 
racity ; but they are fo different from that 
which falls within the experience of mankind 
in genera], as fcarceJy to gain credit. If they 
are true, they aiFord encouraging motives for 
the cultivation of a faculty, which has fometimes 

IVft TO tPO^V fAHnfMtHUiTS^l /Xfl* Oi SpOl^U^f OUtXfJLVymXuTlf 01 

it M Ta;^iK «J loxaSfK. Ferfons of a good and of a bad 
memory are not of the fame fort of intelleSi ; but for the 
moft fart tbt slow are of a good^ and the quick and 
afprebenfi*ue of a bad memory . A R i s T o T. 

t la his Faria Ledioues. 

been 



ri2 ON IMPROVING THE MEMORY. 

been advanced to fo 'high a degree of perfec- 
tion ♦. 

In giving great attention to the cultivation 
of the memory, there is danger left it fhould 
be overladen with minute obje6ls ; a circum- 
stance highly injurious, efpecially in the courfe 
ef education. Let it therefore be confidered, 
that a good memory f, according to a fimili- 

tude 

• Qmntilian, after mentioning fbme extrordi- 
Bary ioltances of memory, concludes with this judi- 
cious remark ; Dicebantur etiam effe^ nunc qui face- 
cent, fed mihi nunquam ut ipfe intereflem contigit; 
habenda tamen fides efl vel in hoc, ut qui credide- 
rit, et fperct, i/ is Jaid there are/ome 'who can do fa 
noiv y but I ne'ver ha*ve happened to meet 'with them ; 
Qjte *would, ho-we'ver, belienje it, if it 'were only for this 
reafon, that he nvho believes that fuch things have been, 
may hope that they may be again. Qu i n t i L i a n . 

•f Some perfons feem to think, that a good me- 
mory confifls in retaining dates and minute parti- 
culars ; but I believe, that, though a reader re- 
members but few dates and few minute particulars* 
^e may yet retain all the neceffiry general ideas and 
valuable concluftons. He will fee a wide and beau- 
tiful arrangement of important objedls ; while ano- 
ther, who (loops to pick up and preferve every trifle, 
will have his eyes conflantly fixed on the ground. 
It is not enough that the mind can reproduce juft 
what it has received from reading, and no n ore ; it 
muft reproduce it digefted, altered, improved, and 
refined, Reading, like fc|od, mull fhew its efFefts 
in promoting ^ri?xu//&; fince, according to a flriking- 
remark of EpiAetus, t« wp^ola, op ;^op1c» (piVovIa, 

i-o^rjy "El^n nEH'ANT/ ,*'£PIA :'|a; (pi^oi. Kj FA AA. Shtef 

do not fiovj the Jhepherd hovj much they have eaten, 

h 



ON IMPROVING THE MEMORY. 113 

tude of Erafmus, refembles a net fo made as to 
confine all the great fifli, but to let the little 
ones efcape ♦. 

by producing the grafs it/elf; But after they ha*ve ift" 
njoardly digefied the pafiure, they produce outivardlj^ 
ivool and milk. Epictetus, 

Apes debcmus imitari, qu^e vagantur ct floras ad 
IT el faciendum idoneos carpunt : et quse coUegerunt,. 
in hunc faporem mixtura quadam et preprietate fpi- 
rittts fui mutant. • . • nofque has apes debemus 
imitari et qusecunque ex diversa ledlione congefCmus^ 
feparare. Deinde adhibita ingenii noilri cura et 
facultate, in unum faporem varia ilia libamenta 
confondere : ut, etiam £ apparuerit unde famptum 
iity aHud taxnen eile, quam» unde fumptum eft^ 
appareat. Seneca^. 

* " It muft be owned, that the memories of fome 
are fo treacherous, and» if I may be allowed the ex- 
preffioiu fo open on all fides, as to let e very .thiny 
confided to them run through. Plenus rimarum' 
fum : hac atque iliac perfluo. I am full of chinks : 
J leak on this fide and on that ^ as Terence fays. — But 
this defed may often proceed from negligence. 
Their end in reading is only to fatisfy prefent cii- 
riofity. They endeavour rather to read much thaix 
to advantage (multa, non mult^m). They hurry on^ 
and ^re continually defiring something new. 
And it is by no means wonderful that thofe objedtr 
multiplied ad infinitum^ upon which they fcarcely 
allow themfelvestime enough to look> ihould maki^ 
but a flight impreifion, and be effaced in a moment. 
To remedy this inconvenience, they fliould not read 
fo faft ; they fhould often repeat the fame thing, 
and give an account of it to themfelves ; and by 
this exercife though troublefome and difagreeable 
at firft ; they would arrive, if not at the perfeft re-, 
membrance of ail they read, at lead at the retentioa 
of thegreateftand moil effential part of it." 

Roll IN. 



[ "4 ] 
SECTION XII. 



ON LEARNING GREEK, AND ON THE 
INTRODUCTORY BOOKS. 



Piimutn igituriftis-Graecae Imgaae oforibus itare- 
fponfoin volo, oronem elegantem dodrinam, om- 
nem cognitionem dignam hominis ingenui ftudio, 
nno verbo, quicauid ufquam cR politiorum difcipli- 
narum nullis aliis qaam Gnecorom libris ac literiaT 
contineri. In thefirftplacey I tvouU inform the gentle^ 
men ivho ben conceived a fijlike to Greeks that aUeUr^ 
rant learnings all inotvledge 'worthy the fur/uit of a 
liberal man y in a ^word^ lohateifer there is of the pouter 
parts of literature f is contained in no other hooks tham 
thofe of the Greeks. MtntETus. 



% 



TT is not furprffing that perfons, who have 
not partaken of a liberal education, (hould 
have no juft idea of its extent and value. 
Writing, arithmetic, a little French, and a 
good deal of dancing, with a very fmall portion 
of the firflr elements of Latin, to enable the boy 
to fay that he once learned Latin, are deemed 
quite fufficient, by the rich lower orders, to form 
the literary attainments of a gentleman. 

With refpeft to Greek, it is often thought " 
totally fuperfluous. Indeed, the vulgar idea of 
Greek comprehends in it all that is dull, diffi* 
cult, horrid,^ uncouth,, ufelefs,, and pedantic. 

I« 



ON LEARNING GREEK, &c, 115 

In confequence of this ignorance, and thefe 
prejudices, we find the fqps of opulent parents, 
whofe circumftances would enable them to liVe 
a life of literary leifure, rendered incapable of 
it, by having been kept in their youth from 
the knowledge of a language moft beautiful in 
jtfelf, and the fource of all that is elegant and 
ingenious. 

I grant, that a fuperficial knowledge of Greek, 
like a fuperficial knowledge of Latin, or of 
other l^guages, is of little value. But why 
muft the knowledge of it, which a boy is to ac- 
quire, be fuperficial ? Evidently from the tri- 
fling notions of the age, the ignorance of the 
parent, and his falfe ideas and prepofleffions. 
.The natural faculties of boys are as good now, 
as in times when Grecian literature was more 
generally and fuccefsfully cultivated. 

I will venture to affirm, that a knowledge of 
the Greek will contribute greatly to adorn the 
gentleman, while it is eilential in a fcholar. It 
will lead him to the fountain-head. It will en- 
able him to judge of compofition with taile. It 
will point out to him, with precifion, the mean- 
ing of many words in the Englifh language, 
which are daily ufed, and of far the greater 
number of technical terms in every art and fci- 
ence.. The Greek authors are indeed fo cele- 
brated, and have been fo univerfally read, that 
one would think no man of letters, who poflefTes 
fenfe and fpirit, would voluntarily forego the 
perufal of them. Homer, we all know, has al- 
ways kept his place as the nobleft writer whom 
the world ever produced. They who think they 
fhall difcover his tranfcendent excellence in any 
tranflation, are greatly miftaken. 

I am 



irfr ON LEARNING GREEK, &c. 

I am Aire, an acquaintance with the Greek 
poets and philofophers * would be highly fa- 
vourable to the prevalence of good fenfe and- 
liberal fentiments, as well as of good tafte* 
But I know how readily ignorance, indolence^ 
and prejudice will oppofe my doftrine. The 
prefent age is difpofed to purfue compendious 
methods of education, which terminate in ex- 
ternal and (ballow attainments. And unlefs a 
timely check is given, the next age will be led 
to negle£l folid improvements ftill more thaa 
the prefent ; for as folid improvements become 
lefs generally underftood, they will be lefs ge* 
nerally efleemed f. 

With 

• ** The Grecian commonwealths, while they 
maintained their liberty, were the moft heroic con^ 
fcderacy that ever cxifted. They were the politef^» 
the bravcft, and the wifcft of men. In the (hort 
fpace of little more than a century, they became 
fuch f^atefmen, warriors,, orator^, hiftorian*, phyfr- 
eians, poets, critics, painters, fculptors, architedls*, 
and, laft of all,, philofophers, that one can hardly 
help confidering that goldbk period, as a pro- 
vidential event in honour of human nature, to Ihew 
to what perfcdlion the fpecies might afcend. 

** Now the language of thefe Greeks was truly 
like themfelves, it was conformable to their tran- 
fcendentand univerfal genius.*' Hermfs. 

t I am informed, that, on the continent, the 
Greek language is not generally underftood, even 
by thofe who write and afTime the dignity of didla- 
tors in literature and morality. We fee, in confe- 
quence of the negled of this, and of other folid. 
learning, falfe taile, falfc philofophy, and infamous 
morals. 

Voltaire 



ON LEARNING GREEK, Sec. 117 

With refpeft to the beft method of attain- 
ing the knowledge of Greek, I own I am pre- 
poflefled in favour of that which already pre- 
vails in our capital fchools, the utility of which 
bas been already proved by repeated experience* 
The beft Grecians of our country have been 
trained in the eftablifhed manner, and at the an« 
cient grammar-fchools. 

Some innovators have, however, appeared in 
this department ; and they have wifllied, that 
Greek might be taught previoufly to Latin, 
Others have infifted that Greek grammars 
written in Latin are abfurd, as they tend to in- 
creafe the difficulty ; but this objedlion falls to 
the ground if Latin is firft acquired. * 

Thofe who wifli that Greek fhould be 
taught before Latin, are in fome degree autho- 
rifed in their opinion by the great Erafmus *. 
Though I have a great refpedt for the genius 
and judgment of Erafnius, I muft diffent from 
his opinion on this fubjedl. My reafon for 
infifting that Latin fhould be firft taught is, 
that Latin is indifputably more univerfally ufe- 
ful than Greek f 3 and that many who remain 

Voltaire appears to have been unqualified to form 
a found judgment of the antients. He was but 
fuperficially acquainted with their languages. 

* His argument derived from the opinion of 
Quintilian, whodiref^s his pupil to learn the Greek 
before Laiin, is fallacious, and not at all to the 
purpofe ; for Latin was the native language of 
Quintilian. 

t Ad ufum, Latina lingua potior eft: ad doc- 
trina; copiam Graeca. For common ufe Latin is pre* 
ferabU'y for the purfofes of extenjive karning, Greek* 

MURETUS, 

at 



ti8 ON LEARNING GREEK, 8cz. 

at fchool only to the age of thirteen or four- 
teen» are enabled to carry away with them a 
knowledge of Latin, which, though very fuper- 
ficial, may yet be ferviceable ; whereas, if Greek 
only had been taught them, they might indeed 
have made fome proficiency in it, but they 
would have been totally ignorant of Latin ; 
and I believe their Greek without Latin would 
be of little value. Every experienced fcholar 
will coincide with my fentiments on this fub- 
jed, and there is little danger that the prefent 
method fhould be reverfed in public^ though it 
may fometimes in private tuition. 

There arc various grammars, all ftrongly re- 
commended by their editors, as containing 
fomething fupcrior to all that preceded their 
publication. I prefer either the Eton, or that 
publifhed by Grant, and afterwards by Cam* 
den, for the ufe of Weftminfter fchool. Dr. 
Ward's edition of this is printed with a type 
and paper which greatly recommend it ; for a 
beautiful type in Greek books, intended for the 
ufe of fchools, IS found to be very advantage- 
ous. I feleft the Eton grammar for the fake of 
uniformity, and becaufe it has been long and' 
fuccefsfully ufed. Many matters prefer Holmes's 
Greek grammar to all others ; but though it 
has great merit, I fee no reafon for exploding 
thofe eftablifhed grammars, by the affiftance of 
which the bett fcholars of this nation arrived at 
their eminence. 

On firft going over the grammar, I would 
recommend an attention only to the principal 
pat*' '^ '^ An applicatipn to the minuter par- 

ticu ars^ 



ON LEARNING GREEK, Sec. 119 

ticulars ♦, on firft entering ort the ftudy of a 
language, certainly impedes the fcholar's pro- 
grefs. When the declenfions of the nouns and 
pronouns, and the formation of the verbs, are 
once learned, I advifo that the fcholar fhall be-> 
gin to read one of the chapters of St. John's • 
gofpel in the Greek Teftament, The Greek 
of this evangelift is remarkably eafy ; and I 
know of no book whatever fo well calculated 
to initiate a boy in the Greek language, as the. 
Greek Teftament. I do not fay, that the ftyle 
is the pureft and mod elegant ; but I think, at 
that early period, when Greek is read only to 
exemplify grammatical rules, purity and ele- 
gance are lefs required than perfpicuity. After, 
ten or twelve chapters (hall have been carefully 
read, 1 would let the ftudent begin St. Luke^ 
whole Greek is allowed to be better than St. 
John's. At this time, I fliould wifli the fcho- 
lar to begin his grammar again, and go through 
it with great accuracy. That which will now 
l>e read in it, will be perfeftly underftood, and 
its ufe fully afcertained. When the greater 
part of St Luke (halt have been read, and its 
grammatical conftruflion and its particular 
words analyfed, let the fcholar begin fome work 
of Xenophon, ftill repeating a portion of his 
grammar (every morning. This will foon pave 
the way to Demofthenes and Homer; and 

* Vulgo multa inferciunt grammaticx plane phi- 
lofopbica, quaeque a tenera state intelligi ne- 
queunt. They commonly infert many things in a gram^ 
mar tvhich are abfolutely philofipbical^ and *whicb 
caMMQt bi underftood at a tender age* V o s s i u s • 

when 



ix« ON LEARNING GREEK, 8cc. 

Vfhen thefe are once underftood, which I hxia-- 
gine, with diligence and good abilities, may be 
very Toon accomplifhed, the fchplar will be 
able of himfeliPto purfue his ftudies in the Greek 
^gu^g^ as far as he (hall chufe to proceed. 
And indeed I have no doubt, but that he will 
chufe to proceed as far as he can, if his lot in 
life allows him leifure. For the pleafure he 
will feel, when once he enters deeply into the - 
£ne authors of antient Greece, will lead him 
to prefer them to all others. He will then find, 
that the preference given to them by all pre- 
ceding ages, is not the efFeft of mere prejudice, 
as is fuppofed by the fuperficial ftudent in Greek, 
who has never read enough to enable him to 
tafte their excellence. 

Though my principal argument in recom- 
mending the ftudy of Greek, is derived from 
its native excellence, and from the opportunity 
it affords of enlarging and ennobling the hu- 
man mind, by laying open the writings of the 
Greek philofophers, poets, and hiftorians 5 yet 
it may not be improper to add, for the fake of 
thofe who feek profit from liberal iludies, ac- 
cording to the vulgar idea of the word profit, 
that the knowledge of the Greek greatly faci- 
liates the praftice of fome lucrative profeffions. 
I cannot underfland how it is poflible for a 
phyfician to acquit himfelf with tolerable cre- 
dit, unacquainted with Greek. Almofl all 
-the terms he ufes are Greek words, written in 
Roman characters, *. The fubordinate prac- 

• Graeco fbnte cadunt. 

ney fionjofram the GrtA fountain. Ho R . 

titioncr 



ON LlilARNmG GREEK, &c. m 

citioner in medicine would alfo find his employ* 
ment much eafier and pleafanter, and his cha- 
rafter more refpe£lable, if he were inftru6ted 
in the meaning of the words which he every 
day ufes, and vyrhich he cannot clearly and fully 
underftand, without knowing the language 
whence they are immediately, and without al- 
teration, tranfplanted*. 

Some late writers, however, who have cen^ 
fared the eftabliflied modes of education with 
all the freedom of dogmatical didation, have 
hinted, that Greek is utterly unneceflary. One 
of them in plain terms informs us, that it can 
be neither ufeful nor ornamental. He recom- 
mends it to all who are not to be divines or 
phyficians, ** not to wafte fo much time, as 
" even to learn the Greek alphabet f.*' Such 
a dodrine as this will often be well received, 
fince both ignorance and indolence will be ever 

♦ One may add, that the profeflbrs and fubor- 
dinate pradlitioners in the law alfo appear to 

treat advantage, when they have enjoyed the bene- 
tsof an education not nominally, but truly, liberal 
and learned. It would not then be faid, as Milton 
cxprefTes it, ** that they arc allured to the trade cf 
the law, grounding their purpofes not on the pru- 
dent and heavenly contemplation of JUSTICE and 

EQUITY, WHICH WAS NEVER TAUGHT THEM, but 

on the promifing and pleating thoughts of litigious 
terms, fat contentions, and flowing fees." 

MiLT0N*s Traftate. 

f Yet even RoufTeau confefles, that the under 

(landing is greatlyjim proved by learning languages ; 

fuppofing that they were not in then;fclves 

ulefbl. 

G readv 



122 ON LEARNING GREEK, &c. 

ready to vote in its favour. Add to this, that 
the attachment of many to fingularity, will 
lead them, to adopt almoft any new and plau- 
fible opinion, when advanced with confidence. 
But to the prevalence of fuch ill-grounded no- 
tions, we may attribute much of the levity 
and the fuperficial knowlege, which difgrace 
fome of thofe ranks among us, who ufed to be 
early initiated in the wiidom of the ancients, 
through the medium of the fine language of an- 
tient Athens, as well as antient Rome, 

The oppofers of the eftabliflied modes, and 
the enemies to Greek, have feldom been folid 
fcholars; and fome have ventured to fufpe<3, 
that they have been guilty of a common prac- 
tice, that of condemning what they do not un- 
derftand *. 

* Damnantquod non intelligunt. They condemn 
^tuhat they do not u?iderjiand. Qu intilian. 

In anfwer to the contemners of Greek, I will 
f gain cite a pafTage or two from a truly elegant mo- 
dern Latin writer. Aiunt Gra;cam Latinamque 
linguam jampridem MORTUAs efle. Ego vero eas 
nunc demum non tantum vivere et vigere con- 
tendo, fed firma valetudine uti, poflquam c{![t in 
potellate plebis defierunt.- Praidicere poiTumus, fi 
homines nollii paulo magis Gnecas literas negligere 
cceperint omnibus bonis artibus certiffimam peflem 
ct perniciem imminere. Hoc fi ifti aut vidcre per 
infcitiam non queunt, aut agnofcere propter in ve- 
teVatum in Graecos odium nolunt; perfiftant fane 
in fententia fua ; nobis ignofcant, fl quoin fludio 
plurimum operce pofuimus, ab eo non facile abdu- 
cimur ; fed et ejus dignitatem confervare nitimur, 
et quas ex eo utilitates percepifle nobis videmur, 
cas cum aliis communicare conamur.-^NecelTe eft 

in 



ON LEARNING GREEK, Sec. I2j 

in crafliOiina rerum ignoratione vcrfarl eos qui prje- 
siDio iNTERPRETtM freti Grxcac ac Latinae lin- 

fax lludia negligunt. ney tell us that Greek and 
atin are dead languages. But I maintain that thev 
are not only living, but that th^ are in high health 
uvw at laftt fence they ha've ceafed to be in the pouuer of 
the vulgar. ^^— I may <venture to prediSl, that if our 
countrymen Jhould go on a little longer in the ncgleSi of 
the Greei, inevitable deftru^ion a^waits all the 'valu- 
able arts. If they cannot fee this thorough ignorance , or 
nvill not ackno-wledge it through prejudice againji the 
Grecians t truly let them perfeft in their opinion ; but let 
them pardon us, ifave refufe to relinquijh ajiudy ton.vhich 
«we have applied, ifi^e endea^vourto preferve its dignity ^ 
and to communicate thofe advantages to others^ vjhich 
vue think owrfelves have derived from it. They tnufl 
he grofsly ignorant ^ vjho negleSl Latin and Greeks rely- 
ing on the ajjijlnnce of tranjlators. M u r e t u s , 
If any are flill of opinion, that the learning of 
Greek is too heavy a burthen for thofe boys who 
are born to a fortune, and to whom it is ncJt necef- 
fary as aprofeflional accomplifliment, let them con- 
fider, that many ladies have learned Greek for the 
pleafure of it. Let them recoiled the names of 
Mrs. Carter, Madame Dacier, Lady Jane Grey, 
and many other living and dead. ..." I found 
her," (Lady Jane Grey) fays Afcham, " in her 
chamber, readinge Phadon Platonisin Greeke, and 
that with as much delite, as fome jentlemen would 
reade a merie tale in Boccace. ... I aflced her 
why (he would leefe fuch paftimc in the parke V^ 
Smiling, (he anfwered me, ** I wifTe all their fport 
«* in the parke is but a (hadoe to that pleafure that 
** I find in Plato. Alas I good folke, they never 
" felt what trewe pleafure ment. . . . My booke 
«* hath bcene fo much pleafure, and bringeth daily 
** to me more pleafure and more, that, in refped of 
*• it, all other pleafures, in very deede, be but 
'* trifles and troubles unto me/' To the boys or 
G % mt » 



124 ON LEARNING GREEK, Sec. 

men who are afraid to enter on fuch fludies, we 
might fay, to fhame them, O verc Phrygise, neque 
enim Phryges ! Oye Kwhoare truly Trojan ladies^ for 
ye art not men of Troy, One might fay fo, if the 
Fhrygiae did not often in the prefent age excel the 
Phryges in learning, as they confeiTedly do in 
virtue. 

Erafmus, whofe genius and judgment in all 
which concerns polite letters are greatly to be.rc- 
fpedled, has this paiTage in one of his letters : Hoc 
unum expertus video, nullis in Uteris nos effe ali- 
quid fine Gnecitate. This one thing I fee from expe- 
rience, that ive cannot arrive at eminence in any kind 
of literature^ 'without an acquaintance ^with Greeks 
This opinion will be controverted by many, who 
have erefted themfelves into fcholars, phtloibphers, 
and theologifts, with a knowledge of no other lan- 
guage than that which they learned from their mo- 
vers ; and yet it is certain, that even that language 
cannot be perfeflly underflood without undcrftand* 
ing Greek and Latin. 



{ 125 ] 

SECTION XIIL 

ON MAKINQ A PROFICIENCY IN GREEK. 



And thu« i? the Greek tongue, from Its propriety 
und oniverfaHtyy made for all that is greats and all 
that is beautiful^ in every fubjcft, and under every 
form of writing. Hermes, 

fTpHOSE who arc ready to acknowledge 
I the excellence of the Greek language, are 
deterred from the purfuit of it by ideas of its dif- 
ficulty. They aflert, with fome truth, that 
few make fuch a proficiency in Greek, as to 
derive sU the advantages from it which it 
wight afford, and that they do not often find 
jn the world, thofe who can read it with eafc 
or with pleafure. 

With refpecJl to its difficulty, it is certainly 
a copious language. It requires much and va- 
rious reading, to gain a competent knowledge 
of the primitive or radical words *. But it i$ 
alfo a language which abounds in compounds 
and derivatives, the meaning of which may be 
cafily known, by knowing the fimple and ori- 
ginal words. He who has acquainted himfelf 
with a fmall number of the moft ufeful radi- 

• Yet the Greek roots have been computed not 
much to exceed three thoufand. 

G 2 ^^^h 



126 ON MAKING A PROFICIENCY 

cals, will be able, with a little fagacity, to dif- 
cover the meaning of many words in a book 
written on a familiar and obvious fubjeft. By 
reading fuch a book, he will probably find his 
knowledge of original words in fome degree 
increafed. . He goes on to one lefs eafy. His 
knowledge of the language is enlarged by in- 
fenfible gradations, and he at laft acquires a 
deep and a mafterly fkill, by perfeverance in- 
deed, but without much painful.labour. He 
may feledl fuch authors as will amufe him as he 
proceeds, and, like a pleafant companion in a 
journey, be a fubftitute for a vehicle. 
. I will point out a few authors, with the or- 
der in which they may be read. I diftate not ; 
for the books and the order may be changed, 
with great propriety, by a better Judgment. 
But as I write a practical treatife, 1 have al- 
ready faid I muft defcend to particulars. I pre- 
fuppofe, that a progrefs has been made in the 
Greek grammar, and in the Greek Tefta- 
ment. 

The works of Xenophon are in general re- 
markably eafy. The fentences are fhort, and 
the ideas familiar. I will not now defcant on 
the fweetnefs of his didlion, and his other beau- 
ties. I will only advife, that either his Me- 
morabilia, his Cyrop<edia, his Anabafis, his lit- 
tle but elegant treatifes on the Charadler of 
Agefilaus, and the Spartan and Athenian Po- 
lity, may be read immediately after the Greek 
Teftament, or with it. 

The Dialogues of Lucian are too entertain- 
ing to be omitted. The Greek is pure, but 
lather more difficult than that of Xenophon. 

They 



IN THE GREEK. 127 

They may read after fonie progrefs has been 
made in Xenophon. But as morality is of 
great importance in early youth, and as it may 
be learned in great perfection from the Greek 
authors, I wifli that no very particular nor very 
long continued attention may be paid to Lucian 
• at fchool, though his wit and his language are 
highly excellent. To accuftom boys to laugh 
at every thing ferious, may have an ill cffe£k 
on their future condu(St. I recommend Epiftetus, 
and the Table of Cebes, and all the Socraticae 
Charts exhibited by Plato and Xenophon, to 
be more frequently and more attentively read 
than the works of the laughing Philofopher. 

When thefe books are once properly ftudied, 
the fcholar (hould be immediately advanced to 
the higheft clafs of Greek literature at fchool, 
to Homer, Plato, arid Demofthenes, and in the 
dramatic walk to Sophocleis or Euripides*. 
Neither fliould he be contented with reading 
only a few paflages^ but fhould go deeply into 
them, ftudy them with great and long attention, 
and receive fuch an imprefiion from them as 

♦ I think It, at this ftage of improvement, a very 
. ffood method to make the boys tranflate pafTages of 
Simc eafy author into Greek as a night's exercife. 
Though they certainly will not at firft write ^ttic 
Greek, yet, however imperfeft the flyle, they will 
gain by it a great knowledge of the vocabulary. 

It muft however be remembered, that at fchool 
there is not time to do every thing that is defirable. 
The more ufeful things muft take place of the lefs 
ufeful. In writing modern Greek for the public 
eye, I apprehend, there is more conceit and pe- 
dantry, than real ufe, excellence, or. true genius. 
G 4 fliall 



128 ON MAKING A PROFICIENCY 

fhall induce him to read them again when he 
leaves his fchool, and to make them the com- 
panions of his Hfe. Their converfation will 
•exalt his (enfcj and give him dignity. 

At fchool, it is impofHble to go through th« 
works of a very voluminous author^ neither is 
it required. It is the bufinefs of the fchool t« 
qualify the ftudent to go through the^ by him- 
felf. Seledlions are therefore publifbed for the 
ufe of fchools. But I am forry to obferve, that 
the knowledge of many neVer extends beyond 
thefe feledions. They judge of Plato from 
.Fofter*s edition, of Lucian from Kent's, of 
Demofthenes from Mounteney's. Though thefc 
and fimilar fele£^ions may be very judicious, 
and quite fufficient in fchools, yet I would by 
no means wi(h the fcholar to confine his cu- 
riofity within limits fo narrow. Let him dig 
the mine deeper * and wider, and he will find 
treafure in abundance. Let him afcend higher, 
and he will view a profpeft no lefs beautiful 
than extenfive. 

I wifh a very confiderable alteration and im- 
provement to be made in the method of reading 
Greek ; but there is little reafon to fuppofe that 
it will univerfally take place. I wifh to fee 
editions of Greek authors univerfally ufed in 
fchools, without Latin tranflations. For my • 
own part, I am convinced, that the pradiice 
uniformly adopted for many ages, of giving a 
Latin tranflation of Greek books, is the prin- 
cipal reafon that Greek has been lefs generally 
underflood than Latin. Not but that fon>e 

* ApprofoiKdi&z. G9 /# tht^ J^oUom, 

have 



IN THE GREEK. 129 

have proceeded fuccefsfully, not A^ithftanding all 
impediments ; and I believe at prefent, and in 
our own country, Greek is well underftood. 
Several living writers have given indubitable 
proofs of their excellence in it ; among whom 
may be moft honourably enumerated the philo- 
logical Emendator of Suidas, If we look back, 
we fhall find a numerous and diftinguiflied train, 
who, while they adorn the literary annals of our 
nation, afford moil animating examples for the 
aspiring ftudent of the prefent age *. 

♦ I will take the liberty of quoting another paf- 
fage from Hermes, before I leave this fubjeft : 
■ *• It were to be wifhed that thofe among us, who 
•* either write or read with a view to employ their 
** liberal leifure (fur as to fuch as do either from 
•* views more fordid, we leave them, like flaves, to 
** their deftined drudgery) —it were to be wifhed, I 
•• fay, -that the liberal (if they have a relifh for 
•* letters) would infpeft the finiflied models of Gre- 
•* cian liter^ature; that they would not wade thofe 
•* hcurs which they cannot recal, upon the meaner 
•*^ productions of the French and Engliih prefs ; 
** upon that fungous growth of novels and of 
•* pamphlets^ where, it is to be feared, they rarely 
•* find any rational pleafure, and more rarely ftill 
•' any folid improvement. 

*• To be competently ikilled in ancient learning, 
*^ 18 by no means a work of fuch infuperable pains, 
•* The very progrefs itfelf is attended with delight, 
*• and refembles a journey through fome pleafant 
** country, where every mile we advance new 
'* charms arifc. It is certainly as eafy to be a 
•* fcholar as a- gamefter, or any other charadler 
'* equally illiberal and low. The fame applica* 
" tion, the fame quantity of habit, will fit us for 
^' one as completely as for the other. And as to 
G 5 . . *• thofe 



130 ON MAKING A PROFICIENCY- 

•* thofe who tell us, with an air of feeming wifdom, 
•* that it is men, not books, we mud ftudy to be- 
*• come knowing; this I have always remarked, 
•* from repeated experience, to be the common 
** confolation and language of dunces." 

With refpe6X to the propriety- of iludying the 
Greek grammar with attention, let us hear the opi- 
nion of Jortin,and obfervc the example of Eraf- 
mus,—.** Erafmus, in the earlier part of his life, 
carefully ftudied the Greek and Latin gramipar^ 
read ledlores .upon them, and tranflated Greek 
books into Latin. This was laying a right found- 
ation for criiicifm and philofophy ; and it is to be 
wifhed that our young iludents would follow his 
example. Be you ever fo ingenious or induftrious, 
yet if you negledl to cultivate and to preferve this 
Jiumblepart of knowledge, you will be peiIpetu- 

ALLY STUMBLING WHEN YOU TREAD ON CI AS- 

sic GROUND ; when you attempt to explain, to 
tranflate, or to correal antient authors, or to dif- 
cufs any learned fubje^t, or tocompofe'a few pages 
in profe or in verfe. Th^n beware of blunders; 
and think not to make amends for them by in- 
fiilting arid ridiculing grammarians, fcholiafts, com- 
mentators, lexicographers, verbal critics, word- 
catchers, fyllable-mongers, and poachers in Sto- 
boeus or Suidas. Quand on vouloit mefprifer 
monfieur Cujas, on i'appelloit grammarien ; mais 
51 s'en rioit, et difoit que telles gens eftoient marris 
de ne I'eftre pas. ff^^en they nuanted to Jhenfj contempt 
to monfteur Cujas, they called him a grammarian ; but 
he laughed and Jaid^ that fuch fort of people nxjere only 
Hfexed that they 'were not fo, Scaligerana.*' Jortin. 
That amiable and elegant fcholar Dr» John 
Burton, of Corpus Chrifli College, was a very warm 
friend to Greek fludies, and recomroended a pro- 
per application to them with great fpirit and elo- 
quence. I feledt the following pai&ge from one 
cf his opufcula ; 

• • . Ita^ae 



IN THE GREEK. 131 

. . . Itaque ergo tarn pauci Linguae Graecae cajus 
fludium prse fe ferunt, peritiam atque cognitionem 
intimam Aint a^ecuti. Ecquod huic malo reme« 
dium adhfbferi cupis'? fac idem ut priflina'majorum 
in ftudiis inftituendis induflria refufcitetur,patientia 
exercitetur : ut adoIeCcentes veftri^ omnia marte 
proprio aggrediantur et elaborenty quafi nulla iibi 
e^ent in promptu fubfidia ; ita demum ingenii fui 
virlbus uti confuefcanty ut auxilioalienoneutiquam 
jndigeant. Haud profedlo illis fervitutem JEgyp- 
tiacam impero; cognitionis certs in omni genere 
inilrumenta illis nulla in video ; at idem cavcndum 
puto ne conceffis ahutantur. // // for this reafotiy 
thai /o feiv ivho profefs to ftudy Greek ba've obtained 
a Jkill and intitnate knonjoledge of it. What y the re- 
tnedy ? Let the ittdujiry of our forefathers be roufed ; 
let patience be exercijed. Let young men begin and 
iabour every thing by their onvn poivers, as if there 
ijuere no affiftances. Let them be ufed to exert their 
O'wn abilities^ in fuch a manner as not to 'want foreign 
aid, 1 do not fet them an JBgyptian tajk. I forbid 
them no injlruments of knonxledge : but I think care is 
to be taken that they tnay not abufe ivhat is al/oived. 

Burton. 



G 6 



C 131 3 



SECTION XIV. 

OK THE STUDY OF THE ENGLISH 
LANGUAGE. 

Ut ipfe ad meant atilitatem Temper cam Gnecis 
Latina corjunxi, neque id in philofbphia tantam, 
fed etiam in dicendi exercicatione fed., idem tibi 
cenieofacieedam, uc pir fis in utriufque oradonis 
^coltace. jfs I ba've alfucajSj 'with great advoH" 
tage ta my/el/^ tmiud the fiudy of hooks in my oavm Ian* 
guage 'vcitb Greek 6oc.ks, aud that not in pbilofopby 
only, hut a!jo in eloquence ^ fo I think you Jbould do, 
that you may he equally excellent in hctb languages* 

Cic. to his Son. 

Non cnim tarn pneclarum eib fcire latine, quam 
tnrpc ncfcire. I'o he iL^ell acquainted 'with one^s na* 
tvve language^ is notfo much a thing to hoajl of\ as not 
to he ivell acquainted ^w:tb it, is a difgrace. ,- Idem* 

MANY parents are of opinion, that, 
whiie their Tons are learning Latin, they 
are making no improvement in Englifh. They 
are greatly miftaken. It is impoflible to learn 
the Latin grammar, without acquiring a va- 
luable knowledge of grammar in general, and 
confequently of the Englifh grammar. But it 
muft be confefTed, that many particulars of the 
Englifh grammar cannot be learned, but by a 
particular application to it; and it is certain^ 
that this has been long negledled in the moft 
approved fchools. 

Englifh 



ON THE STUDY, kc. 133 

Englifh undoubtedly ought to form a great 
part of an Englifli gentleman's education. I 
think, at the fame time, that if a boy has maJe 
a good proficiency in claifical learning, he will 
be able of himfelf to compenfate the want of 
-particular inftrudlion in this point, if he chufes 
to apply to it. Good fenfe, good company, 
and the reading of good authors, with a know- 
ledge of grammar in general, will commonly 
make a fcholar completely matter of his own 
language. Several of our beft writers were 
educated at public fchools, where L believe the 
Engliih grammar was not taught ; and I con- 
jcSure that the prelate who has written fo ex- 
cellent an introduSion to the Englifh grammar, 
did not learn any part of it at his fchool as 
ihe bufinefs of his fchool ; but, like others, 
probably acquired his fkill by private and fubfe- 
quent fludy. 

To comprehend it, however, among the 
other objefts of fcholaflic purfuit, contributes to 
render a plan of education more complete. It 
is indeed very defirable ; for I have known boys 
who, though they could write Latin gramma- 
tically, were unable, for want of this part of 
inftrut^ion, to compofe an Englifh letter on a 
familiar fubje6t without incorreSnefs, much 
more with elegance j and even fome celebrated 
writers in Englifh have made egregious mif- 
takes in Englifh grammar. Mere Englifh 
fcholars incur great danger of mifapplying words 
derived from Greek and Latin. Falfe gram- 
mar and falfe orthography very often difgrace 
their good fenfe and their knowledge oF things 
and fa&s. 

I need 



. 134 ON THE STUDY OF 

I need not point out the proper Introduftion. 
Every one will anticipate me in chufing 
Lowth^s. Some parts of it are unavoidably too 
diiScult for a child's comprehenfion. There 
are fome little introduftions to it, adapted to the 
ufe of children, which may be fometimes ufed 
with gre^t advantage : though perhaps it may 
be right to omit the Englifh grammar till the 
child poflefles a degree of intelle<9:ual ftrength, 
fufficient for the underftanding of Lowth's In- 
* troduftion. What little he learns before that 
time will be of no great value. 

The beft method of teaching the Englifli 

f ram mar, is, I think, after having gone through 
iowth, to caufe to be read by one of the clafs, 
a paffage of one of Addifon's papers in the 
Spedator, and then to parfe it accurately in the 
manner in which a Latin or Greek leflbn is 
ufually analyfed. All violations of grammar^ 
and all vulgarifms, folecifms, and barbarifms, 
n the converfation of boys, and alfo in their 
inoft familiar letters, mult be noticed, and cor- 
reiSbed. 

To confirm their improvements in EngliHi, 
boys muft compofe in it, as foon ^s they are 
capable of invention. Indeed, this is ufually 
done in public fchools, and the advantages of 
it are univerfally felt, not only in the walks of 
" learning, but in the mercantile and civil de- 
partment. Many boys go to public fchools, 
who are defigned for commercial life. The 
little Latin they learn by the age of thirteen or 
fourteen, when they fometimes leave the fchool 
for the acCompting-houfe, may not be of great 
fervice to them ; but the babit of compofing in 

Englifb, 



THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE. 135 

Englifh, will enable them to write letters with 
eafe and with accuracy ; an acquifition^ for 
which they will be obliged to their fchool as 
long as they live ; an acquifition which will 
ferve, diftinguifli, and adorn them more than 
any of the accomplifhments which are merely 
ornamental. 

I would comprehend, in the plan of inftruc- 
tion in Englifli, the doftrine of Englifh verfi- 
fication, as well as of profaic compofition. 
The various metres ft..ould be explained; and 
fuch a manner of reading them pointed out, as 
tends to dif\)lay their beauty and their melody. 

I would advance a ftep higher. I would en- • 
deavour to infufe into the higher clafles not only 
a grammatical, but a critical knowledge of the^ 
language, and its authors. To the fenior boys- 
the beauties and defefts of ftylc ihould be 
ihewn. The opinions of judicious critics oa 
our poets, hiftorians, orators, and moralifts^ 
ihould be laid before them and difcufled. They 
ihould be taught not to read every thing 'that 
falls into their hands, but to fe]e£t their books 
with judgment, and to aflign the reafons for their 
preference. They will thus acquire not only 
grammatical accuracy, but tafte j a quality^ 
which will fiirnifli them, during life, with 
pleafure pure and refined > to be able to relHb 
which, befides the exalted fatisfadlion of it, will 
charafterife the true gentleman independently of 
fortune. 

As Englifh cannot always be read with con- 
venience in claffical fchools, and during the 
fchool hours, it muft be read in private by hoys 

who 



136 ON THE STUDY OP 

who wifli to acquire a perfeS knowledge of it. 
To complete the grammatical and theoretical 
(kill which is taught by the infiru^or, let the 
pupil read the moft elegant compofitions in the 
Englifh language. f'ame will ufually point 
thefe out ; but leaft fhe fhould err, as (he fome- 
times does, the advice of the living inftrudor 
muft be fought and followed. 
• Though the ftudj of a vernacular language 
is of high importance; and though fome in- 
ftrudors * have endeavoured to perfuade their 
countrymen, that it is fufficient for all the pur- 
pofes of life ; yet the education of him who has 
been confined to it, will be greatly defedive. 
It may with truth be aflerted, that, notwith- 
ftanding his attention may have been dire<9ed 
to this fingleobjeft, he will never comprehend it 
fo well, as he wiU who is alfo converfant in 
jthe ancient languages f.. The mere £ngli(h 
fcholar will often be obliged to turn over his 

Englifl;^ 

* Plerique mera deliramenta paeris incalcant, 
tamen Dii boni, quern non illi Palxmonem, quern 
non Donaturo pras fe contemnunt ? idque nefcio 
quibus praefligiis mire efficiunt, la fiuuh maters 
ctdiset idiotis patribus tales videantur quales ipii fe 
faciant. The greater part teach mertfo§leries to their 
hoyt^yety good God ! luhat Palamon; luhat Donatus^ 
do they not defpife in comparij'on luith t hemf elves ^ 
And I kno^jo not bonu they do it, hut they make them" 
felmes appear tofoolijh mothers^ and to idiot fathers ^jufl 
fuch as they rep refent themfel<ves . £ R a s M u s« 

f And as to the objedlion» that boys are long 
employed in learning mere words and terms, and 
unintelligible rules, while they are learning Latin, 



THE ENGLISH LANGWAGE 137 

Englifh DiiSionary, and, after all, will acquire 
but an imperfe<S^ idea of the many words 
which are direSly derived from the Latin or the 
Greek*. 

iiD objefiion which is triumphantly urged by every 
innovator, we may fay in the words of Felton : 
*' A boy will be able to repeat his Latin Grammar 
over t\Vo or three years before his underftanding 
opens enough fo let him into the reafon of the 
rules ; and when this is done fooner or later, it 
ceafeth to be jargon ; fo that all this clamour is 
Wrong founded ; . . . . and therefore I am for the 
old way in fchools ftill, and children will be fur- 
niihed there with a dock of words at leaft, when 
they come to know how to ufethem.'* 

1 wifh thofe parents and inftrydors who rail fo 
much againft employing boys in learning words, 
and terms, and rules, would inform us how they can 
be employed fo innocently. Would they intro- 
duce boys into company, take them to all pablic 
places, and initiate them in all the vice and vanity 
of the world ? The time will come when they will 
repent fuch a choice, and will wifli their fons had 
been learningLiLLY's Rules, inftead of Hoyle's. 

^ Natnra enim ipfa lie hominum ftudia difpertiviffe 
videtur, utpnmam astatem Lingua, mediam elo- 
quentiae et artibus, poflremam ufui et communi 
ucilitati diflribuerit. For nature her/elf feems thus to 
have allotted the Jiudies of man^ fo as to devote the 
firft part of life to language^ the middle to eloquence 
and the arts, the laft topra^ice and general utility , 

Anon. Diflert. de Rat. difcend. Ling. 

* Grasco fonte cadunt parce dctorta* Hon. 



[ 138 J 



SECTION XV, 

ON THE PREPARATION FOR A MERCANTILE 
LIFE* 

rovlovc /Tre^vKoruv av^^uv Wi* Money indeed can be pof- 
fejfed by any fort of man ^whate'ver ; but the honour- 
able, and that luhich leads to praife and glory ^ is 
peculiarly the property of the gods, and of men luho 
come nearefl to them* r L Y B i u s.^ 

■ "■ Pueri longis rationibus aiTem 

Difcant in partes centum deducere— ~ 
— ^At haec animos iERuco, &c» Horat» 

Our youths proficients in a nobler artf 
DMde a farthing to the hundredth part* 
Well done, my boy, the joyful father cries. 
Addition and fubtraSlion make us *wife, 
£ut nvhen the rufl oftvealth pollutes the foul. 
And monied cares the genius thus controul, 
Honv pall ive dare to hope, l^c. Fraiccis* 

A Great wit of antiquity, no lefs remark- 
able for the liberality of his mind, and 
his knowledge of the world, than for his ex- 
cellence in poetry, has cenfured that mode of 
education which is confined to arithmetic. He 
has fiiggefted that the mind, from a conflant 
attention in early youth to pecuniary and mer- 
cantile computations, contrails a degree of ruft 
totally deftrudive of genius. There is cer- 
tainly fome truth in his obfervation ; but it 

muft 



ON THE PREPARATION, &c. 13J 

muft be confidered, that our country differs 
from his in many eflential particulars. Arms 
and afts were the chief objects of attention ia 
Rome ; but Britain, from her fituation and cqn- 
ne<Siions, is' naturally commercial. Commerce 
in Britain has acquired a dignity unknown in 
antient times, and in other countries of Europe. 
They who have been engaged in it have added 
a grace to it by the liberality of their education, 
and the generofity of their minds. This has 
introduced them to the company of thofe to 
whom their fortunes made them equal j and 
they have appeared in the fenate, and in fociety, 
with peculiar grace and importance. 

I mean, however, in this fe£Hon, to advife. 
that they who are deftined to ^ commercial 
life, fhould not devote their time and attention, 
exclufively, to penmanfliip and to arithmetic^ 
In 'whatever degree thefc excellences may ht 
poflefled, they will never exalt or refine the 
fentiments. They will never form the gentle- 
man. They are the qualifications of a hireling 
fcrivener, and are at this time in pofleifion of 
fome of the loweft and meaneft perfons of the 
community. 

But I would not be mifapprehended. I know 
the value of a legible and expeditious hand, and 
the beauty of arithmetic as a fcience, as well 
as its ufe as a praflical qualification *. They 

are 

* Numerorum notitia cuicunque primis faltem 
literis erudite necefTaria elh ne kno'wledge of num^ 
hers is necejfary for e*very one«wbo is acquainted ^witb 
the frfi elements of learnings Quintilian, 

Arithmetic, 



I40 ON THE PREPARATION FOR 

are abfolutely neceflarj to the merchant ; thef 
are highly ufeful to aU. My meaniog is, that 
they fliould not form the whole of ^ucation» 
nor even the chief part of it, even when the 
ftudent is defigned for a mercantile life. For 
what is the propofed end of a mercantile Kfe I 
The accumulation of money. And what is the 
life of money ? To contribute to the enjoy- 
ment of life f. But is life to be enjoyed with 

a narrow 

Arithmetic, indeed, when fiudied as afeience for 
its own fake, aHomes new grace, and famiflies afine 
exercife for the mind in its favourite employ ment, 
the purfuit of truth. 

" nris here," fays a fine writer, (peaking of 
quantity, ** we fee the rife of thofe mathematical 
iciences, arithmetic, geometry, mnfic, &c. which 
the antients efteemed fo effential to a liberal educa- 
tion. Nor can we believe there is any one now, 
but mnft acknowledge that a mind, properly diiged 
with fuch noble fpeculations (fuppofing there be no 
want of genius or of courage), is qualified to excel 
in eyery fuperior fcene of life. Far more honour- 
able they furely are, than the arts of riding a borfe^ 
or of wielding a fword, thofe accomplifliments, 
ufually affigned our youth of diftinftion, and for the 
fake of which alone they are often fent into diftant 
countries, as if there were nothing to be taught them 
at home, nor any thing in a gentleman worth cul- 
tivating but his body. We would not undervalue 
thefe bodily accomplifhments (for perfedlton of 
every fort is certainly worth aiming at) ; but we 
would wifli them to be rated as much below the 
mental, as the body itfelf is inferior to the mind." 

Har.ris. 

f In order to which it is necefTary to have ac- 
quired a fort of knowledge, ov itit 'jnplriv ZHS. ot'xxoi 
f/i» TTp'^ T© £T ZHM. N&t that 'which regards mere 

ammal 



A MERCANTILE LIFE. 141 

a narrow and unenlightened mind ? If it is, 
what muft be the enjoyment ? It muft be low, 
and difgraceful. A rich man, without liberal 
ideas, and without fome fliare of learning*, 
is an unfit companion for thofe in the rank to 
which he is advanced ; a melancholy confi - 
deration, that after all the toils and cares of 
bufmefs, when a man has acquired a princely 
fortune, he muft be excluded from the fociety of 
men of equal condition, but fuperior education, 
or be ridiculous in it ; that he muft be unfit 
for parliamentary or civil employments, though 
the influence of money may procure him ad- 
miflion to them ! 

I really do not mean, in any thing I have 
faid, to difcourage an attention to writing and 
arithmetic. If I did, I fhould with reafon raifc 
a very numerous party, who would not fail to 
be clamorous againft my doctrine. My advice 
is, and I offer it with unafFeded deference, 
that thofe who are intended for a genteel line 
of commercial life, fhould beftow at leaft as 
much attention on the cultivation of their 
minds as on mechanical attainments, or on a 

mnimal life^ mere eatings drinking^ i^c, hut that 
nuhicb coptrihutes to well hiyiNG--the pleafures of a 
reafinable nature. EpicTetus. 

■ Qui uti fcit ci hona. Riches are goods to him alone - 
tAfho knonus bo'w to u/e them* Te R E zf c E. 

. ♦ ——Petite hancjuvenefque fcnefque— 

« Miferis viatica canis. Hor. 



Seek this, both young and old---^ 
This furnijhes t^J^pply fir the mil days if old age. 



mere 



142 ON THE PREPARATION FOR 

mere preparation for the fuperintendence of an 
accompting-houfe. 

There is time enough for the accomplifh- 
ment of both purpofes, in the courfe of an edu- 
cation properly conducted, and long enough 
continued. At our beft and moft refpedbible 
grammar fchools •, opportunities are ufually 
afForded for improvement in writing' and in 
arithmetic. Many inftances might be produced 
to fhew, that the claffical and the mercantile 

• Thefe arc fometimes avoided, from an idea 
that iheyarc expenfive. I believe they are feldom 
more fo than other reputable fchools, Afcham, 
fpeaking of the folly of parents in fparing expenoe 
in the education of their fons, though not in other 
trifling or vicious matters, fays, •' It is pitie more 
care is had to find out rather a cannynge man for 
their horfe, than a cunnynge man for their child- 
ren. They fay nay in worde; but they do fo in- 
dcede. For to the one they will ^ladlie give a fti- 
pend of 200 crownes by the yeare ; and loth to of- 
fer to the other 2co (hillings. God, that fitteth in 
heaven, laugheih their choice to fkornc, and rc- 
wardeth their liberalitie as it ihould ; for he fufFereth 
them to have tame and well ordered horfes, but 
wilde and unfortunate children ; and therefore in 
the ende, they find more plcafure in their norfe than 
comforte in their children.'^ Roger Ascham. 

Ti^ii lAxU^c^u (jLvx^ ^iV, ioclfu ^^axf^if 

Uoftfi rdXa-ilov, .^tXo<7©^w T^i»Co?tor. 

He gifves bis cook ten mime^ his doQor a drachm^ 

his toad-eater fi^ve talents^ his friend and counfellor 

/moaki his mifire/s a talent ^ bif philosopher three 

iiALFPEifCE* Crates. 

difclpline 



A MERCANTIL?'; LIFE. 143 

difcipline have proceeded with equal fuccefs. 
It is indeed true, that the writing of thofe ex- 
crcifes which are indifpenfably required in a 
claffical courfe, retards the acquifition of a fine 
hand, becaufe it is ufually done in a carelefs 
and hafty manner. But it might perhaps be 
done otherwife. Granting that it cannot, yet 
furely one would abate fomething from the ex- 
cellence of a flourifh, for the fake of acquiring 
ideas, and elevating the mind with juft, ge- 
nerous, and noble fentiments. Is it worth while 
to forego the improvement of tafte and literary 

ijenius, for the fake of forming a ftroke in a 
etter with greater elegance, though not in the 
Jeaft nlore legibly ? for the fake of acquiring a 
mechanical habit, in which, after all, the fcholar 
will often be furpafled by the loweft apprentice, 
or the meaneft clerk of a petty office. 

I know it will be faid, that boys who are 
deftined to reputable merchandize, are ufually 
taught Latin. But how are they often taught 
it ? They are often placed at a fchool where 
the matter teaches it not *. He profefles to 

teach 

• Cheapnefs is the firft obje£l with many in fe- 
leding a fchool. 

Quintiliano 

Ut multum ? duo fufficient. Res nulla minons 

Conilabit patri quam filius. 

To ^intilisin^ thefeboolmafter^ honx3 much ? Tia/o 
fefterces iajUI he enough. Nothing luill coft a father 
lefs than a /on. Juvenal. 



1+4 ON THE PREPARATION FOR 

teach only writing, arithmetic, and mathema- 
tics; but, to complete his plan, he. hires an 
affiftant to teach Latin. The principal (hare 
pf time and attention is devoted to writing and 
arithmetic. The parent defires it, and the 
matter naturally gives it the greateft attention. 
^ Seldom any thing more than the firft elements 
of Latin are taught, and thefe, it may reafon- 
ably be fuppofed, in a very fuperficial manner. 
The boy ' leaves his fchool at the age of four- 
teen. He writes a fine hand, and cafts ac- 
counts to admiration. His Latin he foon for- 
gets ; for he was never taught to dwell upon it 
as of great importance ;• and, in general, what 
he knows of it is fo little, that it is fcarcely 
worth remembrance, 

«7cp( lactiTUv woUTj-Qs avrov^^Vf ru9 ^l vUutp olq ravlot xa- 
T«\i»4'6lef |tA»«^a (pfofji^ds ; • • • . woAAoi ^t, ttf^ 
royovToi^ ruv tooci^uv inooQacmwTh ^(^a^^yi^toi; UfAOu x^ f/uco^^ 

rouf fjLY.hvo^ T(/xi(&; ai^ovvlai tok ti«mk oat^tt/lcK* 
Crates, the old philofopher^ often ufed to fay^ that if it 
njuere pojffible to make them hear, he nuould get up to 
the top of the higheft pinnacle, and cry out tvith aloud 
'voice, *' Good people, ^whither are you going in fucb 
hafte,ye <who apply yourfehes fo earnefly to get money ^ 
hut nuho take but little thought for your children, to 
nvhomyou muft league it all ?^* — Many fathers, con- 
tinues Plutarch, have arrived at fuch a love for mo- 
ney, and fuch an indifference for their children, as, 
for the fake of cheapnefs, to chufe fuch indrudors 
for their fons as are good for nothing, eyomon 
iKf4.a$iar ^iJ«o>?i<. Looking out for one of lubom iguo* 
ranee may be had a bargain. Plutarch. 

When 



A-MERCANTILE LIFE, 145 

When he has acqaired his fortune, which he 
nay very well do, with little other knowledge 
but chat of addition and multiplication ; though 
he prid(S himfelf on having had a liberal edu- 
cation ; -yet he acknowledges, that he ha^ 
found little advantage from the claifics, and 
holds them in low eftimation *• He declares* 
that a fon of his fball adhere to the four firft 
rules. He feldom looks beyond. the circum- 
fcribed horizon of the accompting-houfe, even 
when admitted ihto the council-chamber; and 
he contributes, both by his difcourfe and exam-> 
pie, to bring the claflical mode of education 
into difrepute. He pretends to have been train- 
ed according to its rules, and grounds his pre* 
tenfions on the very little of Latin grammar 
which he very imperfedlly learned, in a very 
ihort time, when his attention was almoft con- 
fined, both by parental and preceptorial autho- 
rity, to a mechanical attainment, and to a ilngle 
fcience. 

I need not ufe argument in recommending 
the ftudy of French and Geography to the in- 
tended merchant. Their obvious utility is uni- 
verfally underftood. 

It is well known, and much to be lamented, 
that the (hafts of wit and ridicule have often 
been fuccefsfully thrown at city magiflrates, 
and other public charaders, whofe offices f 

oaght 

♦ This difefteem may be accounted for by the 
old obfervation, Ignoti nulla cupido ell. U^e ha've 
uo Jefirefor that *wbicb ive inoHv nothing about, 

t Pericles fupported a public charader in a fr'tt 
city with great dignity. \i Ti m}Mrm nt^a>MffvyM^ 



146 ON THE PREPARATION^ FOR 

'ought to fecurc refped. This unfortunate cir- 
cumftance has been entirely owing to that de- 
fied in their education, which their wealth 
could never compenfate. Though they oiight 
to' qualify thcmfelves for the defic; yet they 
Ihould recoiled, that they are not to remain 
there always : but fhould let their minds be 
early imbued with that elegance, which will re- 
fnain with them, and conftitute them gentle* 
men, whatever may be their employment *. 

fM)i^«f >^ fi«^tr« OfptdcK "OFKON avlf x) ^^5»i9/mb hnfjui' 
yvy'ha^ ifJof^Qsrifof, oXa;^ ti fillt'kffia'Ct^ 1^ avuictpaf to 

Mptnrn NOTN vfotrt) yyptvop. But he^ nvif^ ^wmi moft 
€9mw€rfant <with Pericles ^ and mofi contributed to give 
kim a GRANDB^n OF MIND, and to make bis higb 
J^irit for go'verniug tbe popular ajfemblies more 'weigbty 
4md autboritafi^TJe ; in a ijoordy who exalted hts 
IDEAS, anft rai/edf at tbe fame time\ tbe dignity of bis 
heba*viour ; the perfon *wbo did tbis ivas Anaxagoras 
tbe Claxomenian^ lAjhom tbe people of tbat age ufed to 
€all NOTl, or mind, 

Plutarch, quoted by Harris. 

• Great ftatefmcn, and men who have tranf- 
afted civil hufinefs with honour and authority, 
have ufually been polite fcholars and philofqphcrs ; 
witnefs, Scipio, Cicero, Cato, Brutus, Marcus 
Antoninus, bir Thomas More, Sidney, Raleigh, 
Temple, Grotius, De Witt, and many others. 

Vide Philofoph. Arrangements. 

Homines rerum gerendarum gnari, ad negotia 
exequenda idonei forta^e funt, et in fpecialibus 
judicio non malo utuntur. Verixm confilia de 
iiunmis rerum, eorumque inventio et adminiflratio 
feda felicius a literatis promanant. Mere mem of 
3 iu/mefs 



A MERCANTILE LIFE. 147 

Bufine/s art firhafs wtU enough qualified to manage 
ewmmm affurs^ and in a fe^ particulars ba'oe a pretty 
g§Qd judgment. But ceun/els of high moment , and the 
proper indention and execution of tbem^fucceed heft im 
^hehemdt of min of letters. LordBACON^ 



H a 



r h8 ] 

SECT I O N XVI. 

OH LEARKtNG FRENCH AT SCHOOL. 

Fas eft ct ab hofte doceri ♦. 

E* en from a foe tnftruSion may hi fought • Ovid. 

TH E French language abounds with au- 
thors elegant, lively, learned, and claf- 
iical. A fcholar cannot, in this age, difpenfe 
with it. To be ignorant of it, is to cut off a 
copious fource of amufement and information. 
I need not expatiate on its utility to the man 
of bufinefs, and the ornament it. adds to the 
accompliflied gentleman. Its ufe and its grace 
are fufficiently undcrftood. 

But whether boys ihould begin to learn it fo 
early as they fometimes do, admits of doubt. I 
need not obferve, that the lapfe of a conflderable 
time is necefTary to mature the mind as well as 
the body. Like the body, the mind may, at a 
very early age, be overladen and contrafted in its 
growth. I would therefore begin with the moft 
important object, and lay a good foundation. 
The Latin grammar I confider as the moft im- 
portant object at that age, and as the avenue 
to future improvements. Let not the fcholar 
then be introduced to French till he has made 

* The war wa^ not terminated when this motto 
was felewted. 

a pro* 



ON LEARNING FRENCH, Sec. 149 

a progrefs in the knowledge of the Latin 
grammar*. 

At the age of ten or twelve; and before, if 
the boy has abilities^ this preparatfon mav be 
in a great meafure completed. Th6knowcdge 
of Latin words, as well as of the grammikr^ 
will contribute greatly to facilitate the acqui- 
fition of French. 

French ihould by all means be Caught gram- 
matically. And when the pupil has not learns- 
cd the Latin grammar, he muft begin with the 
£rft elements of the French, and go through 
them accurately ; for fome grammar muft be 
learned with accuracy. But when he is ac- 
quainted with the parts of fpeech, and the ge« 
- neral principles of grammar iii all languages, 
which he will be b^ learning the Latin gram- 
mar, I cannot fee any neceffity for going over 
the fame ground in a French grammar ; which, 
however, is not uncommonly required, to 
the great impediment and confufion of the flu« 
dent. 

It wiU therefore require judgment in the 
French matter, to fele£t fuch parts only of the 

♦ He who has learned the Latin grammar Der« 
ft&ly, will find French incredibly facilitated. Mr. 
Richard. Carew, who wrote a paper on purpofe to 
difconntenance the nfual methods of learnmg La- 
tin, by the grammar, &c. informs us, that '* he 
learned more French among the natives in three 
quarters of a year, than he had done Latin in 
tnirteen years." . . . But he is obliged to confefs, 
though very unwillingly, that ** iheuj\ of bis Latin 
** grammar dii Jomething help blmJ*^ 

RiCHAED Carew's I'rue and ready Way. 
H 3 grammar 



ISO ON LEARNING FRENCH 

grammar as are abfolutcly neceflary. Theft 
are of thcmfelTes fiifficiendy numerous, 

I will likewife recommend it to him to in- 
troduce cfe ftudent to reading an eafy audior, 
as iboo as the nouns, pronouns, and regular 
verbs are learned. This early entrance on 
reading aiidiors greatly accelerates a progreft 
in the French language^ and, indeed, in all lan- 
guages. The fubje^ matter of a book, cfpe- 
-cially if it be narrative and entertaining, aUe- 
-viatcs the labour erf" acquiring the knowledge of 
a new language. But ¥^en the boy is confin- 
ed during fix or twelve months to the dry rules 
of a gtammar, be is naturally induced to hate 
-die ftudy of a language, which pvefents to him 
. nothing but irkfome toil. The perufid of an 
eafy author not only makes the ftudy pleafant, 
but alfo illuftrates and fixes in the mind the 
rules of grammar. 

I belike the greater number of parents wiih 
their £tyn% tQ i^-- Frcnch *, ChleHy tnat. riiey 

- may 

* The fbllowbg remarks of Mr. Chtmbaud, 
prefixed to his grammar, appeftr to me joft. 

'* The leamifig of a language is the work of 
time and application. It cannot be learnt in a 
ihort time withoat taking great pains. That is im- 
poffible in the nature of the thing : and children 
learn nothing bat by repeating the fame thing over 
and over again. 

.** Bot if they do not learn fo fail as grown per- 
fons, they generally learn better. They will fpeak 
French, of courie, after they have learnt how to 
fpeak: for we are all apt to (he w our accompli (h- 
mcnts. If both they and their mailer adl their part, 

you 



AT SCHOOL. iji 

may be enabled to fpeak the language. This is 

certainly 

you may reft Tatisfied that they come on well^ though 
they cannot fpeak. Do not be impatient at the 
operations of nature ; ihe works butilowly. Child- 
ren« in a good ftate of health, dnd under a wholes 
feme diet, grow con flan tly, though their growing is 
not conftantly obfervabte. It is even fo with the 
jkiind: it improves conftantly, fo it is properly cul* 
tivated ; though 'tis in procefs of time only that we 
can perceive the improvement. It is impoflible for 
one not to be able to fpeak the language, when 
thas made capable of it ; and it is as impoffible to 
be made capable of it, otherwife than by ftudying 
its genias» and learning methodically. 

" It is a great abnfe introduced in moft fchoQls^ 
to force beginners to fpeak nothing but French 
among themfelves. They muft of neceftity either 
Ipeak wrong (even fuppofing they have a compe- 
ient ftofk of words and cxpreftions, for it is the 
vtmoft abfurdity to pretend, that they will learn 
tiiem by goelfiog), or condemn themfelves to 
filence. The firft cannot but be very detrimental 
to them ; fince they thereby accuftom themfelves 
to a barbarous broken French, which is no Ian- 

fuage at all, and cannot be unlearned without in*^ 
nite pains. The fecond is ftill worfe, for it hin- 
ders them from difclofmg freely their thoughts, 
and ftraitens in fome meafure their underftanding ; 
but, above all, gives them the utmoft averfton to 
the language, their books, and their mafter: to 
prevent which, too much care cannot be em- 
ployed. 

"It is amazing to fee how apt people are to 

■ deceive themfelves, and how eaiy.to be impofed 

upon by deiigning crafty men, who improve the 

general fimplidty to their own private gain* To 

H 4 thb 



152 ON LEARNING FTIENCH 

certainly a vsluable attainment * ; but I think 
an ability to read and tafte tbe beauties of the 

cclc- 

this is owing the abuie which I am complaiitiog 

of. 

" The generality of people being incapable to 
rrfle^ duly opon the nature of a langaage, aa^ 
tbe facclty of the ho man mind, have hai3]y put 
their children to the ftody of the Fieoch Ian* 
guage, hot they ezped them to ^>eak it, before 
they hare learnt how to fpeak : and in cafe they do 
nor, never fail to uz the mafter eidicr with inca* 
padty or negleA of his boiineis. 

" The makers, on the other hand, bdng at t 
lofs to fatisfy tho(e unreasonable ezpe&ations, and 
knowing not what to contrive for forwarding their 
boys, pmently begin by making them learn wordis 
dialogues and phrafes, and labour hard to beat 
into their heads as many common fentences at 
they can ; p-etty near after the fame manner a« 
parrots are inllruAed. Atid, as has been hinted 
before, the abfurdity is even carried fo far in ibme 
fchools, as to confine the poor boys, under all 
ibrts of penalties and punifliftients, to the talking 
nothing elfe bat French. The confequence of 
which is, they acquire the knack of talking a 
Gibberi(h, which nobody can make any thing of. 
The ignorant parents, charmed, however, with the 
ihew their children make of their learning, think 
them great proficients in the French tongue.— 
They recommend the fchool as one of the bell for 
learning, and fo ihc mailer gets his ends ; bat in 
truth the poor hoys know nothing of French, and 
the parents are deceived ani impofed upon." 

* It enables ihe boy tu tranfad mercantile bu- 
finefs, and facilitates the acquifiiion of money ; 
and is, for that rt^/on alone, valued by many pa- 
rents, 



AT S C H O O L. ^155 

celebrated French writer?, is alfo highly vau- 
abJe. If he can learn to do both in perfeflion 
it is doubtlefs moft to be defired. But I have 
obferved., that the French converfation of many 
boys, difmifled as completed from celebrated 
French fchools, has been but a barbarous jar* 
gon. To learn to fpeak French with, real 
elegance, and with fluency, it will be neceflary 
to give it the greateft portion of time and at- 
tention, or to refide fome time among the na- 
tives of France. To read it with eafe and 
critical accuracy, may be foon acquired witb 
moderate application ; and it is, in every refpe£l> 
a very eligible acquifition. 

There is no neceffity to point out the proper 
books to h,e read in the ftudy of the French 
language, Thofe which are commonly ufed in 
pdaces of education, are for the moft part pro- 
per. They are Gil Bias, Telemachus, Va- 
rietes hifto'riques, and a few others, both enter- 
taining and well written. I will only give a 
caution, that none of Voltaire's books be 
admitted at a very early age. Let the ftudent, 
when his judgment is mature, feledt thofe books 
which he moft approves, whatever they may 
be ; but let not the young mind be poifonea,^ 
on firft entrance into life, by obtruding on 
its attention the writings of a libertine and a 
fceptic. 

rents, who are not aware that maiotx «f^^Xa<ov tup 
iilniAalm, Child fin are the chief of our pojfejjions, 

Chritsostom. 

H 5 There 



154 ON LEARNING FRENCH 

There was a time when even profound fcho«' 
hra*, and celebrated writers, were unacquainted 
with French ; but it is fo generally ftudied and 
underftood in the prefent age, that to be igno* 
rant of it is both a difgrace and a ^difadvantage. 
It ought feldom to be omitted in education ; 
for to the man of buiinefs it is always ufeful f,^ 

and 

* 'rEnglifhrenfe joined with a Greek or Roman 
ljpirit> will go farther to raife_a charadter, and give 
A man penetration in buiinefs, ' and nviigbt in the 
nvorld^ than all the flattering accomplifliments of 
what is called a polite or French education. We 
find, however, in mod boarding-fchools, more pains 
taken about French, than about more folid.and 
nieful improvements/' Fordyoe'sDial. on Edne. 

t The obvious utility of French in the cranf- 
adUons of the worldj^ induces all parents to wifh 
their ions to acquire itl Many of them are not fb 
anxious concerning Latin and Greek, and other 
elegant purfuits. They dI5*wherc \it9 \ht frofii 
and the gain of thefe? In anfwer to theih, 1 will^ 
again cite the words of the excellent author oT 
Hermes, fpeaking of fome fciences. 

*' Every fcience whatever (fays he) has its i^e. 
Arithmetic is excellent for the gauging of liquors ; 
geometry, for the meafuring of eftates ; agro- 
nomy, for the makirg of alman-'cks; and gram* 
mars, perhaps, for the drawing of bonds and con* 
veyances, 

" Thus much to the fordid. If the liberal afk 
for fomething better than this, we may anfwer, 
and afTore them from the bell authorities, that 
every exercife of mind upon theorems of fcience» 
like generous and manly exercife of the body, 
tends to call forth and ftrengthen nature*s original 

vigour. 



AT SCHOOL. ,55 

and often neceflary. To the fcholar It is the 
fource of pleafure and improvement. But yet 
it will not fupply the place of claffical learning ^ 
and it is a happy circumftance, that iii moft of 
the feminaries originally confecrated to the 
lludy of the antient authors only, opportunities 
are now afforded for the acquifition of an ele* 
gant and ufeful modern language ** 

Tigour. Be the fubje^ itfelf immediately locra* 
tlvc or not, the ner*ves of rea/on art bracti by the 
ffUTi empr$y, and we become abler adtors in the 
drama of life, whether our part be of the ba£er, 
or of the fedater kind." Ha rris. 

* Italian is very dedrable to a fcholar ; but it 
is not dfiially taught in fchools. He that under* 
ftands French and. Latin will be able to teach it 
himfelf, . for it is very eafy to read and underftand 
it, if not to fpeak it. Let him read a chapter or 
two every other day, for two or three months, in 
an Italian Teftament, and he will foon be able to 
read Goicciardini, &c. 

When thefe modern languages are ufed in the 
traniadion of buiinefs, or in converfation with 
foreigners of charader, or in reading celebrated 
books; they are truly valuable. But where is the 
ufe of prating them for prating fake ? Yet many 
a fop, and many a fine lady, is very proud of 
being able to jabber broken French and Italian 
a poor accomplifhment, without a liberal and 
comprehenfive mind ! 



H 6 



[ 156 ] 

. SECTION xvir. 

ON THE ORNAMENTAL ACCOMPLISHMENTS, 

Quibus in rebus duo maxime fugienda funt, ne 
quid efFeminatum aut molle, et ne quid durum 
aut ruflicum fie. lu ijuhichf tivo things an prtnci^ 
fally to be anioided^ the effeminate or the fcfi man^ 
ner \ the rough or the rufiic. Cic, 

Fac perculum in licerisy 
Fac in Palxflra, in muficis. Quse liberum 
6cire xquum e^ adolefcentem^folertem dabo. 

Try him in learnings try him in the exerci/es, in 
tnufic^ I ivill anfwer for it he is tueli Jkilled in 
e*verj thing *which a young gentleman ought to kno-iv, 

Ter. 

IT is not' ncceflary to admonifh the world of 
the value of accomplifliments which contri- " 
bute to exterior grace. They are in their na- 
ture fuch as ftrike the eye of the beholder upon 
intuition. They render the impreflion, received 
on the firft fight of a perfon, favourable to hrs 
general charadler, and they are therefore unr- 
verfally purfued* They ought to be purfued, 
but not without reftriftion. 

They are often confidcrcd, even by the pa- 
rent as well as by the child, as of the firft im- 
portance ; as more likely to contribute to good 
fuccefs in the world *, than folid merit. If this 

• Parents fliould confider that this world is but a 
part of their children's exiftence, and ihould be 
anxious to render education preparatory to a better 
itate than this ; for non eji tanti. 

IS 



ON THE ORNAMENTAL^ Ac. 157 

is really the cafe fometimes, -and I am fure it is 
not always ; yet it furely ought not to be fo, 
and the reform (hould begin in the rifing gene- 
ration. Boys therefore mould be tr^ught to va- 
lue external graces only in a fubordinate degree. 
Great care muft be taken, that they may not 
be viewed in fo favourable a light as to appear 
capable of becoming the fubftitutes of moral and 
intelle£lual excellence. The too high eftima- 
tion of the ornamental qualifications is injurious 
to the individual, and to the community. It 
caiifes a negleft of- ferious and ufeful purfuits, 
fuch as are neceflary to the general welfare ; 
and it introduces ignorance, want of principle, 
levity of mind and behaviour, irreligion and 
immorality. 

When the boy is once taught to efteem reli- 
gion, learning, truth, benevolence, and a power 
of becoming ufeful to himfelfand others, as they 
ought to be efteemed, as qualities which do ho- 
nour to human nature, and exceed all the little 
arts of pleafingby external deportment, as much 
s^ a reafonable nature exceeds the beftial ; then 
let him be introduced to the ftudy of thofe arts, 
whofe true ufe and end are to caufe virtue, who 
is lovely in her own nature, to appear more 
amiable ♦. 

♦ Orm» fvtfti TO xo^X^ nrixo^fA^ rfovO- ' 

Wbtn the fair firm^ *which nature ga'ue, is graced 
With 'Virtuous hianners^ then <wb9e'er draws near 
It doublj captivated^ ' Menander. 

With 



I5S ON THE ORNAMENTAL 

With Ack ideas in his mind, let the boy 
learn to dance*. It will contribute to his 
health, and to his growth. It will give the hu- 
man form, in the embdlifhment of which na- 
ture has beftowed peculiar care, the power of 
diffdaying its natural beauty and fymmetry f • It 
will ftrengthen the limbs, and render them fit 

* Ne^ae enim geftom componi ad fimilitodinem 
fidtationis volo, f^l fobeile aliqaid, in hac exerd- 
tatione paerili, ande nos, non id agentet, fartim 
decor ille difcentibos traditus profeqaator. / wmld 
tut 6a*ve the carriage of the per/on etmfofed fi as 
to refemhle dancing ^ but I nuotud hawe /ometbing r/- 
Wiain from this puerile exercife^ nuhence thai graeeful 
ear J nvhich *tvas gi*ven us tvhen ive learned to dance, 
may infenfihlj fteal upon us tvhen ive are mot thinking 
•f it. 

Ut re^ fint bradiia,* ne indodae. mffioeqiie 
manus, ne ftatus indecorus^ ne qua in proferendis 
pedibus infcitiay ne caput oculiqae ab alia corpo- 
ris inclinatione diffideant. That the arms he 
fiidgbt^ that the hands be not a^whward imd rmftic, 
that the manner of fianding be not unbecoming^ thai 
there mivf not appear a nuant ofJkiU in advancing 
the feet t that the head and eyes may not dif agree nmth 
the inclination of the refi of the body. 

QviNTXLIAN. 

t 'Oto a» |vfMri«r|ii m rt rn ^X^ '^'^ ^ h^«* «; <' 
ru c*^£» ofAoXoycptla txt^roK* «; iviAip»novfla^ roo mvlov 
/jule^oHa rvnroot rZvf m* fin isaA>»roy Bia/AM rtt hnofufu 
SsaeVOflft. If there Jhduld be a coincidence of beauteous 
morals in the minds of any one, and of appearances in 
his form correfponding to them j in harmony 'with t hem ^ 
and participating of the fasm original fteunp — this 
*would be a mofi beautiful fgbt to bim nvbo is able to 
fee it. Plato. 

fo» 



accomplishments; 159 

for their proper exertion. A fkill in the art^ 
independent of other advantages, is defirable, as 
it enables young people to join in a diverfion, 
which, in decent company, is no lefs innocent 
than pleafing. When therefore the parent ap* 
proves it, tfiere can be no reafonable objeAion 
to placing the fcholar under the dancing-maf* 
tcr. The methods commonly adopted are fuch 
as, I am fare, I will not pretend to improve. 

Fencing, as a gymnaftic art, is highly ufeful 
in ftrengthening the body. In fevcral walks of 
life, cuftom hath rendered it eflfentiallv requifite. 
But I (hall not dwell upon it, iince it is by no 
means necefiary in general. If the fcholar 
chufes to purfue it, and has a convenient oppor- 
tunity, he (hould not negle£l it ; iince it fur- 
niflies ah excellent mode of bodily exercife, af- 
ter the labour of the mind in a fedentary em- 
ployment ♦. 

The learning of the military exercife, which 
is now very common, is, in feveral points of 
view, beneficial. It gives a manlinefs of mien, 
it j-enders the body ereft, and the limbs robuft ; 
and it qualifies youth to defend their country in 
an efFe^ual manner, when called out by an 
emergency. It may likewife have an indirect 

♦ I hope none who read this will ever ufe the 
art in the Gothic and unchriftian practice of 
duelling ; a practice forbidden by the laws of God 
and man ; encouraged only by diabolical pride and 
malice, and chiefly ufed by ignorant, vain, con^ 
ceited, filly young fellows, who have no idea of 
tru€ hoMUTt from the defed of their underftandings 
and education ; and from their want of religious 
principles. 

influence. 



1^3 ON THE ORNAMENTAL 

influence, in infpiring mailly fentiments^ and 
infinuating a love of order ^ • 

Muiic , furntflies a fweet amufement to the 
man of letters f. Boys are not often initiated 
in it at fchools. With great propriety, they arc 
tifually left to follow, in this particular, the im- 
pulie of their genius ^r their inclination. With- 
out the co-operation of thefe, no valuable pro- 
ficiency is ever made in performing on a mu- 
iical inftrument. Scarcely any art is purfued, 
invita Minerva^ or without a natural turn for 
ft, fo unfuccefsfully as mufic. And indeed to 
arrive at any great excellence . in it, requires 
more time and attention, than can well be be- 
ftowed by him who follows any other purfuit 
with ardour. The lover of muhc, who has full 
employment of another kind, and who has not 
any very remarkable degree of genius for mufic, 
fliould content himfelf with hearing ikilful per- 

* It is the fcience of Tactics ; but this effed 
is not, I believe, often produced. 

f I hope it is not true, which has been faid, 
'* In comes mufic at one ear; outgoes wit at an- 
other." Erafmos fays, Tibicines mente capti. 
"Pipers art 'void of fen/e. I fuppofe this aroi« 
from the idea that thofe who ftudied muiic effec- 
tually, had little time for improvement of the 
mind. — - ** Thefe inftruments (fays Afchaia) 
make a man's wit fo foft and fmooth, U> tender 
and quaify, that they be lefs able to brook ftrong 
and tough lludics.*' 1 hope mudciaos will re- 
move, by application to fuch ftudies as improve 
the underilanding, an afperfion fo difgraceful lo 
their art* 

formers i 



ACCOMPLISHMENTS. i6i 

formers ; opportunities for which abound in 
this cultivated age and nation. 

Drawing is frequently taught at fchoels ; not 
ofteu with any Angular fuccefs. It is, however, 
a very Convenient as well as agreeable accom- 
pliihnient ; and, where a genius for it evidently 
appears, no care fliould be fpared in its cultiva- 
tion. But as drawing is a fedentary amufe* 
menjt, I do not particularly recommend it to the 
literary ftudent. His leifure' hours fhould bt 
Ipent in adive diverfion. 

I will in general advife, that, whatever orna- 
mental accompli(hments the ftudent may wifh 
to purfue, he mav call tm mind, what has often 
been repeated witn a figh, that life is (hort and 
art long*. Much time and nouch attention 
muft not be beftowed, in the contraAed fpace of 
faumsUi.life, on objeds which afford no rational 
pleafure, and no real advantage of any kind to 
the individual, or to fociety. It is indeed far 
better to confume time in employments merely 
innocent, than in vice or in malignant anions ; 
but true, permanent, and heart- felt happinefs is 
to be derived from a benevolent condudi, and 
from uieful exertions. Ornamental qualifications 

* ** Another paflion which the prefent age if 
apt to ran into is, to make children learn all 
things; thi languages, the sciences; mu- 
sic, THE exercises, AND PAINTING. ThoS 

the child foon becomes ^ talker in alc, but 
A MASTER IN NONE. Po thus acqulres a fuper- 
ficial fondnefs for every thing, and only fhews his 
ignorance, when he attempts to exhibit his fkill.'* 

Goldsmith. 

and 



t6t ON THE ORNAMENTAL 

and amufing attainments, may plcafe, indeed, 
during a fhort period of youth ; but, alas ! the 
old age which has no more than thefe to fup« 
port *, and recommend it, would be ridiculoufly 
contemptible, if it were not truly pitiable. Men 
are too little inclined to look fo far before them, 
and to provide for that period, which, if it is 
deftitute of rational amufement and of folid 
improvements, muft be fpent either in a ftatc of 
^upid infenflbility, or in wretchednefs. 

If the antediluvian duration of life ftill con* 
tinued, what accomplifhment is there at which 
an ingenuous mind would not afpire 7- But to 
fpend the greateft portion of threefcpre years 
and ten, in trifling or ufelefs purfuits, . is pi* 
itiable folly f. 

^ • Oberve what fupports the great Cicero ppo» 
vided for his old age : In hb letters to Atticos he 
fzysi Bibliothecam tuIM cav(: ciiiqualh^ defpefi^ 
deas, quamvis acrem amatorem iaveneris ; nam 
ego omnes meas vindemiolas e6 relervo, at illud 

VUBSIDILM SENECTUTI PaREM Nolt 

defperare ut libros tuos facere poiTiin meos. Qood 
fi affequory fupero CraiTum dividis : .atqae om- 
nium agros^ lucos, prata contemno. Take care 
you do not engage your library to any one^ though 
you Jhould find an eager fur chafer ; for I referve all 
my little property y that 1 may pur chafe this fapport 
for my old age • • Do not defpair of my being able 
to make your books my onvn, ^which if I do, I fball 
furpafs Craffus in riohej^ and Jhall defpife all their 
lands, luoods, and meado*ws» Cic. 

t Quid brevi fortes jaculamur ^vo 
Malta? 

Why do ov/, moho ha<ve fpirit but for a Jhort time, 
form fo many projeQs ? Ho race. 

Quid 



ACCOMPLISHMENTS. 163 

Quid ^Dod acdimatione noAurnas quietis dimidio 
quifque fpatio vitae fux vivit. Pars a^qua morti 
fimilis exigiturT—nec reputantar infantise anni, qui 
fenfu csrenty nee ftnchx, in pcenam vivacis, cot 
morbiy tot curae- hebefcunt fenfus, membra tor- 
qaentur, pnemoritur vifus, auditus» incefTus^ denteis 
ctiaro — et tamen vitae hoc tempus annumeratur. — 
If you compute th time /pent in Jleep^ you ^11 find, 
that a man aSuaUy li'ues only half his /pacez^'-^ 
ne ether half pajjes in a ftate refemhling death. 
You do not take into the account the years of infancy 
*which are deftitute of reafon^ nor the many difeafis 
and the many cares of old age^ thofe penalties of lon- 
^e^ity. The fen/es grotv dull^ the limbs are racked, 
the fight, the hearings the potuer of ivaliing, tke 
teeth alfo^die Before us,* — and yet all' this time is 
reckoned in the period of a life. P l i n i u s*. 

Thus it appears^ that, deducting the time of 
childhood, of deep, of pain, of difeafe, offuper- 
annuation, there remain, even in a lone life, 
fcarcely more than fifteen or twenty years of real 
ACTiviTTj (hat i* pf I^I5AL LIFE, for the reft 
1$ viOBTATioNy or worie, WLen we confider 
this, we cannot help being ihocked at the incon- 
iideratetiera of thofe many ghoft-like forms, whicli 
hover about the public places of pleafure, and bow 
the hoary head to the only objed of their worfhip, 
ALMIGHTY FASHION, Their error arifes from 
the DEFECTS OF THEIR EDUCATION, They ac- 
quired in youth nothing but the ornamental 
ACCOMPLISHMENTS, and they find in age none of 
the SOLID comforts which books, philofophy, and 
religion always aflbrd in abundance. 

Life is not a jest; and it was a fool, wh« 
faid in his heart, 

Tidfla r£AX2£) 9^ wdflci xoNf, n^ vaSla to ^li^er. 

E'very thing is laughter^ and every thing is dufi, 
end every thing is nothing. Ik c e r t i . 

The 



i64 ON THE ORNAMENTAT, &c. 

The following pafTag^, on introducing boV* into 
company, and infilling too much on the fhining 
and externaf accomplifhinents, may corred the 
judgment of THE many on an important point. 

** When lefs attention was paid to thofe exterior 
accompli (hm en ts which quality young men to bear 
a part in the converfa^ion of their leniors, when 
they were kept clofe at-fchool, and were feldom 
brought into company, or at 4eaft allowed to fay 
but little in company, fo that they had but little 
fociety except with their parents and fchool fel- 
lows, they contraded a baihfulnefs, tvhich» by dif- 
qualifying them from appearing to advantage in 
what is called polite company, made them ra* 
ther ihun it, * • 

*' By THIS MEAKS A GREAT DEAF. OF VBRT 
VALUABLE TIME WAS SAVED ; AND HAVING NO 
ROAD OF AMBITION OPEN TO THEM, BUT THAT 

or EXCELLING IN THEIR STUD! Es, they ofcouffe 
applied their time, and bent their application, that 
way; so that they were possessed of the 

UNDERSTANDING, AND HAD ACQ^'IRED THB 

KNOWLEDGE OE MEN, wheo they exhibited na> 
thing but the appearance of rufHc boyt. 

*' Of thefe two extremes (bringing them too 
early and too much into mixed company, and keejy- 
ing them entirely out of it), I own myfelf inclined 
to lean rather to the latter than the former ; bc- 
caufe EXTERNAL ACCOMPLISHMENTS are Certainly 
of lefs value than internal ones, and becaufe 
the former can be acquired when the latter cannot* 
The elements of knowledge can only be acquired 
to any good purpofe in early life,^becaufe they de- 
pend chiefly on memory, which is peculiarly quick 
and retentive in youth, and the exercife of it is 
peculiarly irkfomc in riper years.'* 

Dr. PaifcSTLET. 



C 165 J 
SECTION XVIII. 

-ON THE NECESSITY AND METHOD OF LEARN* 
ING GEOGRAPHY, &C. 



Totam licet animis» tanqaam oculis, laflrare 
terrain xnariaque omnia. One may fur^vty the 'whelt 
iartby and all the feas ixihicb /urrounti //, in the mind, 
jufiasiftbeynjoereprefentedtotheeyesm Cic, 

THERE is nothing :^hich contributes more 
to accelerate the improvement of the 
fcholar, and to render his progrefs agreeable, 
than a proper care to prefent all the ideas with 
which he is to be furnifhed, clearly to his ap. 
prehcnfion ♦. This is not often fufficiently re- 
garded.. Boys learn much of what they arc 
taught, by rote, often without any ideas at all, 

• «* The ^r^ ftrokes which form the fkctch of a 
piflare cannot be pencilled with too much truth. 
If you fail in thefe firfl lineaments, let the colour- 
ing be ever fo brilliant and rich, far from conceal- 
ing this want of proportion, it will only make 
the deformity more apparent. Indeterminate ideas 
ferve only to confufe the minds of children ; they 
afford no inllru^iion to them» and prevent their 
future improvement ; becaufe the falfe ideafl they 
rrceive^ will always contradid the true ones which 
we endeavour to give them. The firH impreffions 
will be in oppofmon to the Iccond, and the confer 
quence, confufion." Father Cbkpil. 

2 and 



i66 ON LEARNING 

and almoft always with confufed and imperfect 
ideas. They are apt to confider dieir bufinefs 
merely as a tafk, without any view to valuable 
improvement ; and if they can go through it 
with impunity, they are little folicitous concern* 
ing the advantage to be derived from it. 

Among other proofs of the imperfedion and 
the confuiion of boys ideas may be numbered 
their frequent ignorance of geography, at the 
time diey are reading hiftory. At many capital 
fcbools, fcarcely any attention is paid to geo- 
grafAy^, efpecialiy among the younger boys ; 
who are, however, often engaged in reading 
Eutropius, Juftin, Cacfar, and many other hif- 
torians antient and modern, Latin and Eiiglifli. 

Obfcurity and confufion are at all times pain- 
ful. It is no wonder that boys, while they are 
unacquainted with geography, appear to receive 
little entertainment from hiftories which abound 
in amufing events. They are travelling in 
the dark. They fee nothing around them dif- 
tinftly ; and, at the end of their journey, they 
find the confequence little more than fatigue. 

At a very early age, then, I would introduce 
die pupil to a knowledge of geography *. But 

I would 

* Sexenni vel feptenni atiliter cenfeo datum iri 
chartas tres vel qaataorgeographicas, ut inde diftia* 
gaere difcat tres continentes, et in prima Afiam, 
Africam, et Europam. In finealis haram nobi- 
liores regiones, et terminos pnmariafque urbes» 
velut, Romam, Carthaginem, Athenas, Spartam» 
ConllantinopoliAiy Hierofolyma. Oftendatur ubi 
Chriflus liatus ; abi imperator Germanicus do- 
minetur, ubi Turcicus ; ubi CaftUiae rex> ubi Lui 

fitani» ; 



GEOGRAPHY, &c. 167 

I would not place a geographical treatife in his 
hands. I would not burden his memory^ or 
diftraft his attention, with too many or too 
minute particulars. I would at firil only give 
him the maps of Europe, of England, of Italy^ 
and of Greece. They fhould be fuch as are 
printed diftinftly, and not too fully crowded. 
The ufe of maps (hould be familiarly explained ; 
and then the pupil will be well able to inform 
hjmfelf of the fituation of principal places, and 
of fuch as occur moft frequently in reading die » 
clai&cs and the Roman hiftorians. Antient 
geography fhould at firft engrofs his attention* 
The fame method fhould foon after be ufed, to 
introduce him to a general idea of the modern. 

But as the pupil advances in age, he mud be 
led to higher improvements. Still I think the 
befl and the eafieft method is, to point out the 

fitanis ; ubi rex Callus, Britannus, Danus, Po- 
lonos, Suecas; ubi ponttifex Romanus, ubi £ta 
tellas atque orbs qaam ipfi incolimus ; et fie in 
cxteris. To a boy of fix or /e*ven years old^ I think 
that three or four maps may he ufefully gi'uen^ that 
bt mr^ learn thence to diftinguijb three continents^ and 
in the firft Afia^ Africay and Europe. In each of 
thefe let him learn to difiinguifl? the more famous 
countries^ boundaries^ and the principal cities^ as 
Romtf Carthage, Athens^ Sparta^ Conftantinople, 
Jerufalem, Let it he fl?ewn mjhere Chrift loas horn, 
ivhere the German emperor reigns^ lubere the Turk, 
ijuhere the king of Spain, of Portugal, of France, of 
Britain, of Denmark ^ of Poland, of SiAjeJen ; ivhere 
the Roman pontiff, ivhere the country and city in which 
wt live, Mid fain the reft. V os s i v s • 

places 



]« ON LEARNING 

places ta mapS) and not yet to peiplez him widi 
an unentertatning geographical treatife. 

When he has made confiderable improve- 
ments in grammar and claffical learning, he majr 
enter on Cellarius. Not that I would recom- 
mend an attention to every part of this book at 
jG:hoo1. It will, I think, be fully Aifficient to 
dwell with attention on Greece and Italy. A 
knowledge of other countries, fufficient for this 
period of life, may be gained by a careful and 
repeated infpeAion of maps, without reading 
long and dull catalogues of proper names ; a 
method which tends to render difficult and dif- 
gufting a ftudy in itfelf naturally pleafant and 
remarkably eafy ♦. 
* The facility and the ufe of this fcience, will 
induce the judicious fludent to make a great 
progrefs in it. He will therefore ftudy modern 
geography, even with more accuracy than the 
antient. Frequent and attentive infpeSion of 
maps will avail him moft in this purfuit, 
throughout all its parts. Whenever a name of 
an unknown place occurs in reading, let the 
ftudent mark it in his pocket-book, to be fearch- 
ed for in the map at a convenient opportunity. 

* Geography was but a fport, and like a pleafant 
voy^lge to us ; we fell down rivers in their gentle 
current, then put out to fea, viewed the coads» en- 
tered the ports and cities, then went up the' coua- 
try, &c. 

Bossuet's Acc. of the Educ. of the Daaphine. 

It may certainly be rendered a moft pleafing 
diveriion; if interiperfed with hiftorical remarki. 

I do 



GEOGRAPHY, kc. 169 

I do not think it right to turn immediately from 
the book to the map, on every fuch occafion j 
becaufe it will interrupt the courfe of reading, 
divert the attention from the main objeft, and 
be the caufe of loilng fome idea, or lome im- 
provement of greater value than the knowledge 
of a local fituation. 

There is a great abundance of treatifes on 
this eafy fcience. The vanity of fome, and the 
hope of gain in others, have urged many to pub- 
liih what they could compile without di£Sculty. 
Cellarius I have recommended to the fchool- 
boy as a guide to antient geography ; Guthrie I 
will recommend as a guide to modern. In that 
ufeful compilation he will find a great number 
of particulars, not merely geographical, which 
ought to be known to every individual. Though 
D'Anville's geography is feldom ufed in fchools, 
yet the fcholar ought to be informed, that his 
maps are held in the highqft efteem. Their 
price alone prevents them from being univerfally 
received. 

Mathematical geography, or that part of it 
which is connected with altronomy, may be de- 
ferred till the pupil arrives at a mature age, un- 
lefs he diiplays a very early genius and inclina- 
tion for mathematics. The drawing of maps, 
and other minute labours in the purfuit of geo- 
graphy, may be defirable to a perfon who is de- 
figned for fome employment conneded with 
furveying or navigation, but are an unneceflary" 
toil to the liberal fcholar. For him, an atten- 
tive infpedion of maps already drawn, together 
with an hiftorical account of places, will be 
fully fufficicnt. 

I With 



t70 ON LEARNING 

With rcfpcfl: to mathematical fcience *, and 
thofe which depend upon it, I think they can- 
not often be purfued at claffical fchools, confift- 
chtly with other ftudies more immediately ne- 
. ceffary in early youth. The Elements of Eu- 
clid, muft not be omitted in a liberal education ; 
but perhaps they ought to be attended to at 
the univcrfity f, rather than at fchopl. Aftro- 

nomy, 

• I am well convinced of the beauty and cxccl- 
lejice of the mathematics ; but I think them more 
the bufinefs of the univerfity than of the fchool ; 
and I am alfo of opinion, that a man may be very 
liberally educated without much fkfll in them. 

+ Many projedlors haveperfuaded parents, that, 
in order to teach boys things, and not words 
only, it is neceflary to introduce ihem very early to 
phyfics and mathematical fcienccs. Among thefe 
Milton and Cowley take the lead. Let us hear 
Dr. Johnfon, fpeaking of Milton when Milton kept 
a boarding- fchool. 

** The purpofe of Milton, as it feems, was to 
teach fomething more folid than the common lite- 
rature of fchools, by reading thofe authors that 
treat of phyfical fubje^Hs ; fuch as the georgic and 
aflronomical treatifes of the antients. This was a 
fcheme of improvement which feems to have buiied 
many literary projcdors of the age. Cowley, who 
had more means than Milton of knowing what was 
wanting to the embcHifhment of life, formed the 
*fame plan of education in his imaginary college. 

*' But the truth is, that the knowledge of ex- 
ternal nature, and of the sciences which 

THAT KNOWLEDGE REQJJIRES OR INCLUDES, 
IS NOT THE OR.EAT OR THE FRFQUENT BUSI- 
NESS OF THE HUMAN MIND. Whether wc pro- 
vide for adion or conveifation, whether we wilh 



GEOGRAPHY, &c. ^ 171 

nomv, and natural and experimental philofophy 
in all its branches, will alfo be more properly 
wmprehended in the courfe of academical ftu- 
dies *. The leftures read in the univerfities on 
thefe fubjefts, are admirably well fitted to ac- 
complifh the ingenious pupil in thefe delightful 

to be ufeful or pleafing, the firft rcquifite is the 
i«ligious and moral knowledge of right and wrong; 
the next is an acquaintance with the hiilory of 
mankind, and with thofe examples which may be 
faidio embody truth, and prove by events therea- 
fonablenefs of opinions . . • . We are perpetu-^ 
ally MORALISTS, but we are geometricians 
only by chance . ^ . Phyfical knowledge is of 
fach rare emergence, that one man may know an- 
other half his life, without being able to eftimate 
his ikill in HYDROSTATICS or astronomy; but 
his moral and prudential charadler immediately 
appears. 

** Those authors, therefore, are to bb 

READ at schools, THAT SUPPLY MOST AXI- 
OMS OP PRUDENCE, MOST PRINCIPLES OF MO- 
RAL TRUTH, AND MOST MATERIALS FOR CON- 
VERSATION ; AND THESE PURPOSES ARE BEST 
SERVSD BY POETS, ORATORS, AND HISTO- 

aiANS." Dr. Johnson. 

♦ The laws of England muft alfo be compre- 
hended among the academical Hudies. The ex- 
cellent inftitution of the Vinerian profeflbrfhip, is 
a noble accquiiition to the glories of Oxford. But 
Blackftone's Commentaries, the firfl fruits of that 
eftabliftment, have almoft rendered fubfequent 
leflures unnecefTary. Thefe well read will be quite 
fufficient for the liberal fcholar, who ftudies 
. not the fubjed with a view to qualify himfelf for 
a pra^cal and venal profeflion, 

I 2 . and 



I7X ON LEARNING 

and improving fciences. In thofe places, a 
large and coftly apparatus is always at hand, 
and the profeflbrs who read lectures, are for the 
mod part men of great and folid merit, with 
little oftentation. 

And yet if a boy has a peculiar turn for ma- 
thematics, it (hould be early cultivated ; as, in- 
deed, (hould all very predominant tendencies to 
peculiar excellence. Intervals may be found, in 
a courfe of claflical ftudy, for improvement in 
mathematical knowledge ; and I will recom- 
mend, as excellent performances, the books 
written by Dr. Wells * on thefe fubjefts, profef- 

fedly 

* ** Nothing, fays he in his preface to his Young 
Gentleman's Geometry, has more difcouraged 
yoang gentlemen from entering upon geometry, 
than the notion, that a competent knowledge of 
fach geometrical elements as are of moil afe in 
the common concerns of life> cannot be attained 
without extraordinary pains pnd time. And this 
notion feems to owe its rife to an opinion, that all 
Euclid's Elements are neceffarily to be underftood, 
in order to attain fuch a knowledge. . . .To remove" 
therefore this wrong notion, I have reduced moft, if 
not all thofe elements that are of the greateil ufe, 
and moft requifue to be known by young gentle- 
men, under twenty-eight principal propofitions ; 
viz. twelve theorems and twelve problems relating 
to lines and planes, and four theorems relating to 
folids." Wells. 

Jn his other little Treatifes alfo, he has given us 
a great deal of kernel with little fliell. 

Euclid's Elements, however, it has been well ob- 
ferved, conilitute the bell introdudion to rational 
logic, or the art of reafoning juflly and accurately 

in 



GEOGRAPHY, Sec. 173 

fedly for the ufe of young gentlemen. They will 
very fuccefsfuUy prepare the way for a future 
progrefs in the univerfity. 

in life and in learning. As matters of tafte, they 
alfo fonn moil delightful fubjeds ; for inteJle^ual 
truth is the moil beautiful objedt which the mind 
can contemplate. 



[ m 1 



SECTION XIX. 

6n the study of history in the 
course of education at school. 



Pleraqae differat et prscfens in tern pus obiittat. 
Let him pejipBHt many things^ and ^mtt t htm. for the 
frefcnt. HoR. 

To adorn andfajbion life after the virtues of ethers, 
asinaglafs. Flvtarch. 

IT muft be remembered, that the moft im- 
portant views in education are to open the 
mind for the reception of general knowledge, 
and to prepare it in particular, for the reception 
of the fpecies and degree of knowledge required 
in that fphere in which it is deftined to exert 
its adlivity. It is not the bufinefs of the fchool 
to complete, but to prepare *. They who 

♦ His igitur rudimentis puer in prima imbutus 
fchola, deinde bonis avibus ad altiores disci- 
PLiNAs conferat {tk^ etquocunque fe verterit, fa- 
cile declarabit, quantopere referatab optimis aufpi- 
catum fuifTe. The hoy being tinSiured ijuith thefe ele^ 
ments in his firji fchool y may betake him/elf in the next 
Jlage, and iviih good pr ef age t offuccefs to higher learn- 
ingj and luhitherfoe'ver he Jhall turn him/elf he 'will 
eajily be led to declare, ofhonAj much con/e^uence it is to 
have begun in the befi methods. Erasmus. 

pretend 



ON THE STUDY OF HISTORY, 175 

pretend to teach every part of neceflary know- 
ledge, and to finifli the improvements of the 
fiudent during the time that can be fpent in a 
fchool, are confidered by the intelligent as de- 
ceivers and empirics. Thofe inftrudors do 
their duty well, who point out the various ave- 
nues of learning, and, by leading their pupils a 
little way into each, enable them to proceed 
alone in the years of maturity *. As many 
avenues as can well be comprehended, without 
impeding the progrefs of the Scholar, muft be 
opened for his view, and for his admiilion f, 

Hiftory therefore muft be included. But 
hiftory is a moft extenfive field. I would only 
introduce the boy into a part of it, left he (hould 
be difcou raged and confufed by the immenfity 
of the profpcift. His attention mould be confined 
to the more ftriking parts % of antient hiftory, 
and to the hiftory of his own country. 

With 

^ Plato divided education into Propadia and 
Vmdia ; the one preparatory, the other perfecting. 
At fchool, we ougnt to pretend to no more than the 
Propadxa. The p^dia is the bufinefs of the 
tiniverfity, or of private application. 

f *' The TAKING A TASTE of cvery fort of 
knowledge is neceflary to form the mind, and is 
the only way to give the underftanding its due im- 
provement to the full extent of its capacity.'* 

LOCKF, 

J '* In hiftory, fuch ftories alone (hould be laid 
before them as might catch the imagina- 
tion ; inftead of this, they are too frequently ob- 
liged TO TOIL THROUGH THE FOUR. EMPIRE5» 

as they arc called,, where their memories are bur- 
I 4 dencji. 



176 ON THE STUDY OF HISTORr. 

With refpeft to antient hiftory,.itis true, 
diat he reads feveral original hiftorians, as lef- 

fons 

dened by a number cf rlifgufting names, that de- 
ftroy all their future relilh for our beft hiflorians, 
who may be termed the trueft teachers of wif- 
dom." Goldsmith. 

•* L'homme qui eft plus f^avant, qu'il n'ell hillo- 
rien, & qui a plus de critique, que de vrai genie, 
n'epargne a Ton lefteur aacune date, aucune cir- 
coniLince fuperEiies, aucun fait fee Sc detache. II 
fui: fon rout, fans confulter celui du public. II 
veut cu? tout i- mcnde foit aufli curieux que luides 
El in u ties, vers lefquelles il tourne fon infatiable 
curioiitc. Au contraire, un hiflorien fobrc & 
difcret laifie tombre les menus faits qui ne menent 
Ic ledleur a aucun bcuc important. Retranchez ces 
faits, vous n'otez rien a Thiftorie. lis ne font 
qu'interrompre, qu'allonger, quefaire une hifloire, 
pour ainfi dire, hachee en petits morceaux ; Se fans 
aucun fil de vive narration. 11 faut laiffer cette 
iiiperftitieufe exaOitude aux compilateurs. Le 
grand point eft de mettre d'ahord le ledlenr dans le 
fond dcs chofes, de lui en decouvrir les liaifons,, & 
de fe hater, de le faire arriver au denouement. 
L'hiftoire doit, en ce point, reflerobler un peu aa 
Pocnie E pi que : 

iJemper ad eventum feftinat, &in medias reSj, &c» 

. Et quas 

Defpcrat traSata nitefccre pofterelinquit. 

II y a beaucoup de faits dagues, qui ne nous 
apprennent que des noms & des dates fteriles ; il 
ne vaut gueres mieux fijavoir ces noms que les ig- 
norer. Je ne connois point un homme, en necon- 
noiflant que fon nom. J'aime mieux un hiftorien 
peu exadt & peu judicieux, qui eftropie les noms, 
mais qui peint naiVement, tout le detail comme 
FrciiTaid, que les hiftoriens, qui me difent que 

Charlemagne 



ON THE STUDY OF HISTORY. 177 

fons at fchool. But though from thefe he may 
derive a knowledge of the language, I have fel- 
dom found that he has received any great ad- 
dition to hiftorical information. The reafon of 
this is, that he feldom reads enough of them ;. 
that he reads detached paflages; or that he read<t 
them at fuch intervals, as caufe him to lofe the 
thread of the narration. His attention is paid 
lefs to thefubjedt, than to the expreflion. It can* 
not be well otherwife * ; for he reads Eutro- 
plus, Nepos, Juftin and Caefar, at a time 
when his knowledge of their language is very 
hnperfecft, and when the principal obje<i^in view, 
is to learn the meaning of Latin words, botb 
as they^ ftand fingly, and as they are combined 



Chai-Iemagne tint (on paTlement a Ingelheim, qu* 
enfuite il partit, qu'il alia battre les -saxons, et 
qu'il revinc a Aix la Chappelle : c'ell: ne m'ap- 
prendre rien d'utile Sans les circonftanceij, les 
faits dem€urent comnre decharnes : ce n'ell qus* 
le fquelette d'une hiftoire. Fenelon. 

This admirable poet and critic, fnys " un 
*' hillorien doit retrancher beaucoup d'epichetes 
fuperflues, et d'aurres ornemens du difcours " If 
feme celebrated hiftories are judged by this rule, 
they muil be condemned. See his Dialogues fur 
L'EIoquence, & Lettre fur L'Eloquence^ p. 373, 

* Neque velim ego in primA ^tate hifto* 
riim cum Latinitatis difpendio difci, cujus po- 
tior TUNC ratio habenda / ivould net in the 
firft age, ha've hijiory learned at the^ exp mce of La- 
iinity^ 'which is then to be more 'valued. M o r h o r . 

I S in 



n% ON THE STUDY OF HISTORY. 

in a fentencc. The liiftory is only the inftnr- 
ment for the accompliihment of this purpofe ♦. 

Thebeft method of giving him a dear and a 
com prehenfive knowledge of antient hiftorjr, is^ 
to place in his hands fome hiftory well written 
in Englifli. The firft and fecond volume of 
RoUin tranflated, will be very proper. Seleft 
Lives of Plutarch, the Hiftory of Rome by 
Queftion and Anfwer, commonly received, and 
Goldfmith's Hiftory of Greece and Romefj. 
will give a boy as much knowledge of ancient 
hiftory, as he can receive at fchool coniiftently 
with his other occupations. Moft of thefe I 
wifli to be tead by the boy, as the amufement of 
hisleifure hours. They can fcarcely be read in 
the fchool, without interfering with very im- 
portant purfuits ; with purfuits, which cannot 
be poftponedjlike hiftory, till the age of man^ 
hood. 

I earneftly recommend an attention to the 
Greek and Roman Hiftory in particular ; not 
only for the neceflary and ornamental know- 
ledge which they furnifti, but alfo for the noble,. 
manly, and generous fentiments which they tend 
to infpirc. He, who, in his early age, has beea 
taught to ftudy and revere the charaSers of the 
fages, heroes, ftatefmen, and phHofophers, who 
adorn the annals of Greece and Rome, will 

• But let him early be taught to tafte and be 
nourifhed by Livii laftca ubertas, thtmifky richnefs 
ef Linjy Q^intilian. 

f Thefe were hafty works, compiled merely to 
fuppJy prefent wants ; but as Goldfmith certainly 
pofTefied genius, it has fometimes (hone out and 
irradiated the gloom of a dull compilation. 

neceflarHy 



ON THE fiTDDY QF HISTORY, 179 

neceilarily imbibe the mod: liberal notions. -He 
will catch a portion of that generous enthufiafm^ 
which has warmed the hearcs, and directed the 
conduft, of the benefa£lars and ornaments of 
the human race. 

A Latin and Greek fcholar muft not be ig* 
norant of the armals of his own country. It 
this (hould be the cafe, he will appear inferiour,, 
in theeyesofcommoh obfervers, to many boys 
whofe education has been in other refpefts much 
confined. They are in themfelve capable of' 
rewarding his attention moft amply, A very 
particular ftudy of them may,, indeed, very pro- 
perly, be deferred till a more advanced age *, 
but a little introduftory knowledge is certainly 
defirable at the fchool. I know not a better 
book for the purpofe of communicating it to 
boys, than the book already adopted in fchools^ 
written in queftion and anfwer, and abounding 
with prints. 

Englifh Biography I ftrongly recommend^ 
as more entertaining, and perhaps more ufeful,, 
than civil hiftory at large. I do not recolleft 
any biographical work, which is particularly 

* Ancient Hiftory is more proper for a young 
daffical iladenCy becaufe it has ufually been better 
written than the modern. Quia provenere ibi 
magna fcriptorum ingenia^ per lerrarum. orbera, ve- 
terum fadla pro maximis celebrant ur. The exploits 
of the Greeks are celebrated throughout the ^Morldy ai 
the grtateft that e'ver appeared ^ becaufe there arofe^' 
in thofe countries^ hifiorians of great genius* Not 
(the hiflorian means to injtnuate) that the exploits 
themfefves are ahuajs greater than thefe atchieved 
in other nations, S al L u s t . 

I 6 and 



i8o ON THE STUDY OF HFSTORY. 

and properly adapted to the ufe of fchools. It 
is, I think, a defideratum. It fhould be elc- 
ganily written, and confift principally, but by 
no means entirely, of the lives of the learned. 

A knowledge of feigned hiftory, or mytho- 
logy, isabfolutely necefiary to the reader of the 
claffics ♦. I do not recommend Took*s Pan- 
theon. That book, though it difplays much 
learning, and has been long and generally re- 
ceived, is furcly improper for boys. It contains 
many ideas, and many expreffions, which may 
equally corrupt the morals and the tafte of the 
young ftudents. I would fubftitute in its room the- 
abridgment of Spcnce's Polymetis. This, if it 
includes not fo many particular*?, includes 
enough, and is v/ritrcn with elegance and deli- 
cacy. Dr. King^s Kificry of the Heathen 
Gods is a ufcful book for the purpofe ; but I by 
no means approve the pradice of beftowing 
much time in fuch purfuits. The little treatife 
of Juventius's is exceedingly well adapted to the 

• Nc ca quidrm que funt a clhricribus poetis 
firta ncgiigcrc. V/e mujh not trverkck e*ven the fit- 
tions rf tkc more ilu.'/Iricus poets, Qu i n t i L i a n . 

Cerce propi^fr poetaruin cuarrationcm, quibus 
mos eit ox onii^i diki-pliRanim gcnere fua teinpe- 
/are, teiieiuia ell fabularum vis, quam unde po- 
tius peras, quam ab Homcro, fabularum omnium 
parcnie ? Undoubtedly ^ for the fake rf e^plaitiing the 
poets, ivhofe cufhm it is to mix all forts of learning- 
fn their ivorks, the meaning of fahles is to be un^ 
4 rfocdy n.Mch meaning ixjhere nvould one rather^ 
J/e.ekj than from Homer, tks parent cf all fables ? 

Erasmus. 

purpofe. 



ON THE STUDY OF HISTORY. i8i 

purpofe. This part of knowledge is certainly 
neceflary to throw a proper light on the antient 
writers; but I would not proceed any farther m 
purfuit of it, than is indifpenfably required. 

A little chronology will be highly ufeful. It 
is unavoidably a dull and unentertaining ftudy *. 
It will be fu^cient if the pupil is at firft fumifli- 
ed with general ideas in it, and with a know- 
ledge of a few remarkable aeras and epochas. 
Chronological tables abound, and they are in 
general fufficiently accurate f. They may be 
referred to as eafily as an almanack. 

It muft be remembered, that the reafon why 
r recommend introduflory books only on hifto- 
rical, mythological, and chronological fubjefls, 
is^ that I am direfting the ftudies of a boy, or a 
very young man... To a proficient in learning 
I fhould recommend, if I prefumed to offer my 
advice, large and original treatifes J. I might 
enumerate a great variety of thefe in our own, 
iUid in feveral modern languages. But the 
voice of fame and his own judgment, will be 
fuflicient to direct him in the feleClion §. 

* Yet many fpend their lives about the fhells 
and hufks of learmng, without ever tailing the 
AvectneG of the kernel and the fruit; difficiles ha- 
bentes nugas, fnr*Ung much ado about trifles^ 

■\ I recomnicnvi Dr. Prieftley^s Charts. 

J I will refer him for inform ation to Dr.Prieflley's 
Syllabus, of a Courfe of Ledurcs on Hiilory,. 
p. 230, of his Ohfernjations en Education ; to Raw - 
linfon's Method of Studying Hillory ; to Hearne's 
Du<5lor Hilloricus ; to PufFendorf 's Introdudlion. 

§ The farcaftic Juvenal cenfures, in the follow- 
ing paflage, thofc injudicious parents, who require^, 

ia 



itz ON THE STUDY OF HTSTORT. 

in the ftadent of hiftory, a knowledge o( unim- 
portant particulars. What he fays was required of 
mafters in his time, is now often expedled from the 
young fcholar, as a fpecimen of his improvement. 

■ Sed vos fsvas imponite leges^ 

Ut praeceptori verborum rcgula conflet ; 
Ut legat hiilorias, audlores noverit omnes^ 
Tanquam ungues digitofque fuos ; ut forte ro«> 

gatus 
Dum petat aut Thermas aut Phcebi Balnea> 

dicat 
Nntricem Anchifx, nomen patriamque novercae 
Anchemori ; dicat quot Acefles vixerit annos 
Quot Siculus Phrygibus vini donaverit urnas. 
I add the concluding lines, though they are not im- 
mediately appofite : 

' Exigite, ut fit 

Et Pater ipfius Ccetiis. , . . 
ITaec inquit cures ; et cum fe verterit annus. 
Accipe, viftori populus quod poftulat, aurum. 
But lAjhen thou dun*ft the parents yfeldom they 
Without a fuit before the tribune pay. 
And yet hard laius upoti the majfer lay. 
Be fure he kno^ws exadly grammar rules ^ 
And all the bejl hijlorians read infphools ; 
All authors^ euery poet to an hair ; 
Thaty ajkedtbe quejiion, he may fcarce defpair 
7o tell ivho nursed Anchijes^ or to name 
Anchemorus* s Jiepmother^ and iv hence Jhe came ;, 
Ho'w long Acejies li^ued, ivhat Jiores of swine 
He ga^e to the departing Trojan line ; 
Bid him, befides^ his daily pains employ 
To form the tender manners of the boy ; 
And 'work him, like a wjaxen babe^ lAiith art^ 
To perfe^ Jymmetry in e^very part \ 
To be his better parent^ to beiuare 
Ho young obfcmties his frength impair • t^ t 

"fhU 



ON THE STUDY OF HISTORY 185 

^his hi thj tajk ; and yet y for all thy pains, '% 

At the yearns end expeS no greater gains l 

^ban njobat a Fencer, at a prixe, obtains. \ 

Drydei*:. 
Whereas : Hoc illud eft prxcipue in cognitione 
rerum falubre ac frugiferum, omnis te ei^exnplr 
documenta in illullri poiita monumento intueri ; 
inde tibi tiweque reipublicae, quod imitere, capias ; 
inde fcsdom inceptu, fcedum exicu, quod vites» 
Tbis is the moft falutary and ufeful effed ofbiftory, 
to be able to fee examples of e<very kind placed in a. 
flriking point of 'u/Voy, that you may take thence^ 
for yourfelf and for your country , fometbing to imi^ 
tate^ and learn ijuhat is bafe in the attempt , and 
difgraceful in the iffue^ and therefore to be Jhunned. 

i ivy, 
Hiftory is particularly proper for the ftudy of 
young ladies, and ought to be recommended ta 
them in the place of thofe novels which often lead 
them to ruin. Mr. Hume very judicioufly ad- 
vifes the ladies to read hiftory. The following is. 
a quotation from his EfTay on this fubjeft. 

** I remember, I was once defired by a young^ 
beauty, for whom I had fome paflion, to fend her 
fome novels and romances for her amufement ia 
the country ; but was not fo ungenerous as to take 
the advantage, which fuch a courfe of reading 
might have given me : being refolved not to make 
ufe of poifoned arms againll her. I therefore fent 
her Plutarch's Lives, afFuring her, at the fame 
time, ihat there was not a word of truth in them 
from beginning to end. She perufed them very 
attentively, till (he came to the Lives of Alexander 
and Cafar, whofe names (he had heard of by ac- 
cident ; and then returned me the book, with 
many reproaches for deceiving her." Hume. 

I will infert in this place the following dirediona 
for Study, written by Dr. Holmes, formerly PrefU 

dent 
) 



x84 ON THE STUDY OF HISTORT. 

dent of St. John's College, Oxford. I believe they 
have never yet been printed. Dr. Holmes was 
tutor of the college when he gave this adviccLto hi* 
pupils. 

** Having gone through a fhort fyftem of logic, 
in order to qualify you for the exercifes of that clafs, 
you are now entering into, it is my duty to give 
you my thoughts concerning a method of ftudy ; fo 
far, I mean, as is related to the attainment of claf- 
fical learning ; for the cuflom of the UnlveHity 
prefcribes a method to. you in your philofophical 
ftudies, which I would advife you ftriftly to follow. 

**To read the clafficks then, with pleafure and 
advantage, it is abfolutely neceflary that you fhould 
be acquainted with an tient geography, that part of 
it more particularly, which defcribes the Greek 
and Roman empires, and that in fuch a degree, 
that you may be able to go readily to any place in 
the map, which you meet with in the book yon arc 
reading. For a competent meafure of ikill in this 
part of learning is of fingular ufe to us in dif- 
eovering the difierent iqtereil: of nations which de- 
pend chiefly upon their fituation, in letting us into 
the reafons and policy of leagues and alliances, in 
caufing us to make a due eftimate of the difficulties 
which may attend any warlike expedition, and con- 
fequently of the condudl and bravery of him who 
commands it, in judging the probability and truth 
of what any hiftorian relates, in finding out the 
caufes of that affinity which the civil and religious 
rites that one nation bears to another, with many 
other things of the like nature which we muft net 
be ignorant of, if we propofe that the clafficks 
fhould be of any ufc or benefit to us. After hav- 
ing got a notion then of geography in general from 
Harris's^ Holland's, or fome other fhort globe notes^, 
let Cluver's Compendium be carefully perufed, 
which, altho' it may not be fo corre^ as Cellarijiia, 

yet 



ON THE STUDY OF HISTORY. 185 

yet IS lefs tedious, neither has it fomany faults but 
that it may ferve your purpofe as well. Whilft you 
are upon the old Geography, it will coft you 
but little pains to make yourfelf mafter of the new ; 
wherefore, it would be advifeable to furni(h your- 
felf at the fame time with a fet of the beft modern 
maps, fuch as Sanfon's, or better if they may be * 
had } of what fervice it will be to you to compare 
the one with the other, is a thing too obvious to be 
mentioned. 

** When and where things are tranfadled will be 
matters of equal importance to us in the ftudy of 
Claflicks; to your Geography therefore you muft add 
fome fkill in Chronology. For the technical part 
of which, as it is called, you cannot confult a better 
perfon than Bp. Beveridge in his book of Chrono« 
logy at large, or abridged by Dr. Hudfon. And 
for the hiftorical part you have it in Helvicus's, 
IViarfhal's, and feveral other chronological tables, 
which, with the maps, fhould hang conHantly in 
your view, ready to be confulted at all times. To 
jthefs you muft add, that mod excellent book 
of the Bp. of Meaux concerning univerfal hiftory, 
which for the brevity and fullnefs of it, is not to ^ 
be equalled by any of that kind. 

** For laws and cuftoms which are neceflary to 
be known like wife by way of preparative to the 
ftudy of the claflicks, you need have recourfe only 
to Potter's Greek, and Kennet's Roman Antiqui- 
ties, which, once or twice carefully read, will give 
you an indght into the policy and manners of 
thofe people as far as is needful for your prefent 
purpofe; the books on thefe fubjedls are Macrobius's, 
Aulus's, Gellius's and Alexander ab Alexandrow 
Thus prepared then you are to enter upon the 
claflicks themfelves, which may be read very ufe- 
fully in the following order, namely, in the Latin 
tongue, Plautus, Phsedrus, Terence an hundred 

tiracs„ 



1 86 ON THE STUDY OF HISTORY. 

times, Juftin, Caefar, Cornelias Nepos, Patercalus, 
Salluft, Cicero, beginning with his Epiftles and 
fcleft Orations, Seneca, Suetonias, Tacitus, Ovid, 
Virgil, Horace, Lucan, Statius, Cat. Tib. and 
Propertius, Juvenal, Lucretius ; and in the Greek 
tongue Lucian, Ariftophanes, Theophraftus, Hero- 
dian, Xenophon, Herodotus, Thucydides, Demoft* 
henes, Plato, Homer, Hefiod, Theocritus, Eu- 
ripides, Sophocles, Pindar. 

'* In the ufe of thefe authors, which altho* they 
arc pretty numerous, may be gone through without 
any difficulty in the courfe of three or four 
years fludy ; you are nicely to obferve grammar, 
geography likewife and chronology, dialers, idi- 
oms, traniitions and coherences, and placing of 
the words, and their, cadences, figures, iimilitades, 
epithets (efpecially thofc in Horace, who is cu- 
rious in them), force of prepofitions, rites,* caftoms, 
laws, &c. and whatever you meet with remarkable 
in any of thefe kinds, you will do well to tranf* 
late into a common place book, made after the 
method Mr. Locke commends (which pray confult); 
or at leaft you fhould make fuch references to the 
paiTages of your authors, as you may know where 
to find them readily upon occaiion. Becanfe the 
Latin authors bear fo near a refemblance to the 
Greek, that in many cafes they ferve to explain 
each other ; in the reading of them it will be ex- 
pedient to join them all always together, efpecially 
thofe in each language who write after the fame 
way though upon different fubjedls. Thus De- 
mofthenes and Tully, Pindar and Horace, Plutarch 
and Cornelius Nepos, Homer and Virgil, Sopho- 
cles, Euripides and Seneca the tragedian, Ariftopha- 
nes and Terence, Ovid and Tibullus. Theocritus 
and Virgil's Bucolicks may very properly be read 
together. So likewife the Greek hiftorians, Hero- 
dotus and Thucydides may he read with the Latin 

onesa 



- ON THE STUDY OF HISTORr, 187 

ones, Tacitns and Livy y were it not more proper 
in my opinion to read hiftory according to order 
of time, let it be wrote in whatfoever language it 
will, for the contrary prance is to be feared is a 
diilurbance to the memory, giving us only a con- 
fufed notion of paft tranfadions, whereas a regular 
progrefs in hiftory, according to the time of things 
written, I mean, not of the authors writing, is the 
caufe of Icfs trouble to us and greater proficiency. 
But for this 1 refer you to Wheare's Methodus 
legendi civiles hiliorias ; only obferving to you 
that in the reading of Livy you muft needs joia 
Dion. Halic. with him, and perufe both hiftories 
together, for the latter will oftentimes both en« 
lighten the former, and make up the imperfedions 
we now find in him. 

** The tranflating feled pafTages out of authors 
into Bnglifh, and back again into their own tongue* 
is m'oft undoubtedly of great ufe, if we take care 
to compare our tranilation with the original ac« 
curately, coniidering the moil minute part in which 
they difier, for this will imprint in us a lively 
notion both of the idiom and genius of the lan- 
guage, and the author we are upon; we fhall difcera 
alfo how much he exceeds us in elegance and pro- 
priety, and a good ftep it will be to the attain- 
ment of his excellencies, and to be thoroughly ac- 
quainted with our own deficiencies. 

•* There arc twe faults in compofition, and that 
ibmetimes from men of no fmall reputation for 
learning, which are a confufion of flyle and thought. 
To avoid the former of thefe, let it be your care 
always to fuit your ftyle to your fubjedl, not intro- 
ducing flights of poetry into a theme or decla- 
mation (as the manner of fome is), nor the full 
periods of an oration into an epiftle, an'eflay, or 
a character, for this is as ridiculous as it would 
be to plead at the bar in Milton's or Waller's 

drain. 



188 ON THE STUDY OF HISTORY, 

ftrain, or to harangue an afTembly in the facetioas 
pleafant vein of Sir G. Etherege, Voiture, or Sir 
R. L'Eftrange. To avoid the latter^ namely, a 
confufion of thought in your compofitions, it wiU 
be advifeable not to undertake many things at 
once ; to apply yourfelf clofely to the fubjed yoa 
are upon, till you are roalter of it in fome good 
degree, and even then not to pafs on to another 
too haftily» A want of due care in this particular 
has filled the world with fo many learned triflers, 
who know nothing becaufe they will know every 
things and hence it is that the writings of fo many 
perfons arc void of method and perfpicuity, being 
nothing elfe but a mixture of crude undigefled no- 
tions, which the authors do' not clearly underfland 
themfelves, and therefore, cannot be fuppofed to 
convey them to any body elfe. 

*^ In compofing let it be your endeavour always 
to do your bed, not letting one word pafs which is 
infignificant or improper, for it is the moil difficult 
thing in the world to leaye a carelefs way of writ* 
ing, when once we have been accuftomed to it 
fome time. 

** Let your imitations be as clofe as you pleafe, 
but be not a plagiary, for befides that common 
obfcrvation, that, he who ufes himfelf to crutch- 
es, will always halt without them ; it gene- 
rally fares with thofe fort of thieves as with all 
others of the like denomination, they never leave 
off till they are hanged, that is, till they are 
difcovered and brought to fhame. I fhall only 
obferve to you farther, that the Hudy of the claf- 
ficks inuft not break oiF or interrupt that ac- 
quaintance with the holy Scriptures, which you 
would do well to read in large portions at a time, 
ami that in their original languages, fo far as may 
be done ; a critical enquiry into them it is fooa 
enough to think of hereafter, 

Laflly» 



ON THE STUDY OF HISTORY. 189 

** Lafll/y in all your ftudies let me engage 
you to join your prayers tuith mine, for your good 
fucce/s ; for as prayer iviihjut ftudy is pre* 
fumptiofiy fo ftudy without prayer is downright 
atheifm.*^ 

From a M.S. of Dr. Holm is* 



[ 190 ] 
SECTION XX, 

©K LEARNIKC TO SPEAK OR READ* WITH 
PROPRIETY, AND ON REPETITIONS OF 
AUTHORS. 

Nolo exprimi literas putidius, nolo obfcaraii 
negligentius ; nolo verba exilitcr exanimata exire ; 
nolo inflata et quafi anhelata gravius. / nvouid 
not have the Utters afff3edly exprejfed^ I *would not 
ha^e them curele/slj ccnfufed ; / luouJd not ba'ue the 
ivords ccme out faintly^ and as if the fpeaker ivae' 
put of breath ; / luould net ba*ve them mouthed^ and 
AS it *were laboured from the lungs luith fuffing and 
blowing. CiC. 

Tct; x) drao yXuavTj^ ftcXtl^ yXvicluf pin av^/}. 

Homer. 
Words tfiueet as honey , from his lips difilPd. 

Pope. 

THERE has long been a Juft complaint that 
men, whofe attainments in learning have 
rendered them highly refpedable, have not been 
able to difplay their knowledge with any great 
credit to themfelves, or advantage to others, 
from a defect or a fault in their mode of elocu- 
tion ♦• 

It 

• They often incur the reproof of Julias Casfar 
to a bad reader: ** Si cantes, male^cantas; fi le» 
gas, cantas." Jf you art finging, you fng badly i if 
you are reading, you really Jing, 

Magni intereft, quos quifque audiat quotidie 
domi, quibufquam loquatur a puero : quamadmo* 
dum patresy psdagogi, matres etiam loquantur. 

Cicero. 
The 



ON LEARNING TO SPEAKS, &c. 191 

It is therefore become a very defirable objeft 
in education to enable boys to fpeak well *. If 
the boy is defigned for the church or the law, it 
is abfolutely rieceffary. If he is defigned for no 
particular profeflion, yet a clear aiid manly ut- 
terance is a valuable acquifition. A part of the 
time fpent at fchool fhould always be devoted to 
the purfuitof this ufeful and elegant accomplilh- 
merit. 

The proper mode, then, of purfuing it, is all 
that claims our prefent examination. I fhall 
not enumerate the methods which appear to me 
wrong and inefFe6lual ; but fhall prefcribe that 
which I think moft conducive to the end in 
view f. 

At 

The ungraceful tones of boys educated in the 
northern counties are a great difadvantage to their 
fenfe and learning. They fometimes render them 
ridiculous in the fenate, at the bar« and in the 
pulpit, at the fame time that their fenfe may 
defer ve refpefl. 

♦ Sapere et far!, ut poilit, quae fentiat. To ba*ve 
good fenfe ^ and to be able tj utter ^hat he thinks, 

HpR. 

f Under fpeaking I comprehend reading ; and 
the following appears to me an excellent rule, 
** Whoever reads a perfect or finished com- 
position, whatever be the language, whatever 
the fubjedl, fhould read it, even if alone, both 
audibly and didindly. ... 

'' A compofition then like this, ffiould, as I 
faid before, be read both diilindtly and audibly; 
with due regard to flops and paufes ; with occa-* 
fional elevations and depreffions of the voice, and 
whatever elfe confticntts juH and accurate pronun- 
ciation. 



192 CN LEARNING TO SPEAK, Sec. 

At the age of thirteen provided the boy is 
pretty far advanced in the claflics, fufficiently 
advanced to be able to afford time and attention 
to other objeSs, he fhould enter on the art . of 
fpeaking. There are many books written on 
it, and many rules are ufually given to the ftu- 
dent, previoufly to his entrance on the pra6Kce. 
But I advife that thefe (hall not be ufed, .if ufed 
at all, till he fhall have been a little while ac- 
cuftomed to the pradice. Natural fenfe and 
natural tafte, a good ear *, and well forme'd or- 
gans of fpeech, under the guidance of a fkilful 
living inftruftpr, will efFedlually accomplifh this 
purpofe, without any painful attention to dry 
and unentertaining rules of art ; to rules which 
often give an appearance of difficulty to pur- 
fuits which in themfelves are eafy and pleafant. 

Once in every week I advife, that fcholars of 
the age and qualifications already fpecified, (ball 
rehearfe, in the hearing of all the boys in a 
fchool, feated in form as auditors, fome cele- 
brated paflage from Demofthenes, Plato, Ho- 
mer, Cicero, Livy, Virgil, Milton, Shake- 

CJation. He who, defpiiing, or neglefling, or 
knowing nothing of all this, reads a work of fuch 
a charader, as be would read a feflions paper, will 
not only mifs many beauties of the flyle, but will 
probably mifs (which is worfe) a large proportion 
c£ the fenfe." Harris. 

• I ^infill very much on this quality, for elo- 
quence is mofi ilridlly and properly music. 
Mooo-ixij comprehends poetry and oratory, no left 
than harmonious found whhout fenfe* 

fpeare, 



ON LEARNING TO SPEAK, &c. 193 

fpeare. Pope, or Addifon ♦. I wifh to adhere 
fcrupuloufly to thefe original writers, or at leaft 
to thofe among their fucceflbrs whofe charac- 
ters are eftabliflied. I would, for the fake of 
drawing a line not to be paffed over, admit no 
authors but fuch as thefe ; for thefe are fully 
fufficient to form the tafte, as well as to furnim 
matter for the praSice of elocution. And when 
once minor or obfcure authors are admitted as 
models for the young fpeaker, there is danger of 
corrupting his tafte. I know there are nume- 
rous writers, befides thofe I have mentioned, of 
great merit. Thefe may be read at a fubfe- 
quent period with great pleafure and advantage. 
But I would confine the attention of the ftudent 
in (peaking, to authors, whether Greek, Latin, 

♦ " When all thefe employments are well con- 
quered, then will the choice hiftories, heroic 
poems, and Attic tragedies of (lateliefl and mo ft 
regal -argument, with all the famous political ora- 
tions, offer themfelves ; which, if they were not 

ONLY READ, BUT SOME OP THEM GOT BY ME* 
MORY, AND SOLEMNLY pfOnOUnCCd WITH RIGHT 
ACCENT AND GRACE AS IMIGHT BE TAUGHT, 

would endue them even with the fpiric and vigour 
of Demoilhenes or Cicero, Euripides or Sopho- 
desV Milton's Traftate. 

I difapprove the pradice of fchool-boys fpeak« 
ing their own declamations ; unlefs it be occa- 
fionally, and as an honorary reward for a good 
compoiition. A fine piece of writing contributes 
greatly to facilitate a fine utterance. Few bOys can 
write fuch a Latin or Engliih declamation as is 
proper to difplay, to advantage, the graces of 
elocution. 

K or 



194- ON LEARNING TO SPEAK, &c. 

or Engliih, who have obtained, or who at leaft 
dcfervc, the rank of claffics ; efpecially when 
he is to commit their pafTages to memory, as in 
the.prefent cafe. I muft mention, by the way» 
that the learning by heart the moft beautiful 
pafliigcs of the fineft authors, is a very great 
collateral advantage attending the ftudy of the 
art of fpeaking in this method. 

The firft objedl is, to habituate the fcholar 
to fpeak flowly and diftindily. The greater 
part of boys have fallen into a carelefs and pre- 
cipitate manner of articulating their words. 
Till this fault is removed, no improvement can 
be made in elegance or expreffion. A diftindl 
enunciation in fpeaking, refembles perfpicuity 
in writing. Without it, there can be no grace- 
ful elocution, as without perfpicuity there can 
be no beauty of ftyle. Let fome months be 
employed in obtaining thefe primary and im- 
portant points, a flow and diftinfl utterance. 
This of itfelf is a valuable attainment. One of 
the beft methods of introducing it, I have found 
to be a motion of the inftruftors hand, refem- 
bling the beating of time in mufic, and directing 
the paufes of the learner, and the flower or 
quicker progrefs of his pronunciation. I have 
alfo found, as I doubt not others have likewife, 
that it is very ufeful to infift, during the exer- 
cife, that every fyllable, but efpecially the laft *, 

♦ Singula autem cujufquediflionis syllaba?, 
pnefertim extremte, refte, diftinde, ct clare pro- 
ferantur. Let e^uery Jy liable of every luordt hut ejpt" 
cially the Utft Jyllahles, he properly ^ diftin&ly, and 
clearly pronounced. 

QUINTILIAN, BvTLERj DuCARD. 

fhali 



ON LEARNING TO SPEAK, ice. 195 

ftiall clearly^ and almoft feparat^ly, ftrike the can 
Boys arc apt to drop the laft fyllable. They muft 
not however dwell upon it too long. Caution 
is neceffary, to prevent the flow and diftinft 
manner frooi degenerating to the heavy and die 
fluggifli. But really this feldom happens. 
Boys of parts are generally too voluble. They 
oftener want the bridle than the fpur. During 
this proccfe all monotony, and, indeed, all dif- 
agreeable tones whatever, muft be carefully 
correfted. For if they are fufFered to grow 
into a habit, the difficulty of removing them 
is great indeed ; and it is really amazing, how 
unnatural and difgufting arc the tones of many 
boys, who have been taught to read by vulgar 
pcrfons, without fubfequent correftion. 

When a flow and difliinft utterance is ob*. 
tained, and the difagreeable tones correfted, die 
graces of elocution will claim the pupil's at- 
tention. And here I cannot help remarking^ 
that I have feldom feen a very graceful manner 
in boys, who yet have not been without in- 
ftruftion in this accomplifliment. Their in- 
ftrudlors, have almoft univerfally taught them a 
bold, an affeSed, and a theatric^ manner. 
They have aimed at fomething more fliewy 
- and ftriking than the plain^ natural^ cafy, di- 
IKnd, and properly modulated ftyle of pro- 
nunciation. The confequence has been, that 
hearers of taflre have laughed and pitied. 

Modefty, whatever fome diflipated and inju- 
dicious parents may think on the fubjeft, is one 
of the moft becoming graces of a boy. When 
he fpeaks in public^ it is one of the lincft rheto- 
K 2 rical 



i^Cy ON LEARNING TO SPEAK, &e. 

rical ornaments that can be ufed. The beft 
writers on the fubje£t of rhetoric, have psefirrib- 
cd.the appearance of modefty, even in men« It 
is not therefore .wonderful, that the want of it 
in boys (and it muft always be wanting where 
a theatrical manner is adopted) (hould give diC- 
guft. A loud rant, and a violent tone of voice, 
can never pleafe in a boy, unlefs, indeed, he is 
a;^iiig .a play. But as few boys are fent to 
fchool to be prepared for a theatrical life, I 
think the theatrical manner ought to be ex- 
ploded from a fchool *, The claffical manner^ 
as I fhall call it, muft prevail in every femlnary 
devoted to antient learning ; for there, if an- 
tient learning is properly underftood and culii- 
vated, tafte muft prevail. I wifh, then, no 
mode of fpeaking to be taught and encouraged at 
a clafllcal fchool, which would not pleafe an 
Attic audience. 

I think that the greater part of inftruftors in- 
liA too much on acIion> Much adlion requires 
a degree of confidence unbecoming in a boy. 
Yet without that unbecoming confidence, it will 
be awkward ; and if it is awkward, it will ren- 
•der the fineft fpeech and the beft delivery ridi- 
culous. I have been prefent on many public 
occafions when boys have fpoken ; and I never 
yet obferved above one or two who ufed a£lion, 
without expofing themfelves to the derifion of 
the audience. Good nature led them to conceal 
their difpleafure from the boys, but it was evident 

* Plurimom aberit a fcenico. Let it he 'very 
diflant from the manner of the ft age* Qy int. 

to 



0*1 LEARNING TO SPEAK, &c. 197- 

to others, Npne feemed to have approved it but 
the more illiterate. 

It is ufual in many fchools to a<ft Englifli 
plays. The exercife may poflibly improve the 
boys in utterance, but there are many inconve- 
niencies attending it. The various prepara- 
tions, and the rehearfals, break in greatly upon 
the time which ought to be fpent in clafiical and 
grammatical ftudy. Nor is the lofs of time the 
only evil.- The boy's attention becomes en- 
grofled by his part, which he is to perform be- 
fore a large and mixed audience. The hope of 
applaufe, the dreffes, the fcenery, all confpire to 
captivate his imagination, and to make him 
loathe^ in , comparifon, his Lexicon and. Gram- 
mar. I am not fure that fome moral corrup- 
tion may not arife from feveral circumftances 
unavoidable in the reprefentation. The theatrical 
mode of fpeaking, which has been acquired by 
it, has feldom pleafed the beft judges *. Per- 
haps fome improvement may arife from zSting a 
play of Terence or Sophocles. ; but I doubt 
whether a boy will be the better for emulating a 
flroUer in a barn. The aSing of boys is feldom 
equal to that of ftroUing players. 

Neither is it defirable, that he fhould acquire 
that love and habit of declaiming, which may 
introduce him to fpouting clubs, or difputing fo^ 
cieties f. If we may believe report, little elfe 

than. 

• Non ab fcena et hiftrionibus. Not from the 
ft age and the players-, C / c. 

t Since this was written, many of thefe femx- 

aaries of riot, rebellion, and irreligion^ have been 

K 3 fupprcffc4 



19?? ON LEARNING TO SPEAK, &c. 

than infidelity and faction are learned in thofe 
fchools of oratory. Nor can it be fuppofcd, 
that elegance of ftyle, of fentiment, or of utter- 
ance, is often found in fuch unfelecled aflbcia- 
tions ♦. 

Having rejeSed the forward, the pompous, 
and the declamatory ftyle, I muft explain what 
I mean by the clai&cal. I mean, then, a clear, 
a diftind, an emphatic, and an elegant utterance 
without afFe£lation. I confefs I have not often 
Ibund fo pure a ftyle; but I can conceive it, 

{bppre/Ted by parliamentary authority, to the joy 
of all men of good fenfe, good morals, and true 
patiotifm. 

• Nee doquentem quidem efHciant, fed loquacem, 
I'bcy do not render a man a good fpeaker^ hut merely 
a prater, Petrarch. 

cv^\a^ luri v\i?uc, Tbe/e EAST BXTBMPORE ba^ 

ranguts are full ofUvitj audfiailiiy, Plutarch. 

Malo indifertam pmdeociam qoam loquacem 
Hultitiam. I prefer go^ fenfe ^ mMih^ui thi ialtiU 
^f fine fpeakingy ta talkati^^e filly . C i c • 

Loquax magis quam facundus. 

A talkative rather than an eloquent man. 

Satis eloquentiae, fapientiae parum. 

Garrulity enough— but rather too little good fenfe. 

Sallust. 

Veybaquc provifam rem non in vita fequuntur. 

HOR. 

My advice is, that, after all that has been faid on 
the* great importance of fpcaking, the iirfl: attention 
ihould be given to the acquiiition of a found judg- 
ment and good fenfe, and words will follow in 
courfe. iNon inopes rerum nugaeque canoraj. 
Not what the French call verbiage. 

and 



ON LEARNING TO SPEAK, &c. 199 

and I am fure it would pleafe and zffe^ a re- 
fined audieixre. To a vulgar and an illiterate 
audience, vehemence of a<Sion, and loudnefs of 
voice, often appear more truly eloquent, than 
the graceful oratory of an Athenian. 

To fpeak well, depends more on the corporal 
endowments, than many other accomplifhments. 
Whatever learning and judgment the mind may 
have acquired, yet unlefs nature has formed the 
organs of fpeech in perfection, and unlefs fhe 
has given a confiderable degree of bodily ftrength 
to the ftudent, he will feldom become a diftin- 
guiflied fpeaker. Art and care * may, however, 
'affift him 5 and, as I faid before, if they enable 
hifn to fpeak flbwly and diftincSHy, they will 
have done him great fervice. 

To conftitute a diftinguiflied orator f. Na- 
ture muft. have dotie mnch more than have fur- 
ni{hed perfeft organs of fpeech. She muft have 
^rven eyquifite ferifibility J. This, with culti- 
vation under an inftruftor, whoKkewife poflefles 

• Nemo jeperitur qqi fit ftudio nihil confecutus. 
T'hen /V no one ivbo has not got fomethtng by appli- 
cation, Qu i n t 1 L i a n . 

t Such an one as Ben Jonfon defcribcs, when 
he fays, ** His hearers could not cough or look 
alide without lofs. He commanded where he 
SPOKE. . . The fear of every man that heard 
him was, left he fhould make an end." 

Ben Jon son's Difcoveries. 

J Omncs voces, ut nervi in fidibus, ita fonanC 
ut a moiu animi quoque funt pulfce. All the touts 
of the -voice, like the firings of a mujical infirument, 
gi've a found according to the firoke received hy the 
emotion of mind, C i c. 

K 4 both 



200 ON LEARNING Td SPEAK, &c. 

both fttifibility and perfeft organs^ will infallibly 
produce that noble accompnfliment which has 
charmed mankind^ and occafioned fome of the 
greateft events in their hiftory. 

I will not clofe this fe6lion, without ferioufly 
advifing all who are defigned to fill that office, 
which is inftituted to inftruct their fellow-crea- 
tures in moral and religious truth, to pay great 
attention, in their youth, to the art of fpeaking ♦. 
The negleft of it has brought the regularly 
educated profeflbrs of religion into contempt 
among the lower orders of the people ; among 
thofe who, for want of other opportunities, 
fland moft in need of inftru£Hon from the pulpit. 
It has given a great advantage to the fe^aries, 
and perions irregularly educated, who fpare no 
endeavours to acquire that forcible and ferious 
kind of delivery, which powerfully afFefls the 
devout mind. <The confequence is natural, 
though lamentable. Tabernacles are crowded, 
and churches deferted f • 

To 

• ' ** Whether they be to fpeak in par- 

*' liament or council, honour and attention would 
'• be waiting on their lips. There would thei^ 
•* alfo appear in pulpits, other vifages, other 
*• geflures, and fluff otherwifc wrought, than what 
*' we now fit under, oft times to as great a trial 
*• of our patience as any other that they preach to 
** us." Milton's Tradlate. 

F ut, oratorum vim imitatur inanis quaidam 
proHuentia loquendi. The irrejiftible force of the 
true orator y is imitated by a certain empty and tfer* 
bofe ^volubility of talking, 

f A pro|*er delivery will caufe an inferior compo- 
filion to produce a defirable effedl on a ferious and 

a well- 



ON LEARNING TO SPEAK, Sec. zipi 

To thofe who wifli to pofTefs feme book to 
dire£l them in purfuing this art, I will recom- 
mend 

a well-difpofed congregation. But a poor man- 
ner as well as poor matter, muil neceffarily in« 
duce the parifhioner to wander to other afTemblies, 
where he can be better pleafed and inftrufted— 
Let an impartial obferver enter many of the 
churches in the Great City, efpecially in an after- 
noon, and "he will regret the want of that elo- 
quence, which is able to force an audience. He 
will fee the nationai utility of making the art of 
fpeaking a part of fchool-education. Not but that 
many popular preachers do indeed attempt ora- 
tory ; but the attempt brings to mind a paiTage in 
Erafmus, 

Age vero quern tu mihi comacdum, qirem cir- 
culatorem fpedare malis quam i(lo$ in concionibus 
rhetorieantes omnino ridicule, fed tamen su avis- 
si me imitantes ea quae rhetores de dicendi ratione , 
tradiderunt?' Deum immortalem ! ut gefticulanti^j;^ 
ut aptc commutant vocem, ut cantilmnt, ut jac- 
tant {efe^ ut fubhide alios atque alios valtus in- 
ddtint, ut omnia clamoribos mifcent ! AVtv ivhat 
comeMan or mountebank bad you rather fee^ than thefe 
gentlemen flourififing atuay in their fermons moji 
laughably ; but yet moft Jhveetly foUonuing all the 
rules laid donjon by the lecturers on the art 
OF SPEAKING. Good God ! *wbat gejliculationt 
they make t hoijo aptly they change the tone of thciv 
'voice ; botv they fejm to Jing it^ honv they throTi 
tbemfeUves about, 'what faces they make^ luhat atti- 
fttdes they ajfume^ and ho'w they confound e^uery thing 
n»itb their 'vociferation I' So much hypocri fy and 
even villany has been detedled in fome of thofe 
vain perfons who have af{e6^ed popularity of pxeach- 
ing, that all fenfible perfons arc nowbecome fufpi- 
cious of it. 

K 5 I will 



tot ON LEARNING TO SPEAE, ftr. 

mend the books commonly in ufe, thoie of 
Burgh * and Enfield. I will add, that fome parts 

of 

I will beg leave ta make a remark on the pre- 
fent flate of the cloquencb of the ba>. I 
am forry to obferve, that it has greatly degene^ 
rated from that liberal oratory which immortalized 
a Cicero, and which was deiigned to defend the 
caufe of the fatherlefs and the widow, and to pro- 
teA the injured, by lending truth the affiftance of 
abilities, it is now little more than frothy decla- 
mation, often didated by the cunning of a knave,, 
and uttered by the bellowing of a bully. Im- 
pudence, inhumanity, indelicacy, want of can • 
dour, and narrownefs of mind, mark the modern 
pleader. The CRutL and unmanly advan- 
tage which he takes of his iituation, to make- 
free with refpe£table charadlerss unpunished, of- 
ten degrades him below the rank of a fcholar, a 
man of common humanity, a Chriitian, and, 

WHAT he thinks WORSE THAN ALL, h GeN' 

TLEMAN. It is remarked of the popular pleaders 
at the bar, that, with all their bold preten£ons to 
eloquence, their volubility fails them when they 
are without their briefs, and when they are un- 
protefted by a court of judicature. 

• Mr. Burgh has rendered his art of Speml- 
iNG particularly ufeful, by inferting in the mar- 
gin, the paiTions and humours which the paflages- 
he has colle6led exprefs. But Dr. Enfield's fpeaker 
is alfo a very pleafing and ufeful compilation. I 
cite the following paflage as a curiofity, from a 
book on the art of fpe^ing, which was printed 
near 250 years ago, and does honour to Englifh li- 
terature, if we confider the ilat^ of the times 

'* Pronunciation dandeth partly in faihioning 
the tongue» and partly in framing the gefture. 

"The 



ON LEARNING TO SPEAK, &c. 203 

of Mr. Sheridan's Art of Reading contain va- 
luable hints. But thefe will effect but little, 
without a living and really judicious inftrudlor, 
or a natural tafFe and genius for elocution. 

. ** The tongue or voyce is praife-worthie, if the 
utteraunce be audible, (Irong, and eafie, and apt 
to order as wee lilh Therefore, they that minde 
to get praife in telling their minde in open au- 
dience, muft, at the firft beginning, fpeake fome- 
whac foftlie, ufe meete paufing, and beeying feme- 
what heated, rife with their voyce, as tyme and 
caufe (hall beft require. They that have no good 
voyccs by nature, or cannot well utter their wordes, 
muft feeke for heipe elfewhere. Exercife of the 
bodie, faftyng, moderation in meate and drinke, 
gaping wide, or fingyng plaine fong, and counter- 
feyting thofe that doe fpeake di(lin^Iy,he]pemuche 
to have a good deliveraunce. Demoflhenes beyng 
not able to pronounce the firfl letter of that arte 
whiche he profeffed, but woulde faie, for Rheto- 
rike, Letolike, uTed to put little (bnes under his 
tongue, and fo pronounced, whereby he fpeake at 
length fo plainly, as any man in the worlde could 
doe Mufici<iDs in Englande have ufed to pat 
gagges in childrens mouthes, that they might pro- 
nounce diilindly, but now with the loiTe and lacke 
of mofick, the love alfo is gone of bringing up child* 
ren to fpeake plainly Some there bee that either 
naturally, or through folly have fuch evill voyces> 
and fuche lacke of utteraunce,- ano foche evill geC^ 
ture, that it muche deface th all their doynges. One. 
pipes out his wordes fo fmall, through defaulte of 
his winde pipe» that ye would thinke he whilUed. 
An other b hoarie.in his throre. An other fpeakes 
as though he had plummes in his mouth An 
other fpeakes in his throte> as though a good ale 
crumme ftucke fail. An other rattles his wordes, 
K 6 An 



204 ON LEARNING TO SPEAK, &c. 

An other choppes his wordes. An other fpeakes, 
as . though his wordes had neede to be heaved out 
with leavers. An other fpeakes, as though hit 
wordes ihould be weighed in a ballance. An other 
gapes to fetch winde at every thirde woorde. This 
manne barkes out his EngliHie Northern like, with 
I faie, and thou lad. An other fpeakes fo finely, as 
though he were brought up in a ladies chamber. 
As I knewe a prieft that was as nice as a Nunnes 
Henne, when he would faie ma/fr', he would never 
faie Dominus vobifcum, but Dominus vobicnm. 
Some blowe at their noftrilles. Some fighes out 
their woordes. Some finges their fentences. Some 
laughes altogether, when they fpeake to any bodie. 
Some gruntes like a hogge. Some cackles like a 
henne, or a jacke-dawe. Some fpeakes as though 
they ihould tell in their fleeve. Some cries out fo 
loude, that they would make a man's ears ake to 
heare them. Some coughes at tvcry worde. Some 
hemmes it out. Som« fpittes fire, they talke fo 
hottely. Some make a wrie mouth, and fo they 
wrcll out their wordes. Some whines like a pigge. 
Some fuppes their wordes up, as a poore man doth 
his porage. Some noddes their hed at every fen* 
fence. An other winkes with one eye, and fbme 
with both. This man frouneth alwaies when he 
fpeakes. An other lookes ever as though he were 
madde. Some cannot fpeake but they muft goe up 
and doune, or at the leaft be ^rryng their feete, as 
though they flood in a cokerying boate. An other 
will plaie with his cappe in his hand, and fo tell his 
tale. Some, when they fpeake in a great companie, 
will looke ^11 one waie. Some pores upon the 
ground as though they fought for pinnes. Some 
fwelles in the face and filles their cheekes full of 
winde, as though they would blowe out their wordes. 
Some fettes forthe their lippes two inches good be- 
yonde their teethe. Some talkes as though their 
tongue went of pattines. Some (hews all their 
6 teeth.. 



ON LEARNING TO SPEAK, &c. 2Qf 

teeth. Some fpeakes in their teeth altogether. 
Some letces their wordes fall in their lippes, fcant 
opening them when they fpcakc, There are a 
thoufand fuche faultes among men, bothe for their 
fpeeche, and alfo for their gefture, the which if 
in their young yeres they be not remedied, they 
will hardly bee forgott when they come to man's 
ftate.** Wilson's Arte of Rhetorique. 

Some good remarks are prefixed to Burgh's 
ART or SPEAKIN-G : but a good living model, 
with a good ear and voice, will render few rales 
necefiary. 

Dr. Blair's Lectures on Rhetoric, and the Belles 
Lettres, are the moft inftrudive books which the 
Engliih fcholar can read, who wifhes to acquire a 
tafte for polite learning, and a general acquaintance 
with rhetoric. 7 hey may fuperfede all other books 
of rhetoric in the Englifh language ; though they 
are faid to be not without fome inaccuracies, and 
certainly contain many remarks, which, though very 
infbuAive to the Uarnery do not appear new to the 
learned. 



t ao6 ] 
SECTION XXL 

ON INSPIRING TASTE. 

^i J <verum atque deceits. Ho rat. 

*' Every man that underilandeth Latin, doth 
not underftand either greatnefs or deJicacy of 
thought, ftrength or beauty of expreffion ; and 
fome critical heads, fuch abfolute mailers are they 
of their pafllons, can bear the raptures and flights 
of poets with a wonderful. command of temper, and 
be no more afFeded with the mod moving ftrains^ 
than if they were reading the heavieft piece of their 
own compoiing.'* Felton. 

Per aiFeftationem decoris corrupta fententia, ciim 
eo ipfo dedecoretur quo illam voluit author ornare. 
Hoc fit aut nimio tumore aut nimio cultu. The 
fenteuce is often /pailed by an affedatUn af hsauty^ 
<wben it is deformed by the 'very means by ivbicb thi 
author meant to adorn it. This arijes from a too 
gnat turgidity^ or too much embellijhment, ' 

DiOMED. Grammat. 

' O enter on a metaphyfical * difquifition 
^ on the particular conftitution of mind 
which forms that quality which is termed good 

♦ Some who are difpofed to cenfure whatever is 
well received by the public, have faid of this treatife, 
that it is not Philofophical^ they mean, Metaphyseal, 
Theoretical, Fanciful. I rt^joice that it is not. 
The cenfurers may fee an anfwer to their objedlion 
in the title page, for ii it not profefTedly a praSiical 
Treatife ? Treatifes on Education have been too 
fpeculative to be ufeful. 

taftcy 



T 



.ON INSPIRING TASTE. 207 

tafle, is by no means the bufinefs of my treatlfe. 
All , I intend is, to point out, as well as I am 
able, the methods which contribute to infpire a 
young mind with a proper degree of it. 

Tafte is indifputably very defirahle in itfelf ; 
but it is the more fo, as it has an influence on 
moral virtue. That delicate faculty which is 
fenfibly delighted with all that is beautiful and 
iiiblime, and immediately difgufled with all that 
is inelegant in compofition, muft be often af- 
fected with fimilar appearances in theconduft of 
human life. And I believe it will be found, that 
perfons poflefled of a truly refined tafte, are 
commonly humane *, candid, open^ and gene^ 
rous. 

* What we call claffical learning is properly 
termed in Latin humakit as. Quibus aetas pueri- 
lis ad hunianicatem informari folet. By wubicb thc^ 
pueriU age is ufed to he formed to humanity ^ 

Cic. 

The word humanity feems indeed to be re- 
ceived in Scotland in the fame claflical fenfe. 

Qui verba Latin a fecerunt, humanitatem ap^ - 
pellarunt id propemodum, quod Grxci ^a\^\%tu 
vocant, nos Ernditionem, inlUtucionemque in bonas 
artes dicimus, quas qiu iinceriter cupiunt, appe« 
tnntque, 11 funt vel maxima humaniinmi. Hujus 
enim fciemiae cara et difciplina ex univerfis ani» 
niantibus uni homini data eft: idcirco humanitas 
appellata eft : utque Cicero pro Archia inquit^ 
omnes artes quae ad humanitatem pertinent, habent 
quoddam commune vinculum et quali cognatione 
qaadam inter ie continentur» 

AvLus Gellius^ 



loS ON INSPIRING TASTE. 

To read widioujt tafte, is like travelling 
through a delightful country, without remark- 
ing the richncfs and variety of the profpedb. 
From fuch an excurfion more fatigue mufl arife 
than pleafure. Indeed, the claffics are entirely 
the objie<Sls of tafte, and he who reads them 
without it mifpends his time. Yet I have 
known many who read Virgil with eafe, and 
who yet received no other pleafure from the 
poem, than that wWch the fuccefEon of events 
afForded*. The ftory was entertaining, but the 
d13ion and the fendment, the delicacy and dig* 
nitypafied unadmired. 

out how fhall we proceed ? Is this amiable 
quality to be fuperinduced by art, or is it not 
neceffary that, like moft of the finer faculties of 
the human mind, it (bould originate in nature ? 
I believe, with many others, that all nfien,. not 
remarkably deficient in intelled, are by nature 
furnifhed'wifh fo much of this difcerning power 
as eafily to admit of valuable improvement. In- 
flru6lion is by no means unneceflary. Even 
they who poflefs the fineft natural fenfibility of 
literary beauty and deformity, will find their 
tafte greatly improved by proper cultivation. 
It is certain, that if, from fome unfortunate cir^ 
cumftance, it happens that a mind endowed with 
this natural power in a remarkable degree, is 
confined in a youthful age to bad models or in^ 
judicious inftruflors^ it will fearcely ever arrive 
at that perfection, of whi^ch nature gsive it a ca- 
pacity. Rules, therefore, and precautions, are 
jiot only ufeful, but nec^fTary. 

I fhall give but one general rule. It is in- 
deed fufKcicntly obvious^ and it requires lefs to 

be 



ON INSPIRING TASTE. 20^ 

be pointed out than to be ftriSly followed. It 
is, that from the age of nine to nineteen, the 
pupil be not permitted to read any book what- 
ever, except religious books, Englifli, French, 
Latin, or Greek, which is not univerfally known 
and allowed to be written according to the mofb 
approved and claffical tafte*. This rule is proper 
to be prefcribed on the prefent occafion, fince all 
who are converfant with young ftudents, are fen- 
fible how fond they are of reading any trafli, with- 
out the leaft regard to ftyle or manner, if it af- 
fords but entertainment by the gratification of cu- 
riofity. At an early age the mental, like the ani- 
mal tafte, delights in that improper food, from 
which it is more likely to derive an atrophy» 

♦ As to tafte, or elevation of fentiment^ we arc 
told by fome arrogant writers that claffical fcholars, 
ieldom poflefsit. I'heingenious Author of the Origin 
and Progrefs of Languages has quoted a paflage from 
an Edinburgh periodic^ publication » in which the 
fagacious writers tell us, ** Upon the whole, Mr. 
Harris, even in the prefent volume, with all its 
iroperfe£Hons, has an elevation op sentiment 
that lifes above the ordinary reach of merb 
classical scholars. He may be coniidered 
as a iingular exception to a general and welU 
founded obfcrvation, that thofe who have been 
remarkable for their ikill in Greek and Latin, 
have feldom difcovered a good taste, or any 
TALENTS, for philofophical difquifition.*' Lord 
Monboddo fhews a proper indignation on reading 
fuch criticifm* I will take this opportunity of re- 
commending the claflical parts of Lord Mon bod- 
do's work, and efpecially the third volume, to the 
reader's attention. 

than 



2IO ON INSPIRING TASTE. 

than to acquire nourifhment. . But when, during 
ten of the moft fufceptible years, none but the 
beft models are prefentcd to the mental eye, it 
muft perceive, and learn to admire, the form of 
beauty. The bufinef^, will, however, be greatly 
facilitated, if the inftrudor feels the excellencies" 
which he reads with his pupil, and pofleffes the 
talent of impref&ng them upon him in a lively 
and forcible manner. If he is not remarkably 
happy in fenfibility, yet if the pupil is fo, the 
end will often be accomplifhed ; for the beau- 
ties of the truly claflical writer are fuch, as to 
make their own way to the feelings of the fcn- 
fible ♦• Let them but be well underftood, and 
kept conftantly before him, and the tafte muft 
be improved. 

Boys fometimes, from a redundancy of ima* 
gination, as well as a deficiency of judgment, 
are very apt to admire too much the florid ftyk 
of compofition. In their imitation of it, tbey 
commonly (slW into the turgid and bombaft. 

• Walker, the author of the Treatife on Par- 
ticles, has, I think, well cxpreffed the plea fare . a 
man of tafte feels, even from a particle inferted 
with tafte. ** For my own part (fays he), I have 
often been furprifed with a ravifhing fweetnefs in 
the reading of a piece of Latin, fo that I have 
hung and dwelt upoh it like a bee upon a flower, 
and could not readily get away from it; and when 
I have come to examine the caufe of that furprife, 
I have found nothing but what lay m the finencfs 
and artfulnefs of the comp( fure, or elfe in the fig- 
nificancy and elegancy of the particles, which 
fparkied up and - nvn therein, like ipangles of 
filver in a filken vO.itexture." 

Whenever 



ON INSPIRING TASTE. 211 

Whenever this appears in a theme, or copy of 
verfes, let fome paiFage be read on a fimilar fub- 
jecSl, if it can be found, from the works of a 
Pope, an Addifon, or any other juftly admired 
writer. They will foon fee the deformity of 
their own ftyle, when contrafted with thefe. 
But care (hould be taken, that a boy be hot dif- 
couraged * ; for his fault is the ebullition of 
genius. A dull boy cannot rife to fo elevated 
an error. 

Let the pupils, if it is poffible, be led to a noble 

* Par pari arc bene bifogna pari are mal. In order 
to expre/t onis felf^well^ it is neceff'ary to expre/s one's 

Jelf iU AT FIRST. 

Adag. Ital. 
The following remarks on the proper method of 
correfting exercifes are valuable. Porro five quid 
lauieSy five reprehendas, ucramqae et cum modo^ ec 
'varie fkcieadum. In aliis inventionis nervi, in aliis 
argmnentandi fubtilitas probanda, in aliis fanitas, 
in aliis gravitas : in his lepos, in aliis varietas, in 
nonnullis difpofitio, in nonnallis coniilium, utad 
quamque virtutem quifque videbitur accedere. 
Haec laudis ct rcprehenfionis defpenfatio faciet, ut 
neque quifqaam dc fe defpcret, neque defpiciat 
quenquam : turn aemalatio qusedam inter omnes 
excitata, dam irritatis o:nnibus« alterius quifque 
laudem adfe£labit> didlu mirum quantum calcar 
addet ad iludium. Quorundam putidis ingeniis et 
rufHco pudori pri*uatis ac blandis admonitiohibus 
erit fuccurrendum. Profuerit et illud, praemiola 
qu^dam pucriJia proponere iis, quiprimas tulifTent. 
Viflores collaudare modice, vidos ad conandum 
hortari, quail induilria, non iiigenio fint praeteriti. 

" £rasm js. 

fimplicity 



tiz ON INSPIRING TASTE, 

fimplicity in manner, drefs *, and fentiment, as 
well as criticjfm and compofidon. 'Let them 
be taught, that though falfe and glaring orna* 
ments, in all thefe, may attra£^ momentary and 
fuperficial admiration, yet that valuable and per- 
manent gracefulnefs is the refult of an adherence 
to truth and nature.. 

Falfe and aflPefted tafte involves its pofleflbr 
in ruin or in ridicule. But true tafte, the refult 
of fine feelings and a cultivated underftanding, 
©pens the fource of a thoufand pleafures un- 
known to the vulgar, and adds the laft polifh 
and moft brilliant luftre to the human intelledl. 
Study without tafte, is often Irkfome labour; 
with ufte, it confers a happinefs j: beyond the. 

. reach. 

♦ Illam quicquid agit, quoquo veftigia flcffit 
Componit furdia fubfequiturque decor ;. 
Seu folvit crinesy fufis decet efle capillb 

Sea compfit, compds eft veneranda comIs» 
Urit feu Tyria voluit procedere palla> 

Urit feu nivea Candida vcfte venit. 
Talis in asterno felix Vertuninas Olympo 
Mllle habet ornatuiy mille de center habet*. 
TiBUL.Lib.4. Hleg. 2. 
To Grace, the ofFjLpring of Tafte, we may isiy, 
£t parum comis fine te juventus 

Mercuriufque. H' r». 

t Many authorities might be cited to evince 
the beneficial effed of good tafte on the morals, 
and confequently on happinefs. I will tranfcpibc 
that of Lord Kaims, in his £lementsof Criticifm. 

*• A juft tafte in the fine arts, derived from ra- 
tional principles, is a fine preparation for ailing in 
the focial ftate with dignity and propriety .... 
A juft tafte in the fine arts, by fweeiening and 
harmonizing the temper, is a ftrong antidote to- 

the 



ON INSPIRING TASTE. 21J 

^each of fortune, and fuperior to the ordinary 
condition of humanity *• 

the turbulence of paflion. • . • Elegance of talle 
procures to a man fo much enjoyment at home, or 
eafily within reach, that, in order to be occupied, 
he is, in youth, u der no temptation to precipitate 
into hunting, gaming, drinking ; nor, in middle 
age, to dchvcr himfelf over to ambition ; nor, in 
old age^ to avarice. A jutl reliih of what is beau- 
tiful, proper, elegant, and ornamental, in writing 
or painting, in architedlure or gardening, is a fine 
preparation for difcerning what is beautiful, juft, 
elegant, or magnanimous in charadier or behaviour.'' 

But after all that is faid in praife of tafle, we 
muft place it in a fubordinate rank to good fenft^ 
and a power and habit of juft reafoning. On thefe, 
indeed, true tafte depends. Tafte unfupported by 
good fenfe becomes faftidioufnefs ; a quality of 
weak and vain minds. It is derived from affedla- 
tion, effeminacy, and infolence, and it commonly 
renders its poffeflbr unhappy and ridiculous. It is 
the parent of falfe connoijeurjhip, and of every fpe- 
cies of foppery and unmanly refinement. 

If tafle and claflical learning were only fo far 
ufeful as they afford an opportunity of finding em- 
ployment for all hours, and deliver the rich from 
■ the mifery of not knowing what to do, and of 
running into vice for employment, they would be 
very valuable. Books are the mod convenient 
paftime, confidered only as fuch« They are eafily 
procured, and they are capable of being ufed at 
all feafons and under all drcumflances. The chief 
advantage of a good education, fays Aridotle, is 
to teach us how to employ our leifure. 

See Lord Monboddo's 3d Vol. of the Ori- 
gin and Progrefs of Language. 

* The following is Voffius's explanation of the 
epithet liberal, as it is ufed when we apply it to 
arts, knowledge, or education* 

Liberae, 



214 <^N INSPIRING TASTE. 

Liberae, quia non modd liberis dignae, fed ani* 
mum etiam liberent vitiis. Sapere enim docent; 
quod vere eft liberum effe, et ab tyrannide affec-* 
tuum immunem, soli numinIj et anima fux, 
ac PUBLICO BONO man cipat urn ; quails mancipa* 
tus ipfiilima eft hominis libercas. Liberal, not 
only hecau/e they are luorthy liberal men, but becaufe 
they liberate the mind from 'vices. For they teach to 
think ; (which is, in the trueji fenfe, to he liberal, 
to be free from the tyranny of the paffions, in a flate 
of fervitude, to the deity only, one's own 

SOUL, AND THE PUBLIC GOOD, WHICH SERVICE 
IS PERFECT FREEDOM." VOSSIUS. 

They may be called liberal alfo, becaufe they 
promote the love of civil liberty. 

** Hobbes was confiftent with himfelf, and ad- 
•' vifes thofe who aim at abfolute dominion, to de- 
«* ftroy all the antient Qreeic and Latin authors ; 
*' becaufe if they are read, principles of liberty, 
** and juft fentiraents of the dignity and rights of 
*^ mankind, muft be imbibed." James Thomson. 



[ 215 ] 
SECTION XXIL 

©N THE STUDY OF POETRY IN GENERAL. 



- Hiftoriarum ledio prudentes efficit ; Poetarum, 
ingenlofos« Reading biftory makes men prudent \ 
reading poetry makes them ingenious. Lord Bacon. - 

Ingenuas, didiciflc fideliter * artes 

Emollit mores. ' 

Afpcritatis et invidiae corredlor et irse. 

To have learned the liberal arts faithfully, 
foftens the manners ^ and operates as a fine correSlor of 
ill-nature f ennfy, and a?tger<, Ovid. Hor. 

« » 

MANY parents confider a turn for poetry 
in their children, as a misfortune f.. 
They are of opinion, that it will render them 

averfe 

* The emphaiis mufl be laid on FIDELITER. . 

t Dull people, though they do not comprehend 
men of genius^ are afraid of them, and naturally 
unite againft them. JJr. Gregory, 

.Perfons of this fort generally quote an aphoriiin 
of plebeian wifdom upon the occafion; as the 

GREATEST CLERKS ARE NOT THE WISEST MEN; 

which, though it gives dunces comfort, is not a!-* 
ways true ; they :r.ay not perhaps have that kind 
of wifdom which is properly called cunning ; 
, they may not know fo well as others to make a. 
good bargain; they may not be knowing ones, 
according to a vulgar and cant phrafe ; but they, 
will be wife, in the proper ienfe of the word ;. 
4 they 



ii6 ON THE STUDY OF POETRY. 

averfe from all the ferious occupations * of life, 
and fubjeft them to the ddufions of the ima- 
gination. If a boy is to be fixed in a laborious 
or mercantile employment, their opinion and 
apprehenfions are certainJy well founded ; but 
the truth is, the boy of a poetical turn fliould 
not te deftined to fuch employment, unlefs pe- 
culiar cirpumftances of convenience and advan- 
tage make it neceffary. He ihould be trained 
to one of the profelTions, in which his tafte and 
geitiue will always give him an honourable dif- 
tindlion, or at leaft fupply him with the pureft 
of pleafures f. 

To 

they will Tdc amiable, liappy in themselves, and a 
bleffing to others. They will, at the fame time» 
have their faults and weakneiTes like other jnen^ 
and thefe will be more taken notice of in chem> and 
farnifh delicious food for calumny. 

* That is, from the arts of accpiiring money. 
For the votaries of Plutus chiefly entertain the above 
opinion. 

Omnes hi metuimt verfos; odere poetas. HoR* 

jfll thefe are afraid of a poem^ and bate a poet. 

Rape,congere,aufer, poffide^ — relinqucndumeft. 

Snatchy heap up^ carry anAjay^ take pojfejjion \ -^ 
you mvfi Ua've it all. bENECA. 

f Mr. Locke, in diffuading from poetry, fays, 
" It i« very fcldom feen, that any one difcovert 
mines of gold or filver in ParnafTus." I hope 
Mr. Locke would not infinuate, that gold and fil- 
ver are the iirfl objedts of purfuit. Such an idea 
is not only unpoctical, but unphilofbphical. 

** Mr. Locke (fays Rollin) has fome particular 
fentiments which 1 would not always adopt. Be- 
fides, I queftion whether he was well-ikilled in the 

Greek 



ON THE STUDY OF POETRY, 2x7 

To the boy whofe lot will be to poffefs a for- 
itune, which his friends wifli him to adorn, and 
to him who is defigned for a profeffion, I 
•ftrongly lecommend the cultivation of a poetical 
4urn, if he really poffeiTes it *. Though he 
Ihould never arrive at any very diftinguifhed 
emioence in poetical compofition, yet the at- 
•tempt, while he is at fchool, will add an ele- 

Greek tongue, and in the flady of the Belles Let- 
.tres: at leaft, he feems not to fet the value upon 
them they deferve*"^ 

* If he have a* poetic vein, 'tis to me the 

•STRANGEST THING IJ^ THE WORLD, that thc 

^father (hould deiire or fuffer it to be cherished 
on improved. Methinks thc parents fhould la- 
bour to have it stifled and suppressed as 
znuch as may be. Locke. 

** Mr. Locke,'* fays Dr. Jofeph Warton, " to his 
^ther fuperior talents, did not add a good tajie. He 
affefted to defpife poetry^ and he depreciated the 
,antients." He adds, in a note, ** another, and a 
better philofopher, thought very differently on this 
fubjed ; and has given fo high an encomium on the 
utility of the antient clafHcs, that the pafTagc de- 
ferves a particular notice. ** Annon ideo fit, ut 
^criptorum prifcorum praeftantiffimi libri et fer- 
mones (quibus ad virtutem homines eiHcaciffime 
invitati funt, tam auguftam ejus m jeftatem 
omnium ocalis reprefentando, quam opiniones 
populares, in virtuts ignominiam, tanquam 
habita parafitorum indutas, derifui proponendo), 
tam parum profmt, ad vitae honeftatem et mores 
pravos corrigendos, quia perlegi et revolvi non con- 
^everunt, a viris aetatCji et judicio maturis^ fed 
pueris tantum et tyronibus reilD^uuntur." 

Bacon* 

L gance 



2i« <JN'THE STUDY 6¥ POETRY. 

giin^e to bi$ 'tiiiniy and will naturally kad him 
to givea clofer attention to the beauties of the 
-claffical poets. It >vill not be a painful talk. 
It will be his fnoft delightful amufement. It 
will give him fpirits in hispurfuits : for poetry is 
one of the fiveetfcfft relaxations of a learned life. 

But the 'mode of purfuing the ftudy of poetry, 
received in fome fchook, is certainly abfuf d and 
inefficacious. It is ufual to place in the boy's 
hands fome fupefficial treatife, entitled the Art 
of Poetry. This puzzles him with rules which 
he hardly underftands, and pref^nts him with- a 
train of dry and unentertainihg ideas, wjiich, if 
they do not give him a difrelifli for his purfuit, 
employ his time and attention in an ufelefs 
courfe of reading *. What can ^e expected 
when a youthful genius is put under the guid- 
ance of fuch critics as Byfheand Gildon? 

The moft fuccefsful method, I fhould ima- 
gine to be the following : Let a living inftruc- 
tor, of tafte and judgment^ feleft proper paffagej 
from the moft approved poets, and at firft read 
them with the pupil. After this preparatory dif- 
cipline, which needs not to be continued long, 

• The method of fbmc private tutors is truly 
ridiculous. They read dry diflertations of their 
own compofing, on epic, dramatic, and pailoral 
poetry, to boys of nine or ten, who fit nodding 
around them, but who would be eiFedaally roazed 
and awakened by reading the poems themfelves. 
The inftru6lor finds it picafanter to gratify his 
vanity, hy lecturing with all the formality of a pro- 
felTor in his chair, than to labour like a peda- 
gogue in hearing a boy conftrue and parfe. 

let' 



t> 



ON THE STUDY OF POETRY. ,^ig 

let the works of Mijton, ShakefpQare, and Pope, 
be given to the ftudent. .He will irnprove him- 
fdf by reading them, more than by any inftruc- 
»tor with the moft learned precepts. No other 
reftraint is neceflary, than to confine his atten- 
tion for a-cprifiderable time to thefe great ^oets. 
My reafon for confining his. attention to th« 
gre^t original authors, is a full convicftion, that 
many a fine genius, is lowered and fpoiled^ by 
attending to the little and trifling compofitions 
which are to be found in abundance in many of 
,our modern mifceUanies *. 

The Mediocres Poetae, or the Poetafters, 
muft by no means be read, while the judgment 
is immature. The young mind is prone to 
imitate bad models in literature, as weU as in 
life. The faireft forms of things muft'be pre- 
fented to the eye of imitative genius, and a veil 
drawn over deformity t» 

* He muft write alfo as well as read ; erlt in 

CARMINE, in oratione libera, in omni argurr.enti 

. genere diligenter excrcendus. He muft be diligently 

fxerci/eii in the COMPOSITION of verse, of prof e^ 

of e'very kind of lAjriting, Erasmus. 

** If ever learning conie among them it muft be by 
halving their hard dull ixjtts foftened and ftyarpened by 

the SWEET DELIGHT OF POETRY; /or, UNTIL 
THEY FIND A PLEASURE IN THE EXERCISE OF 

THE MIND,' j^r^«/ promifes of much knoivledge nvill 
not perfuade them 4hat know not the fruits of know» 
ledgeJ*^ ^ Sir Philip Sidney. 

f One principal argument for initiating boys in 

poetical ftudics, is, that it will enable them the 

better to tafte the delicacies of poetical compofi- 

tion, and confequently to part^e of a pure and 

L z aoblc 



^2o ON THE STUDY OF POETRY. 

•noble pleafure in great pcrfeftion. For, as Ci- 
cero obferves, Qaam multa vident pi^lores in um- 
bris et in eminentia, quae nos non videmus; qoaoi 
multa, quae nos fugiunt, in cantu exaudiunt in eo 
generc^xercitaii, Ho^w many beauties do the pedn^ 
.ten fee in light and Jhadey fwbicb ive do not I botjj 
many charms in a piece of mufic^ fixxbicb efcape us^ do 
^hey hear *who are exerctfed in tbe/irt I 

Acad. Qu^st. 
Exclufive of all regard to in tereft, and of pre- 
paration for the exercife of any art or profeflion, 
*a tafte for plcafing booka is furely eligible, if it 
were only for the fake of enabling an ingenuovs 
'man to pafs his days innocently, calmly, and plea- 
furably. The pleafures of letters ^re xrertainly 
.great to thofe who have been early devoted to 
them, and they are of all others the eafieft to tie 
obtained. For, with refped to books we may fay, 
Horum nemo non vacabit, nemo non venientem 
ad fe beatiorem, amantiorerrque fui demittit. . . ^ 
Nofle conveniri et interdiu-ab omnibus poffunt. . • 
Nullius ex his fermo periculofus erit, nullius 
fumptuofa obfervatio . • . fer^s ex his quidquid 
voles . . • quae illiirn faelicitas, quam palchra de- 
nedVus manet, qui fe in horum clientelam contu- 
lit? habebit cum quibus de minimis maximifque 
rebus deliberet, quos de fe quotidie confulat, a 
quibus audkt verum fuie contumelia, laudetur fine 
adulatione, ad quorum fe fimilitudinem^ effingat* 
^hefe are friends , mo on€ of ^whom ewer denies him^ 
Jelf to him njuho calls upon him, no one takes lea've of 
his 'vijitor till he has rendered him happier and more 
pleafed ivith himfelf The con'verfation of no one of 
thefe is dangerous^ neither is the refpeSi to he paid to 
him attended luith expence. Tou may take ivhat you 
nxj ill from them* What happinefsy ivhat a glorious 
old age aiuaits him luho has placed himfelf under 
the prote^iott of /uch friends ! He will have thqfe 

fwhom 



ON THE STUDY OF POETRY, nv 

muhom he may con/ult on the moft important^ and the 
mojl trifling matters, nj^hofe ad'vice he may daily ajk 
ccncerniiig him/elf, from njohom he may hear the truth- 
'without in/ult, prai/e ^without adulation, and to nvhofe 
Jimilitude he may conform hitnfelf Seneca. 

** Adolefcentes NOBiLissiMi vos enim, vos 

mea jam compellabit oratio— did non poteft, ea 
fludia—quanto olim vobis et ornamento et auxilia* 
futura (int, cum vos et generis vellri nobilitas et 
veftra virtus ad reipub* gubernacnlaadmoverit. — - 
Ecenim quibus artibus civitates praecipue confer- 
vantur, pietatcf juftitia, fortitudine, imprimifque 
prudcntia, earam funt omnium artium quaii fe- 
jnina literarum proditamonnmenrtis. Neque verd 
haec ita a me dicuntur,. ut contendanr, nifi literis 
eraditumcivem patriae utilem ef!e neminem pofTe ; 
{^dk hoc dico, jwsi literis excultm sint ii, 

qui, VELUT IN REIPUB. PUPPI SEDENTES, 
CLAVUM TENENT, MULTIS EOS MUNERI8 SUI^. 
llfQUE PR-ffiCIRUIS PARTlffUS NECESSARld DE- 

FUTUR08. Te no'&'L'e. youth — it can fcarcely be eX" 
frejjed hotu much thefe ftudies *will ferve and adortr- 
yoUf tvhen your illuftrious birth and your oijun merit 
Jhall call you to take a Jhare in government. For the 
feeds of piety, juftice, fortitude, and particularly of 
political JkiU, hy nvhich fates are principally pre- 
ferred, are to hi rscei'ved from books, I do- not fay 
that none hut a fcholar can be a ufeful citixien% but 
this I fay, that unlefs they nvho are at the'belm^ are 
ADORNED WITH LETTERS, they muft be ^wanting 
fiL-many and important parts of thurduty, 

MURETU3*. 



l.y 



I 222 J 

SECTION xxiir, 

ON INSPIRING A LOVE OF LETTERS, AND THt 
AMBITION OF OBTAINING A LITERARY 
CHARACTER. 

Ma<5li efte animo et virtute, juvenes, quibas ju- 
cunda induflria efl, odiofa ceflatio ; quibas labori^ 
quies ; labor, quieti; qui turn dem«fXI vita ac fpi- 
ritu frui vobis videmini, cum in Hteris temput 
omne confumitis. Go on in your career of <viriu$ 
and fpirity ye generous youth, to ivhom induftry it 
plea/ant t and inaSion a pain ; to txjhom reft appears 
as labour, and labour as reft, ivho then only feem /# 
enjoy life, ivhen ye are able to fpend all your time in 
letters, MuRETUS, 

THEY who have arrived at any very emi- 
nent degree of excellence in the praSice 
of an art or profeflion, have commonly been ac- 
tuated by a fpecies of enthufiafm in their purfutt 
of it *. They haVe kept one objeft in view, 

• " Obferve that learned man who ftudies till 
the life-bl6od ftems to have quitted his cheeks ; it 
he impelled by any fenfual pleafure ? is it the hope 
of gain makes him read fo much? Very far from 
it. On the contrary, he too frequently ftudies at 
the expence both of his health and fortune. The 
inward fatisfadion he feels in contemplating on the 
truth he difcovers, and, if you will have it fo, 
the defire of fame, are the motives which animate 
and fup port him. Father Gerdil. 

Mihi ille detur puer, quern laus excitet, quem 
gloria ju vet, qui vidlus^ flea t ; hiceritalendus ambi- 
tione, hunc mordebit objurgatio, hunc honor ex- 
citabit: in hoc defidiam nunquam verebor. 

Q;;iNTILIAN. 

amidfl 



ON INSPIRING, &c. 225 

amidft all the vicifKtudes of time and fortuner 
Such, indeed, is the condition of human afFairSy, 
that fcarcely any great improvement is to be at- 
tained, unjefs it poflefs one of the firft places iii- 
the heart*, and be long and laborioufly pur« 

* Unlefs it is purfued con amore with afFeftion, 
and with 

Impetus ille facer, qui vatum pedora nutrit. 
The facred fren%y of a poet^s hreafi. Ovid. 

OpyuTi ix:^<^ iscivloc fjuix.br, fA.ce.7 a.. 

An impetus tonxards all learning, Plato.^ 

Ail ubi fponte fua lludia haec afTuerit amare, 
Jhm non laudis amor, non ilium gloria tantum; 
Sollicitat, fed m Ira operum dulcedine captus 
Mufarum nequit.ayelli; complexibus arftis. 
Moone vide6,;duris natos ubi faepe parentes 
Dulcibus amovent lludiis, et difcere avaras 

iuflerunt artes, mentem fi qnando libido 
lota fubit, folitaque animum dulcedine movit, 
Ut laeti rurfum irriguos accedere fontes 
Ardefcant ftudiis, et nota revifere Tempe? 
Exultant animis cupidi, pugnantque parentuia 
Imperils, nequitardenteavis uUamoFari: 
Sic ailbetus equus jam duris ora lupati^y 
Forte procul notis ii armenta afpexit in arvis:^ 
Hue veterura ferri cupit hau4 oblitu* amprum, 
Atque hie atque illic h^erct, fraenifque repugn^t^ 
Quove magis llimulis inftas, hoc acrius ille 
Perfurit ; it tandem multo vix verbere vi^us 
Coeptum iter : ipfa tamen refpeftans crebra raoratur 
Pafcua, et hinnitu late Idea complet acuto. 
Ah! quoties aliquis facros reminifcitur aeger 
Fontes incaflum, et lucos fufpirat amatos 
Dulcibus ereptus mufispuer, atria ut alia 
Incoleret regum rebus praefeftus agendb ! 
Tybure quam mallet, gclido aut fubTufculo iniquam 
Fauperiemque pati, et ventcs perferreaivftlcs 1 

ViDA. 

L. 4^ fttfid*. 



224 ON INSPIRINGT 

fued. Inftances often appear of extraordinarjr 
performances in the literary world, without 
much apparent application. But they are more 
frequently talked of, than found to exift. Who, 
indeed, can tell what degree of labour pafles in 
-the mind of another? A writer, for inftance, 
may not confine himfelf to the retirement of his 
library, but apparently unite in the amufement9 
and employments of mankind, while he is com- 
pofing a work of learning and genius. We fee 
his perfon among the haunts of men, but we 
cannot fee how his mind is engaged. His 
powers of invention are all in exercife on the 
chofen topic ; and whiJe he appears an idler, he 
ftudies more efFe£tualIy than he who always 
reads, and never thinks. Many an one who 
has wifhed to avoid the imputation of a labori* 
ous plodder, has devoted the night to ftudy, and 
the day to diflipation. 

This at leaft will be undifputed. We all 
focceed beft in the ftudies which we love. One 
of the firft objeds, then, of a parent and an in- 
ftrudor, muft be, to caufe in a child fuch an 
aflbciation of ideas as fhall connedl pleafuresy 
honours, and rewards with the idea of that pur- 
fuit which is to be the purfuit of life *. This 

end 

* He mufl (hew that he is not one of thofe who 
** cenfsnt fludendum eft ut vivamus molliter . ♦ 
qui non perpendunt quam fpeciofa, quam coeleftis> 
quam divina, qusedam res. fit, mens ornata 
DisciPLiNis VARUS. £go fatic non video, quid 
kaec hominum monftra quae corpus grande circum- 
ferunt vel xgre trahunt potius, a bobu^ diftent^ 

Dili 



A LOVE OF LETTERS, &c. zi^- 

end may be eafily obtained, if the fuperintendant 
of the child reprefents the obj[e(9: in its faireft 

form^ 

nifi quod Ibquantur, non rougiant ;. fades ftuplda>« 
afpeftus hebes, crafTa labra, femper terrain ct 
pabula fpedant, venter ingens, quern quater aot 
quinquies quotidie replent . • • . Agite erg&^ no- 
bilior propago juveiitutis, quibus corpus omnc 
ardore tremit; agite, inquam, animi noflri pulchri- 
tudinem qiixramus, hujus decore gloriemur, atque. 
contra brevitatem a^vi,, memoriam noltri quaiu. 
.maxime longam efficere conemur." Jf^^o think the 
firji objeSi in ftudy Jhould be to live luxurioujly -^^ho-^ 
conjider not ho<w beautiful, honu heavenly ^ ho^w di'vine 
a thing is a mind embellijhed woith a variety of learn- 
ing, I. indeed' do not fee honv thefe tnonfiers of men^ 
t/oho carry about a- great body, or rather drag it a- 
Ung <with difficulty, differ f^nt' oxen^ unkfs it be, 
that they talky and. do not le^w like an ox. ^heir face^* 
it ftupid, their afpeH dull, their lips thick, they are.. 
always looking on the earth, and on their pto<vender ; 
their belly is of a 'vajljixe, arid they fill it four or five ■ 
times e'very day, , . . Come on, then, ye noble race 
of youth, njuhofe nvhole body trembles nvith <warm 
fenfibility ; come on, I fay, let us feek the beauty of^ 
the mind, let us boafi of the graces of this, and ta^^ 
compenfate the Jhortnefs of life, let us • endeavour /*v 
render the remembrance of. us as durable as poffible. 
JoACH. Fort. Ringel; 

This extraordinary author has. written a very^i 
warm exhortation to fludy, not without £bme pueri*r 
lities, mixed with good obfervations, . 

** But here (fays Milton) the main fkill^'andf 
ground- work will be, to temper*them xwith fuch ^ 
leftures and explanations upon every opportunity^ 
as may lead and draw them in wiLLLNG<4)BEDir- 
EiscE, inflamed with a ftudy of learning, and the:- 
L. 5^ admiratiott^ 



ttS ON INSPIRING 

form, and at the fame time vigilantly takes care, 
left the impreffion, once received, be effaced by 
the company of fervants, or of any ignorant af- 
ibciates. The child is defigned to fupport the 
chara£ter of the fcholar and the gentleman,, 
whatever may be his engagements in focial life. 
Never let his book be fpoken of, fo as to con- 
vey the leafl: idea of difagreeable labour. Let 
it' be reprefented as the fource of amufement,. 
feme, profit, and of every thing defirable. It 
muft be owned, great judgment and attention, 
much knowledge of the emotions of the human 
heart, conftant vigilance, unwearied patience, 
and a natural talent for the bufinisfs, are required 
to regulate the mind of a child at that very early 
period when ideas firft rufli into the fenforium. 
All thefe qualities are required in a greater de- 
gree than they are often found. Wrong aflb«^ 
ciations are therefore formed, and it becomes a? 
great part of the bufinefs of a preceptor to re- 
medy in future what it could not prevent. 

At the age often or twelve, the tafk may be 
more eafy. The mind is then not merely paf- 
five.. It can co-operate voluntarily with its in'- 
ftfudor, in rejefting, according to the dictates 
of judgment, all improper aflbciations of ideas,.. 

admiration of virtue j ilirred up with high hopes - 
of living to be men, and worthy patriots, d«ar. 
TO God, and famous to all ages. 

Milton's Tw^te?.. 
. . Infufing into their young breafts fuch a« in- 
genuous and noble ardour, as would not fail to 
make many of them renowned and matcklefs laen." 

Idein» 

6 and^ 



A LOVE^ QF'IE/rTERS; &c.- 227? 

and in feleding all fuch as are to be dedred^ 
At that time then, if it cannot fare accomp ifhed- 
before, I wiflr the pupil to be. imprefled with- 
every idea which can render an-eminence in. li,-- 
terature amiable and honoiicable. 

In the fiifl: place, let him feel his chief plea- 
fures arifing from his little performances in let-r 
ters, whatever they may be *. When he. does 
well, let him- be car^efled and rewarded ; not 
only by his tutor or mafer, but by all who have 
any intercourfe with, him f. 5, by his mother, bjf 
his lifters, and even by his aunts and grand- 
mothers. If he is. ingenuous enough to be feu- 
fibly touched with praife^ the bufinefs is half^ 
completed. The parent may. congratulate him- 
felf. n« has nothing to doy.buttp I^ftow it 
with judgment. ' The pupil's little heart will- 
expand and exult to receive it,, and aU his facul-r 
ties will ftretch themfelves to <Jeferve it. 

The converfation which pafles in his prefence 
fhould commonly be on the fubje£t of great Hte^ 
rary charaders. They fliould be fpoken of 
with the higheft veneration. None of their im-r 
perfections, and none of thoie^calumnies whlch^- 

* Studio fallente laborem. 

The l(yve of the furfuit beguiling all the labour ofitm- 

HOR. 

t Spem fuceeflus alit; pofTunt quiapofTe videntur. 

Succefs nouripes hope ; th^ ar» able, becaufe 
they think themjel'ves able. ViRG. 

Etiam pueri alficiuntur laeticia, cum vicerint. 
Ut pudct viftos ? uE fe accufari nolunt ? quam cu- 
piunt laudari ? Qups illi labores non perferunt, uc 
sequalium priacipes fiat. Cu;. 3d. de Fioibus. 
L d envy. 



228 ON INSPIRING 

envy invents, and which derogate from dignit)\ 
fliould be even mentk>ned. On the other hand,^ 
a proper contempt, or at leaft negled, ifaould be 
fliewn to thofe profefled wits and philofophers, 
who, though they do not want their admu-ers,, 
are ignorant and injudicious as well as im- 
moral. The boy (hould be taught by common- 
converfation, not by formal precept only, to 
confider greatnefs of mind as the only true 
grandeur ; and the pofleffion of knowledge, as 
Sie moft ornamental accomplifhment. Not 
onjy the father, but the females of a. family, if 
they have judgment enough for the purpofe,, 
muft concur in imprefSng on the young mind 
ideas of literary excellence. It too often un- 
fortunately happens, that without intending the- 
injury, they undo all the labour of an affiduous. 
• inftruiStor. An attention to cards, to drefs, to. 
fafliion, to thofe fcenes which pcrfons engaged, 
with the_ world cannot eafily avoid, will not only 
obliterate from the puerile mind all virtuous and 
defirable ideas, but will often render it incapable 
of their future reception. If the idea of exceU 
ience, applaufe, and happlnefs, is affociated with 
vanity in the infantine age, vanity will be pur- 
fued in manhood *^ 

Another 

• The early aflbclation of ideas is of the moft 
important confequence in every part of education,, 
whether moral, religious, or literary. To what do 
we owe the number of thofe who, with perverted 
ambition, and with a degree of ardour which would^ 
lead to high excellence in learning and virtue, la- 
bour to attain the chara6t(?r of infidels^ debauchees,. 

xneot 



A LOVE OF LETTERS^, 8tc. n^ 

Another excellent method of infpiring the 
jupil with an emulation to excel in letters^ is to 
accuftom him to. read Biography. I need notr 
add, that the lives of men of learning fhould be 
felefled for this purpofc.. The lives of our 
great poets^ divines, hiftorians, writers of every 
denomination, fliould be frequently in his 
hands *. The eulogia which are ufually paflerf 

OUk 

men of vicious pleafure, arnd excefs in all that is 
FAiinoaSy ridiculous, forbidden by decency and rea- 
fbn, and the laws of God and man i We owe it ta 
the afTociation of fuch a charadervvith the idea of 
fpirit and diflinftion, and to the afTociation of the 
virtuous and the regular character with the idea oC 
a poor fpirit and weaknefs ;, weQwe it to an afTocia- 
tion of the idea of unerring excellence with thofe 
who poflefs hereditary titles, honours, riches, and 
who often make themfelves diflinguifhed by no 
ether perfonal qualities than infidelity, debauchery^ 
excefs, and brutality. Man commonly conforms. 
K bis general charadler to that which he deems mofl 
excellent. But his idea of.excellence is, for the mcft 
part erroneous from wrong afTociations, formed in 
the boyifh age, by feeing vanity and vice t k iumph 
over the modesty of virtue. 

♦ I would not wifh a boy to acquire an exclu* 
siVE love of the more trifling pur/uits of learning, 
which many pride themfelves upon, though they» 
are but little conducive to mental imprgve-c 
ment. I mean fome parts of virtue, a fmat# 
tcring of botany, playing tricks wit.h an 
iLECTRiCAL APPARATUS, &c. &c. For a hoy 
may be very fond of coins, fhells, moths or 
Hiofles, and be able to whirl a glafs globe^ and to 
t^ll the GOTHIC NAMES of a. few plants, to the 

admiratioa 



tyt ON INSPIRING 

oit thtfm, and which they deferve, will fire a^. 
young mind with an ardent defire to tread in 
their footAeps. 

If the boy can be introduced at a proper age 
to the company of fome celebrated literary cha- 
racter, it will greatly contribute to raife and 
fuftain this defirable emulation. He fhould be 
taught to wifli for the honour of fuch an inter- 
view, and to look 'upon any notice taken of him 
by fuch a perfon, as a noble diftinftion. At 
the revival of learning, it is amazing with what 
eagernefs even the. fight of a man of eminent 
learning was fought for by the ftudious. They 
ran in crowds from great diftances to meet him y. 
and any attention paid by him to an individual,, 
conferred an enviable happinefs- The confe- 
quence was, that the youth who were devoted 
to learning, purfued it with a vigour and perfe- 
verance which aftonifhes the prefent age of in- 
dolence. It was the honour and the re(pe<Sl, in, 

admiratirn of the ignorant, and at the fame time 
pofl'cfs a mind very illiberal and unenlight-- 
FNED. Let thefe things be attended to apter^ 
WARDS, ANiy SERIOUSLY^ But they will not 
fupply the place of a classical foundation.. 
Many' vain perfons fhine amongft the illiterate, 
merely by pofrefling an electrical machine,^, 
©r learning by rote a few words in Linnaeus^ Thefe 
perfons might properly be ranked amoag thofc 
whom Weft defcribes thus : 

Who aye pretending lovb op science fair,. 
And generous purpofe to adorn the breaft. 
With LIBER al arts, to virtue's court repair. 
Yet nought but tunes and names and coins 
away do bear*. 

which) 



A LOVE GF LETTERS, &c. 231, 

which the perfons of eminent fcholars were 
held, which difFufed a generous ardour in the 
purfuit of letters, and produced ftupendous ef- 
fefts. If that honour and refpedl: is exclu- 
fively paid to rank and opulence,, however ig- 
norant and undeferving, it is no wonder that the 
liberal purfuits are found to languifh. When 
honour is engrofled by unworthy grandeur, and 
preferment by family and parliamentary intereft^ 
there is nothing to recommend a laborious at- 
tiention to learning but its own charms, which,, 
however great, are valuable only to a few, com- 
pared with the mafs of mankind. 

After the important point is gained,. of mak- 
ing the pupil feel the love of letters,. and an am- 
bition for literary fame, improvement. is fecured. 
He will make his own way,, even under difad- 
vantages*"; but with encouragements, ailift- 
sinces, and opportunities, he can fcarcely fail of< 
arriving, at, what few reach, diftinguiflied ex*-- 
cellence.. ' 

* Of the politeft' and befl writers of antiquity,, 
feveral were flaves, or the immediate defcendants 
of flaves. But all the difHculcies occafioned by 
their low birth, mean fortune, want of friend s>, 
aod defeftive education, were furmounted by their 
tove of letters^ and that generous fpirit, which in* 
cites. 

Still to he Jirfi^ and ri/e ahoue the reJL 

- " Stimulos dedit xmula virtus ; 

Nee qnemqoam jam ferre potefl Caefarve pri* 

orem 
Bompeiufve parenu 



t,ff 0K rNfrPIRING 

^X^was emulative virtue /purred them on ; 

Ca/ar no longer a/uperior brooks^ 

And Pompey /corns an equal % Lucak*. 

The following pafTages contain fbme remarks- 
which may be ufeful in giving the ncceflary ftfmulus.. 

Ut eruditi fiant adolefcentes non fatis eft fi ftude- 
ant ; id maxime curandum vlX. ftudert^^ ut eruditi efle 
velint. Ut porro id velint efficitur facillime dedc- 
coris metu, & semulatione. 

Eft illud in rcgulis noftris perquam fapientcr ob- 
iervatum & vere, multo plus apud pueros profici. 
dedecoris : quam pcsnarum metu ; ncc facile re- 
perias unum aliquem e plagofis iftis Orbiliis, qui. 
ciiii ludum puerilem fuaviter, utiliterque, tenuerit. 
Quamobrem in id unice incumberemagiftrifapientis 
cura deb. t, ut his duabus machinist laude, & vi* 
tiiperid,. fcholam faam regat; Haec alunt smula- 
tionem, cotem ingenii pueriiis>, calcar induftrise. 
Eodem private difcipulorum inter fe concertationes 
juvant. Nemo, verbi gratia, folus legat fcriptio^ 
nem ; paratu.s semulus qui reprehendat adfit, qui 
inftet, qui pugnet, qui vincere gaudeat. Nemo, 
item interrogetur (blus, fed praefto fit qui refpon- 
dentem, fi cefpitet, erigat ; hrefitantem redarguat ; 
Qbrnmefcentis vices &loGum obeat. Schola fuperior 
cum inferiori componatur, deledis ex utroque ag- 
mine pugilibus, conftitutis judicibus, fpedlatoribus 
evocatis, turn domefticis, turn externis, & quidem, 
fi fieri poterit, non obfcuris. Oratiuncula, poc- 
mata, & alia: id genus pro captu Schols lucubrati- 
ones,, identidem recitentur ab* uno vel pluribus 
alumnis ejufdem fcholae. Acciri tunc poteront 
adolefcentes ex inferiore- fchola qui audiant &-mi- 
rentur, qui dicentem laudent, cohoneftent aliquo 
epigrammate, . nodum aliquem folvendum propo- 
nant, &c. Ad hunc modiim explicabitur vernacule, _ 
& illuftrabitur Maronis liber, Oratio Tullii, pars 
Horatii, Juvenalis Satyra, Fabella Phaedri, Hiftorici 

lociu;. 



A LCrVE OF LETTERS, &c. 2jj 

locus : interrogantibus vel aemulis, vel fpe6latoribu» 
k agonothetis ; moderante rem totam praeceptore^ 
In iis omnibus nefas £t alrum fermonem adbibere 
€[uam Latinum, in quo vel puerili plus opinione- 
poflunt-. ^tas cerea, quocumquefledas, fequetur* 
. Ho3 vero seftus animorum puerilium, hjec partiun* 
ftudia, lion ut ludicrum Sc alienum, fed ut fuum Scf 
grave negotium magifter traftabit. Induat cer- 
tantium animos ; pro utraque parte laborare fe^^ 
vigilare, follicitum effe prae fe ferat : angatur cum. 
vidis, & quafi trlumphet cum vidloribus ;t horom 
vidoriam praedicet, iUorum dol«at vicem, ac fpem 
fortunae melioris faciat : , alios ab advcriariis imrre-*- 
pari palam & reprehendi acerbius patiatur : alios 
contra jubeat celebrari. Palmam, ^ lubet, vel 
coronam deferant vi£li ad pedes viftoris, ornatani^ 
lemnifcis & orichalco ; proftent certo in loco venalea 
fudore lauri, praemia vi rapienda ; componatur e 
doftiffimis quibufque Senatus, in quo errata & poenaa 
delinquentibus in.ponendae experodantur, ac pub- 
lico decreto krogentur : magiflro id ratum habente 
quod illuih-ii&inis Senatoribus vifusi fuerit. Sunt 
qui menda graviora in Cenforum libros Sc quail 
tabulas pttbHtias referri jubeant, adfcripto nomine 
auflorum ; hasc menda iingulis hebdomad is feme!, 
aut faepius recitentur per prasconem. Similiter 
ilia fcribentur quae ingeniose fuerint elaborata, ele*> 
ganter didta, explicata dodie, fubtiliter inventa ; 
addetur elogium audoribus, & in eodem libro per- 
icribetur ad perennem memoriam, &. nominis itk 
litterarum regno cclebritatem. 

Alii crrorem majoris momenta ab aliquo, praa- 
fertim e Scholze Proceribas admiflum grandibus 
exarandum litteris, 8c ejurdem. fcholae parietibus 
affigendum curant ; vel recitari clara voce jubenH 
fcmel atque iterum, ut ea vox & acclamatio aures 
puerorum perfonet, erroremque altiiis in animis 
defigat. Alii haec menda in iingulorum fcriptione 
poflridie defcribi ab unoquo^ae volunt: alii ap- 

ponuat 



«14 O^N INSPIRING 

ponunt errati defcnforcs aliquos & pf^tronos, qui 
dum illud pra\e tueri conantur, ridiculum ejus 
au^lcrem faciunt. Ludibrkun Sc amara laus plus 
intcrdum, quam fcria peccati exprobratio, orit ac 
pungic. Alii fcaniDum quoddam infelix ia media 
l'cliola» vel in ejus anguloitacuunt, quod Barathrum, 
auc Latomias, auc Gemonias etiam fcalas, appel- 
lant. In eo qui fedet, huic inufta eH ignominis 
nota ; impoiiitur^ tandia dum in eo haeret» muldla 
Jitteraria; datur taroen facultas ea^ergendi, (i quern 
alium aut recitanda praJcftione, aut fcriptione me- 
lius elaborata, vincat. Sunt qui-trophsum ftatuant 
in media fchola : huic rapta de vidlis fpolia vidores 
appcndunt. Sunt, qui fada re£le privatim a Dif- 
cipulis, live pietatem ilia fpcftent, five littcras, 
coliigant unum in libellum, tacitis nominibu5^ 
eaque recitari qualibct hebdomada vel finguli*. 
menfibus jubeant : quod ceteris vel pudori, vel ex^ 
empio fit. Sexcenta: funt ejus generis artcs, qua 
non modd ferv^iunt acuendis puerorum ingeniis ; ve- 
r^m etiam prxceptorem laboris parte levant» ac 
poenarum fumendarum invidiosa 8c molefta necef^ 
fitate liberant. 

Laudem ac dedecus prudenter Sc caute Magtfier 
difpenfet: nc praemia, fine deledu ac modo ef- 
fundat ; faciendum ut iis pretium arroget non tarn 
materia 8c moles, quam calculus, nomenque Prae- 
ceptoris : dedecoris fit quam laudis parcior : ii> 
eoque id apprimj caveat, ne alienum & averfum ab 
eo quem objurgat aut vituperat, animum pr£ fe 
ferat; ne conteraptum, ne defperationem oftendat* 
Cilm enim vident pueri fe famam perdidifle, ac: 
prp defperatis haberi, defperant Sc ipfi fibi, perfri- 
cant frontem, Sc conatum ad meliora prorsus abji- 
ciunt. Igitur publicis privatifque reprehenfionibus- 
afpergenda mqdica laus aliquando erit ; culpa in 
*alios avertenda; concitanda fpes rei melius ge- 
rendac; curandum ut per alios vitu|crentur, a te 
laudcnjtur. ipfo Sc erigantur, &c. 

Enitenduia 



A LOVE OF LETTERS, &c. 23J 

Enitendum ut qui provehuntur in Scholam Su- 
pcriorcm, anno exadlo, fi qua laude funt infignes, 
maxime ii^ exenvpio & contentione. fua acmulatio- 
ncm banc & rem liierariam adjuverint, cum eloglo- 
aliquo & eruditionis diJigeniiaL-que commendaiione 
iron vulgari provehantur : ut eorura nomina in 
laureatis defcriptachartis, vel typis exarata, ii lubec 
legantur ; appendantur pro Scholse foribus, &C.. 
iidem appellentur cum honore, ac donentur aliquo 
prxmio, in publicis declamationibus, quas una 
Schola alteram invitante, habebuntur. Sint ar- 
bitri litium eruditarum 8c controverfiarum, quas 
inciderint in fcholis, aut a magillris compoiitd 
adornats fuerlnt; ad eas dirimendas legati puolica 
audioritate poterunt fententiam fcripto ferre clam 
& 0C€ttltid fttfiragiisy $c^, Juvektu »» 



r «36 T 



SECTION xxiv: 

OH THE NECESSITY OF LNDUSTRT- 
EVEN TO GENIUS. 

Ov yuf if ^a.i,r,q acirfocrhv io» LTNETON Urou rr.g 
TEXSHX jc; AIAASKAAIAS, uf aymsu 

For furtly you xannctfayj that even a genius ftamds 
not in need of art and inJtruQion in things of nuMcb^ 
he is uninformed, LuCAK* 

n^oTxa, Ivoff yntleu. 

Nothing is to he had for nothing, 

Arrian. £pii(» 

FROM the revival of learning to the prefent. 
day every thing has been produced that 
labour and ingenuity can invent^ to facilitate 
the acquifition of knowledge. But notwith- 
ftanding all the Introdudions, the Compendia ♦, 
the Synopfcs, the Tranflations, the Annotations,, 
and the Interpretations^ I muft aiTure the ftu- 
dcnt, that induftry, great and perfevering in- 
duftry f , is abfolutely neceflary ta fecure any. 

very 

♦Compendia dispendiosa; as they have bcea^ 
Juftly called. 

'* The attainment of Arts and Sciences is well 
compared to the climbing a deep hill : our fancy, 
may contrive tofpring up perpendicularly^ but it wil! 
be found the moft feafible and eafy way to gain the 
top by a fpiral afccnt." Christopher Wase. 

f I repeat this truth often ; for, 

Nunqtii 



TTHETsTEGESSITY OF INDUSTRY, &c. 237 

•very valuable and diftinguiflied improvement, 
Superficial qualifications are indeed obtained at 
*an eafy price of time and labour ; but fuperfi- 
-cial qualifications confer neither honour, emo- 
lument, Jior fatisfaSion. 

The pupil may be introduced, by the judg- 
ement and the liberality of his parents, to the beft 
'fchools, the beft tutors, the beft books; and 
his parents may be led to expe£t, from fuch ad- 
vantages alone, extraordinary adVancement, 
But thefe things are all extraneous. The mind 
•of the pupil muft be accuftomed to fubmit to 
labour; fometimes to painful labour*. The 
poor and folitary ftudent, who has never enjoy- 
ed any of thefe advantages but in the ordinary 
manner, will, by his own application, emerge to 
inerit, fame, and fortune ; while the indolent, 
Tvho has been taught to lean on the fupports 
^vhich opulence fupplies, will fink into infignifi- 
cance. His mind will have contracted habits 

Nunquam nimis dicitur, quod nunquam fatis 
dicitur. 

That is ne'uer /aid too often ivhicb can neiier he 
/aid often enough, Seneca. 

There is no harm done^ if 'what is «iw// faid i* 
tivice /aid, Plato. 

* Nobody will fay that Demollhe^ies was not 
pofTefled of genius. But Demofthencs wrote over 
all Thucydides eight times with his own hand, 
-and learned a great part of him by heart. Cicero 
was equally laborious. And there is this comfort, 
that Quodcunque imperavit fibi animus obtinuit. 
Whate'ver tajk the mind hath frt it/el/y it hath 
Mccom^lijhed it» S £ n £ c a« 

of 



ajS THE NECESSITY OF INDUSTRY 

of inaftivity, and inadivity cattfes imbeci^ty. I 
repeat, that the iirft great objedlisto induce the 
-mind to work within himfeif^ to think long^ and 
patiently on the fame fubjedl, and to compofe in 
various ftyles, and in various metres ♦. It muft 
he led not only to bear, but to feek occafional 
folitude. If it is early habituated to all thefc 
exercifes, it will find its chief pleafure In them; 
for the energies of the mind affeft it with the 
fine ft feelings. 

But is induftry, fuch induftry as I require, 
fteceflary to genius t • The idea, that it is not 
neceflary, is produflive of the greateft evils J. 

We 

'♦ Human nature loves its own prod unions. — 
To give boys a love of learning, let them produce 
fomething of their own. Quicquid fcripfere bead. 
Fhafed ^ith 'whatever they noriu. The exertion 
required in compofition often gives fplrits and en- 
livens ftudy. 

^11 are lowers of ihem/elvei, and their oivn rannot 
.4fut he fweet to all. Aristot. 

t O tu, quifquis es, cui ignea vis in pe6tore ex- 

arfit, cui flamma in praecordiis micat, procul, pro- 

cul abiint mollia, lenia, facilia^ blanda, quas ani- 

mi impetum extinguere folent ! O thouy ivho/oe^er 

. thou arty in 'ufho/e hojom the fire of genius has been 

Mindledy in ^whqfe in^ward parts the fame burns flear, 

Jary far Mftant from thee, he all that is effeminate y 

Joft, eafy^ foot king ^ all 'which ufually damps the im-, 

fetuous ardour of the mind ! 

JoACH. Fort. RiNGFL. 
J^When the Roman hiftorians defci-ibe an ex- 
traordinary MAN, fays the learacd. ICennet, 

this 



EVEN TO GENIUS. 239 

•We often form a wfong judgment in determin- 
ing who is, and who is not, endowed with this 
Aohle privilege. A boy who appears lively and 

talkative, 

this always enters into his charader as an efTentiU 
part of it : He was, fay they, incredibili in- 

DUSTRIA, DILIGENTIA SINGULARI, of incred't* 

hie indufiry, of remarkable application . S a L L u s T • 
They had not the foolifti vanity of wifhing to 
appear clever without pains, nor did they think 
that DULNESs only was capable of labour ; an 
opinion to which we owe much forward conceit, 
much levity, ign ranee and mifery. 

Sir Jofhua Reynolds, who, by the force of ge- 
nius and application, has arrive?d at diftinguifhed 
excellence in an art very intimately connedled with 
all claffical parfuits, and whofe opinion, there- 
fore, deferves our attention, has reprobated the 
corumon pretenfions to excellence, by the force of 
' what is arrogantly called native genius, unaffifted 
by induftry. J believe all who really excel in any 
art or profeffion will coincide with his opinions in 
the following pafTage. ** Invention is one of the 
great marks of genius; but ifweconfult experi- 
ence, we (hall find, that it is by being converfant 
with the inventions of others, that we learn to in- 
vent, as, by reading the thoughts of others, wc 
learn to think. 

** Whoever has fo far formed his tafte, .as to 
be able to rclifh and feel the beauties of the great, 
mafters, has gone a great way in his ftudy ; for, 
merely from a confcioufnefs of this relifh of the 
right, the mind fwells with an inward pride, and 
is almoft as powerfully aiFeded, as if it had itfelf 
. produced what it admires. Our hearts, frequently 
warmed in this manner by the contacl of thofe 
whomwewifhtorefemble, will undoubtedly catch 

fomething 



a40 THE NECESSITY OF INDUSTRY 

talkative, is often fuppofed by his parents to be 
^ genius. He is AifFered to be idle, for Jie is a 
^genius ; and genius is only injured by applica- 
tion* 

ibmething of their way of thinking, and we fliaH 
receive, in our own bofoms, fome radiation at leaft 
of their fire and fplendour. That difpofition, which 
is fo (Irong in children, iHll continues with us^ of 
catching involuntarily the general air and manner 
of thofe with whom we are moft converfant ; with 
this difference only, that a young mind is naturally 
pliable and imitative; but in a more advanced 
ilate it grows rigid, and muft be warmed and. 
foftened, before it will receive a deep impreiiion. 

** From thefe confiderations, which a little ©f 
•your reflection will carry a great way farther, it 
appears of what great confequence it is, that our 
minds fhould be habituated to the contemplation 
of excellence, and that, far from being contented 
to make fuch habits, we fliould, to the laft mo- 
Tnent of our lives, continue a fettled intercourfc 
with all the true examples of grandeur. Their in- 
ventions are not only the food of our infancy, but 
the fubftance which fupplies the fulleft maturity of 
our vigour* 

*' The mind is but a barren foil ; is a foil foon 
'€xhaufted, -and will produce no crop, or only one, 

UNLESS IT BE CONTINUALLY FERTILIZED ANJ> 
«NR1CH'D WITH FOREIGN MATTER. 

*' When we have had continually before us the 
great works of art to impregnate our minds with 
kindred ideas ; we are then, and not till then, fit 
to produce fomething of the fame fpecies. We be- 
hold all about us with the eyes of thefe penetrat- 
ing obfervers ; and our minds, accuftomed to think 
the thoughts of the nobleft and brighteft inteL- 
ledls, are prepared for the 4ifcovery aad fele^i^n 

©f 



EVEN T6 genius, 241 

tion. Now it ufually happens, that the very 
lively and talkative boy is the moft deficient ki 

genius. 

ef all that is great and noble in nature. The 
greateft natural genius cannot fubfid on its own 
ftock : he who refolves never to ranfack any mind 
but his own, will be^foon reduced, from mere bar* 
rennefs to the pooreft of all imitations ; he will 
be obliged to imitate himfelf, and to repeat what 
he has before often repeated. When we know 
the fubjedt defigned by luch men, it will never be 
difEcult to guefs what kind of work is to be pfO« 
duced. 

*' It is vain for painters or poets to endeavour to 
invent without materials on which the' mind may 
work, and from which invention mud originate* 
Nothing can come of nothing. 

** Homer is fuppofed to be pofTe/Ted of all the 
learning of his time. And we are pertain that 
Michael Angelo, and Raphael, were equally pof- 
feffed of all the knowledge in the art which was 
difcoverable in the works of their predeceifors. 

^* A mind enriched by an affemblage of all the 
treafures of ancient and modern art, will be more 
elevated and fruitful in refources^ in proportion 
to the number of ideas which have been carefully 
colleded and thoroughly digefted. There can be 
no doubt but that he who has the mod materials, 
has the greatefl means of invention ; and if he 
has not the power of uiing them, it muft proceed 
from a feeblenefs of in'telleft ; th« confufed man- 
ner in which thofe colledions have been laid up in 
his mind. 

'* The addition of other men's judgment is fo 

far from weakening, as is the opinion of miany, 

our own, that it will fafhion and confolidate thofe 

ideas of excellence which lay in their birth feeble, 

M ill-fhaped, 



•42 THE NECESSITY OF INDUSTRY 

geniQS. His ferwardoefs aiifes from a defed of 
thofe 'fine fenfibilites, which' at the iame time 
-occafion diffidence aiid conftitute genius. He 
ought to be enured to literary labour * ; for, 
without it, he will be prevented, by levity and 
ftupidity, from receiving any valuable imprei^ 
fions. Parents and inftru&ors muft be very 
cautious how they difpenfe with diligence, from 
an idea that the pupil poflefies genius fufficient 
to compenCite the want of it. All men are 
liable to miftake in deciding on genius at a very 
-«arly age; but parents more thzn ail, from 
their natural partiality. On no account 
therefore, let them cxcufe the want of clofe 
application. If the pupil has genius, this will 
improve and adorn it f ; if he has not, it is con- 

:feffcdly 

ill-lhaped^ and confufed> bat which are .finifhed 
aind put in «rder by the authority and pra6Uce of 
thofe, whofeivorks may be faid to have been con- 
fecrated by having Hood the teft of ages." 

♦ Corporis umcn valetudincm caret, namqoe 
fine ipsa nihil e£cere animus poteft. Stare malit 
-quam federe, &c. ,7>/ Jet him take cmrg b/ hfs 
hudtbi for ivit bout that the mind Mn ^ do nothing. 
Let bim rather Ji^nd than fit, 15 c. 

j0AC«.J?ORT JRnNGEL. 

Great temperance will often iupply the place of 
.exercife; bat both are neceflary to theHudent. 

f Nature feems to treat man as a painter would 
his difciple, to whom he commits the outlines of a 
figure lightly fketchcd, which the fcholar for-fatm- 
felf is to colour and complete. Thus from nature 
we derive fenfes and paffioos, and an intelled 
which each of us for himfelf has to nodel into a 
charafter. Harris, 

This 



EVEN to GENIUS. 243 

feffecfly requifite to fupply the defeft. Thofc 
prodigies of genius which require not inftruc- 
tibn, are rare phsenomena : we read, and vre 
hear of fuch ; but few of us have feen arid 
known them. What is genius worth without 
knowledge? But is a man ever born with 
knowledge ? It is true, that one man is born 
with a better capacity than another, for the re- 
ccption and retention of ideas; but ftiM the 
mind muft operate in collefling, difcriminating, 
and arranging that matter which it receives with 
facility. And I believe, the mind of a genius is 
often very laborioufly at work, when, to the 
common obferver, it appears to be quite inac« 
tive*. 

I mofl 

This paflagc is indeed evidently taken from the 
following of Cicero. Ut Phidias poteft a primo 
inftitoere fignum, idque perficere ; potefl ab alio 
inchoatum accipere ct abfolvere : huic eft fapien- 
tia fimilis. Non enim ipfa genuit bominem, fed 
accepit a natura inchoatum ; hanc ergo intuens. 
debet, inititutum illud, quail iignum» abfolvere. 

Cic, 

* Powers aft but weakly and irregularly till they 
are heightened and perfefted by their habits. 

Dr. South. 

How great foever a Genius may be, and how 
much foever he may acquire new light and heat, as 
he proceeds in his rapid courfe, certain it is, that 
he will never fhine with the full luflre, norfhedthe ' 
full influence he is capable of, unlefs to his own 
experience he adds the experience of other mea 
and other a£«s. Genius, without the improvement 
Ma a4 



*44 THE NECESSITY OF iNDUSTRY 

I moft anxioufly wi(h that a due attention may 
be paid to my exhortations, when I recommend 
great and exemplary diligence. All that is excel - 
lent in learning depends upon it. And how can 
the time of a boy, or young man, be better em- 
ployed ? It cannot be more pleafantly j for I am 
fure, that induftry, by prefenting a conflant fuc- 
ceffion of various objedls, and by precluding the 
liftleflhefs of inaftion, renders life at all flages of 
it agreeable, and particularly fo in the reftlefs 
feafon of youth. It cannot be more innocently, 
for learning has a connexion with virtue ^ and 
he whofe time is fully engaged, will.efc2y)e many 
vices, and much mifery. It cannot he more 
ufefully J for he who furnifhes his mind with 
ideas, and ftrengthens his faculties, is preparing 
himfelf to become a valuable member of fociety, 
whatever place in it he may obtain ; and be is 
likely to obtain an exalted place. I cannot 
conclude what I ofFer on this fubjeft, without 
recommending to the induftrious ftudent early 
.rifing *^ an uninterrupted application in the 

morning. 

at Icaft of experienee, is what comets once were 
thought to he, a blazing meteor, irregular in his 
cour^, and dangerous in his approach^ of no ufe 
to any fy^cWf and able to deftroy any. 

BOLINGBROKE. 

* Qui fub fignis noflris mereri ftudet, in primis 
ampledi vxgilias ac labores debet; fugere 
luxum, delicias, & quicquid effoeminatum reddit 
animum. He ivho is defirous ^/fighting under our 
banncrsy ought in the firfi fiace to embrace vigilance 

5 and 



EVEN TO GENIUS. 24? 

morning. I will not anticipate, by defcription^ 
the effefts which he will foon experience. 

and labour ; to fy from luxury^ fliafure^ and nijhat- 
ever renders the mind effeminate. 

JoACH. Fort. Rincbl. 
■ Jam clarum mane feneftras 

Intrat et anguflas extendit lumine rimas. 

Stertimas, &c. 

— quinta dum linea tangitur umbra, - 

En quid agis ? 

Jam liber ut bicolor pbiitis membrana capillis 
Inque manus charts nodofaque venit arundo. 
Tum queritur craffus calamo quod pendeat humor 
Nigra qu6d infusa vanefcat fepia lympha : 
Dilutas queritur geminet qu6d £{lula guttas. 
O mifer? inque dies ultra mi fer, huccine rcrum 
Venimus ? At cur non potius tenproque columbo, 
Et fimilis regum pueris, pappare minutam 
Pofcis et iratus mamma lallare recufas ? 
An tali ftudeam calamo? cui verba? quid iflai 
Succinis ambages ? tibi luditur. Effluis amens ; 

Contemnere, — 

Udum et molle lutum es ; nunc nunc properandus 

et acri 
Fingendus fine fine rota. " Persius. 

The induflrious ftudent, like the thrifty mer- 
chant, muft not negle6l the fmalleft acquifitions. 
HsEC enim tametfi fingula per fe pufilla, tamen in 
unum collata acervum, doftrinx thefaurum lucro 
augent haudquaquam negligendo rZ «»; a.(ptv(iv avriv^ 
^ovli. For thefe things^ though each of them by it f elf 
is little, yet ^vchen they are added together in one heap, 
enereafe the treafure of learning ivith a degree of 
gai»y by no means to be dif regarded by one ivho is 
hafening to grozv rich, Erasmus. 

** The knowledge of languages, fciences, hirto- 

ries, &c. is not innate to us ; it doth not of it- 

M 3 k\i 



2i6 THE NECESSITY OP INDtKTRy, &c. 

felf fpring np in our nunds ; it it not any wayi 
incident by chance, or infofed by grace (except 
rarely by miracle) ; common pbfenration doth not 
prodace it ; it cannot be parchafed at any rate, 
except by that for which, it was faid rf old, the 
Gods fell all things, that is, for pains ; without 
which, THB BEST WIT and the greatest ca- 
pacity may not render a man learned^ as the 
beft foil wil not yield good frait or grain, if they 
be not planted nor fown therein." 

Dr. Isaac Baeeow. 

Suba^ mihi ingenio opus eft, at agro non fe- 
mel arato, fed novato k iterato, qao melic^es foe- 
tus poflit et grandiores eder«: fuba^Q tutem eft 
ofas, aaditioi Icdipj liierast Cie. 






C 247 ] 
SECTION XXV. 



OK PRIVATE STUDT DITRJNG TBK 
INTERVALS OF SCHOOL* 

Far more By care than natural gifis excek 

An AX A N »• apud Stot^, 
Quies tibi non deiidia fit, at c^m ab aliis ludi* 
iwTy tu fandli aliquid honeftique tra^bis. Let noi 
jour reft he Jloth ; hut «whtle others are at play^ d0 
jou emfl^ your/elf in fimething ferious and laudable* 

Seneca in Proverb. 

IMPROVEMENT will be greatly accele- 
rated, and an eipinence in literary attain- 
ments eafily acquired, if the ftudent can be in- 
duced to devote the leifure hours which his pri- 
vate tutor, or his mailer at fchool, allows him, 
to private reading. At the age then of twelve 
or thirteen, let a few Englifh books be put iiito 
his hands. They fhould be entertaining, or 
they will not, at firft, excite his attention. 
They fhould at the fame time be claflical, or 
have fome connedtion with real and valuable 
knowledge, or they will only diflipate his ideas, 
aad impede his progrefs in the more eflential 
purfuits. There is, however, hardly any inno- 
cent book which afFords him entertainment,^ 
which will not, at the fame; time,, in fome re* 
fpeft, improve him. 

M 4, I know 



248 ON PRIVATE STUDY, Sec. 

I know of no book which can be more pro- 
perly recommended at firft, than the Spefla- 
tor *. It abounds with entertainment. It fur- 
nifhes a great variety of ideas on men, man- 
ners, and learning ; and the moral and religious 
principles it recommends, are well adapted to 
tinfiure the young mind with the love of all 

* I would, however, confine his attention to 
the papers marked C. L I. O, 2.s they alone, in 
the firft feven volumes, are Addifon's. He may, 
after having caught the grace of his (lyle, infpe^ 
fome of the others, in order to difcover the dif- 
ference, and improve his tafle and judgment. 

** You cannot have a better book for this exer- 

cifc than the SpeSator, A pleafing vein of 

genteel humour runs through everyone oi Addi^ 
Jon's papers, which, like the fweet flavour of a 
h)'acinth, conftantly cheers, and never overpowers. 
— Sterlets papers, on the contrary, arc little better 
than trafh ;— there is fcarce a thought or fentiment 
that is worthy to be transferred into a common- 
place book. 

** My pupil reads a few papers daily, without a 
jfingle obfervation on my part. After fome time, 
1 remark to him the difference of compofition, 
which in the courfe of reading becomes more and 
more apparent. The laft flep is to put him on dif- 
linguidiing the two authors. — He at firft makes 
an awkward figure ; but I know from trial, that he 
may be brought to diftinguifh To readily, as fome- 
timcs to name the author from the vtry firft pe- 
riod." 

** Fob !" fays he, ** that is Steele, we'll have 
no more of him." LordKAiMS. 

This cenfure of Steele is a little too fevcre; and 
not nuu'li. 

that 



ON PRIVATE STUDY, &c. 249 

that is amiable, ufeful, and honourable. I 
'would require one paper to be read and confi- 
dered avery day, and 1 fhould make little doubt 
but that the pupil would foon read more from 
choice. 

I would by no means fufFer his attention to 
be diftra(9:ed by a great variety of books ; but 
at the fame time I muft obferve, that applica- 
tion to books is wonderfully increafed and en- 
couraged by the occafional introduftion of a 
little novelty*. Let other books then be 
fometimes allowed, at the difcretion of a judi- 
cious fuperintendant. New books, and the 
works of contemporary writers, are found to 
attach the mind with peculiar force. 

Hiftorical books are highly proper; and I 
w4fli, as I have faid before, to begin with the 
Antient Hiftory. Rollin's Antient Hiftory is 
certainly well adapted to boys, but it is rather 
too long. Seleft parts (hould be judicioufty 
pointed out. Plutarch's Lives -f fhould alfo be 
read. Such models tend to infpire the young 
mind with all that is generous and noble. The 
Grecian and. Roman Hiftory, read at this period, 
will never be forgotten. Care muft be taken to 

* Robinfon Crufoe, Tclemachiis, and Den 
Quixote, are found 10 be moft delightful to boys, 
and they are no lefs ufeful, as they finely exercife 
the imagination. 

f «* What profit (hall he not reap as to the bu- 
(inefs of men, by reading the Lives of Plutarch 1 
But let not the pupil fo much imprint on his me- 
mory ihe date of the ruin of Carthage, as the 
maoners of Hannibal ^ind Scipio." Montagnr* 
RI 5 put 



250 ON PRIVATE STUDY, Sec. 

put no books into the ftudent^s hands which are 
inelegant in their ftyle *• I muft confefs and 
lament, that many of the antient hiftorles, writ- 
ten in our language, are remarkably inelegant. 
Such, for inftance, is that of Echard ; and Sta- 
nyan, though a good author, is not to be p^ti* 
cularly admired for his didtion. 

Poetry iliould like wife be read at that early 
^e, when the feelings and the imagination are 
all tremblingly alive. I have known many 
good fcholars, who have gone to the univerfi- 
ties at the age of eighteen or nineteen, without 
having read the works of Pope, Dryden, and 
our other poetical, dailies; a negled: without 
excufe ; as the perufal of fuch writers is of the 
greateft advantage, and is really matter of plea- 
fiire and delight, rather than a tafk. Indeed, I 
know not how a young man can fupport with 
' honour his charader as a claffical fcholar, with- 
out an acquaintance with the fineft writers of 
his own country, who have rivalled the moft ad- 
mired of the antients. But thefe cannot be 
xead, confiftently with purfuits more imme- 
diately neceflary, fn the fchool, and under the 
eye of the inftrudtor. They muft form the 
^mufement of leifure hours, and muft be read 
from choice. They will be read from choice,, 
when their beauties fliall have been once felt, 
and they will be ftrongly felt by youthful fenli- 

* H yocf i^vx'n tow afayi>u7Xovl^f Cvo rvi avw^ooj 
mctfotlrpvicnu^ Tru ofjLoiortla rot; x^f^^^'P^ i(pi>JtiTai,. 
■ for the mind of the reader. By an uninterrupted 
attention to a hook^ draivs to it/elf a refemblance of 
the charaSerifiic fyU. Dionys, Halicar. 

6 bility* 



OI^ PRIVATE CTUPY; Sic. 2si 

bilitjr. All that the maftex apd the pri\^te tu- 
tor can ufually. do in this bufinefs,. if be attends 
to the more eflcntial points, is to recommend 
private application^ and point out the mpft ex- 
cellent authors. 

When the boy fhall have arrived at th^- age. . 
of fifteen, and at the; improveme;its adequate tO' 
the age, it will be highly advantageous to-pre^ 
vail with hiqi to read in priv.ate,^ not only Eng— 
Vifki 6ut alfo fome eafy Latin book. Time and* 
habi^ will render it no more difficult than to 
read Engliih ; and the improvement in Latin 
will be fooi> found much greater than that which. 
would be derived from reading it only in a 
fchobi, or with a private tutor. The private 
reading and application which I advife,^ is to be 
followed as an amufcment ; and I need not re- 
peat, that the pui^fuit we delight in is commonly 
profecuted with fuccefs. 

The boy fbould be taught to be a very nig- 
gard of his time •y. and to fill up the fpaces of^ 

five 

* Tempus tantiim noftrum efl.. 9^ime only can he 
called our oivn* Seneca. 

Mihi tempus perit per ignaviam, etiara turn ciim* 
diligentiifimus efle videor. Quis enim uncjuaiifc 
adeo in rebus peragendis vehemens fuit, qui non 
multo efTe poffit vehementior, fi extrcmas vires co-- 
gere tur experiri ? My time is loft through idlenefss 
e'ven luhen I appear to be moft diligent For ijuho 
nvas ever fo indefatigably ajfiduous in hujinefs^ but 
might have been much more Joy had he been compelled 
to try his utmoft ftrength F 

JoACH. Fort. RiNGEL. 

M 6 Cxfar 



252 ON PRIVATE STUDY, &c. 

. five minutes, and quarters of hours, with a vo- 
lume, with which his pocket fliould never be 
unprovided. A very eafy and amufing book 
muft be chofen for this purpofe* Difficdty on 
firft entering on voluntary ftudy will difguft the 
ftudent, and ftop his progrefs. Three things 
are requifite, whatever Latin book fhall be at 
firft feledied ; a pure diftion,- an entertaining 
fubjeft, and a perfpicuous ftyle. Thoagh the 
boy read the higher and more difficult claffic9 in 
the fchool, yet, in his private hours, I advife him 
to defcend to the eafieft, provided they have the 
three neceflary qualities already mentioned* 
Improvement in phrafeology may be derived 
from reading even Cordery*s Colloquies with at- 
tention, and for the amufement of vacant hours. 
Erafmus's Dialogues abound with entertain- 
ment, and with elegant modes of expreffion* 
Gierke's Tranflation of Gaftiglione's Courtier 
is an excellent book for the purpofe. Phaedrus 
and Cornelius iNepos are alfo very proper. I 
advife that thefe ftiall be read through, and I 
have felecSled eafy books to fecure this point; 
for if the boy is to recur to his di(Rionary very 
often, and to ftruggle with obfcurity in every 
page, he will not long adhere to this defirable 
plan of PRIVATE APPLICATION to the Latin 
language. He will rather chufe to fill up his 
time with amufing Engl ilh authors, or to devote 

Cscfar media inter prselia fernper 

Stella! UTi ccelique plngis fuperifquc vacabat. 
6Vy«r, in :bj mUft of bis battles^ alnxiays found lei- 
fur e to attend to the ftars, and to the ceUftial bodies, 

LUCAN. 

it 



ON PRIVATE STUDY, &c. 2^3 

it entirely to puerile diverfion. Let not there- 
fore any prejudice be formed againft the ele- 
gant books which I have recommended, be- 
caufe, from their perfpicuity, fome of them are 
ufually read in the lower clailes. 

But, when a great facility is gained in reading 
Latin, the ftudent will of himfelf afcend to Ci- 
cero, Terence, Livy, and all thofc excellent 
writers, whom the world has long agreed to ad- 
mire. When fuch books fhall be read for the 
delight they afford, the fuccefs will be fecured. 
The fcholar will leave his fchool richly fraught 
with golden ftores ; a moft defirable event, but 
which by no means happens to the greater part 
of thofe who have fpent many years at our beft. 
feminaries. 1 mean not to refleft on the very 
refpeflable conduftors of thofe feminaiies 5 for 
the fault is in the fcholar, whofe indolence and 
diffipation will feldom permit him to apply feri- 
oufly to the bufinef^ of the fchool, much lefs to 
private and voluntary ftudy; a matter which I 
confider, and I hope not without reafon, as of 
the higheft importance. 

At this period of improvement, Latin verfe 
Ihould form a part of the private ftudies. In- 
deed, no precepts need be given on this topic. 
The boy's tafle will lead him to pcrufe all the 
more celebrated produftions in this pleafing 
fpecies of compofition, when once he is able to 
procure them with eafe. Befides the antients, 
he will read Fracaftbrius, Bourne, and many 
other moft elegant modern works, all of which 
will contribute to accomplifti the truly clafScal 
fcholar. 

lam 



254 ON PRIVATE STUDY, &c. 

I am fenfible, that to read Ls^tin as an zmuk" 
ment, is not common among young fludents. 
The reafon of the omiffion is eafily affigned. 
They feldom can read it without more difficulty 
than is compatible with mere amufement. But 
almoft any point may be carried -with young 
people, if proper methods are ufed. Let pqr- 
fuafion, allurements, rewards, and every art be 
applied, to induce the boy to devote fome of his 
vacant hours to private reading. If he has na- 
tural abilities, and his private reading is well 
chofen, he will, after due preparation, derive 
more benefit from it, than from any formal in- 
ftrudtion. 

One caution is highly neceflary on this fi|b- 
jeft. Novels muft be prohibited. I have known 
boys of piarts flopped at once in their career of 
improvement in claiStal knowledge, by reading' 
novels. They confidered Latin ahd Greek as 
dull, in comparifon, and could never prevail oh 
themfelves to give them due attention. When 
a great degree of claffical improvement is fe- 
cured, one or two of the beft romances and no- 
vels may be read, fot the fake of acquainting 
the ftudent with the nature of this kind of writ- 
ing *. But even the works of Cervantes and 

Fielding^ 

• Omnes pegustandi, all authors are to be 
tailed in the courfe of a literary life ; but during 
education only the beft. To form a found and 
good judgment is of the higheft confequence. — 
Judgment contributes more to public and private 
good than genius.. Let the boy's judgment then 
be exercifed and ftrengthened by being early ha- 
bituated 10 the work of feledlion. Let him be 

taught 



ON PRIVATE STUDY, &c. 255 

Fielding muft not be attended to, before a deep 
and ftrong foundation is laid for folid improve-* 
ment* True hiftory will afford little entertain- 
jment to the boy who can procure fidlion. Ex- 
clude fiSion, and he will be delighted with true 
hiftory *. 

For many reafons, I ftrongly urged the expe- 
diency of accuftoming the pupil to apply in prU 
vate, and without afliftance, as well as with it ; 
but more particularly, becaufe it will habituate his 
mind to work for itfelf, on which a great and 
folid improvement chiefly depends. , Amidft 

taught to chafe the beil authors, and always to 
give reafons for his choice. This will improve his 
judgment in the conduct of life ; without which, 
parts and learning often fcrve only to precipitate 
ruin/ 

* Oration! enim et carmini parva gratia, niii 
eloquentia fit fumma : Hifloria quoquomoJo fcripta 
deUSiat : funt enim homines natura curioii, et qud- 
libet nuda rerum cognitione capiuntur. 7Jbere are 
no great charms in eloquence amd poetry, unlefs they 
are excellent in their kind : Hiftory^ honue'ver it is 
fwritten, affords plea/ure ; for man is by nature in* 
quifiti've^ and is captivated by the knowledge of 
e'vents, though the narrative is unadorned, 

Plinius, 

The late Preceptor to the Heir to the Britilh 
Crown has juftiy obferved> that novels are well 
received, merely " for the gratification they afford 
to a vitiated, palled, and fickly imagination ; that 
lail difeafe of learned minds, and fure prognofllc 
of expiring I e t tcrs . " . ^ ^ ^^P ^ ^ ^ ^ • 

An imagination neither vitiated, palled, nor 
fickly, fuch as that of boys, will be delighted with 
uuth well exhibited* 

the 



2s6 ON PRIVATE STUDY, &c. 

the number of facilitating contrivances, and the 
various aids afforded by opulence, the mind is 
not often allowed to exert its native powers. 
The toil of thinking is too frequently thrown 
upon the preceptor and the formal ledlurer. 
Thus it happens, that many who attend ledlures 
wherever they are to be heard, and purchafe the 
aififlance of all who profefs to afford it, are 
often, after all, lefs learned * than others, whq, 
without fuch apparent advantages, haveforced 
their way up to the moft arduous heights, by 
native vigour and perfevering afliduity f. 

• Nullum Virgilio prseceptorem legimus. Flac- 
cus de fuo nihil niii quod plagofum dixit. Cicero 
autem fuum laudibus ampliffimis celebrate voluit, 
nee valuit. Contra, hujus filius quantis praceptori^ 
hus^ patre fcilicet et Cratippo illius letatis philo- 
fophorum principe, fi quid ipfi credimus Ciceroni, 
quant us nebulo. We read nothing of VirgiVs mafter* 
Horace has /aid nothing of hisy hut that he *was a 
great flogger, Cicero luould have extolled his in the 
higheft terms, but could not^ On the other hand^ 
his font though he had the benefit offo great mafters, 
his onun father y and Cratippus the firft philofopher of 
his time, if nue may belle've Cicero himfelf turned out 
a great blockhead. Sec, Petrarcha, 

f I am happy to find that my opinion on the 
neceflity of the mind's working for itfelf in edu- 
cation ; and the infufficiency of formal Ie6lure« 
alone, coincides with the opinion of the Author of 
Hermes. 

" Nothing is more abfurd, fays he, than the 
common notion of inftrudlion, as if fcience were 
to be poured into the mind like water into a cif- 
tern, that paffively waits to receive all that comes. 
The growth of knowledge refembles the growth of 

fruit: 



ON PRIVATE STUDY, &c; 257 

fruit : however external caufes may in Tome de- 
gree co-operate, it is the internal vigour and vir- 
tue of the tree that muil ripen the juices to their 
juft maturity.? Harris. 

I will add, that a boy will retain what he has 
acquired by his own labour, becaufe he will know 

what it coll him. 'Ov^U overtav, f.v uiPiCk; skli^ctlof 
xdDii^ecyiYi r,v ^\ wex^ aX^ov ivu£bXcc^(» A Tfian does not 
ufually de'vour the fuhftante <vjhich he has acquired 
' himjelf'y but that ^which he has recei'ved from another* 
Cephisidori Apbphthegma. 

The late unfortunate Chatterton is a proof of 
the advantage of private and unaffifted application. 
He was indeed poflefTed of a very extraordinary 
genius ; but he had alfq furnilhed himfelf with a 
great (hare of peculiar learning at the age of fix- 
teen. Unprotehed 2iH^^ untutored, he had made a 
progrefs feldom equalled at a more advanced age, 
by thofe who have enjoyed the afliftances of thie 
beil fchools, and the mod famous univerfities. So 
true is it, *EAN HS <DIAOMAGFTS ESH nOATMA0H2, 
I/you lo've learning, you nvill have learning, 

** In Erasmus we behold a man, who in the 
days of his youth, lying under no fmall disad- 

VANTAGfcS OF BIRTH AND EDUCAFICN, DE- 
PRESSED BY POVERTY, FRIENDLESS AND yN- 
SUPPORTED, OR VERY SLENDERLY SUPPORTED, 
MADE HIS WAY THROUGH ALL THESK OBSTA- 
CLES, and, by the help of bright parts «ind con- 
stant APPLICATION, became one of the mod 
confiderable fcholars of his age, and acquired the 
favour and protc6lion of princes, nobles and pre- 
lates, of the greateft names in church and ftate. . . 
*' After PERSONAL MERIT (fays Bruyere), 
** it muft be confe/Tcd that high ftations and pom- 
** pous titles are the principal and moH fplendid 
** marks of diftin6lion ; and he who cannot 
*' be an Erasmus, must think of being a 

" BISHOP." JORTIN. 

Other 



25^ ON PRIVATE STUDY, &c. 

Other indances might be produced ; bat this of 
the great Erafmas may be instar omnium, or 
€qui*valent to ail, 

" Education (fays father Gerdil) may indeed 
be termed an art ; but it is one of thofe arts which 
are fimply diredlory, forming nothing. The gar- 
dener, to whom a young plant is committed in 
charge, carefully tranfplants it into the mofl con- 
venient fpot, defends it from every thing which 
may injure it, from the heat of the dog-days and 
the winter's froft. If it bends in its growth, he 
ilraighteas it, though he is obliged to make ufe of 
violence, and fcraples not to ufe the knife for 
cutting off fuch ufelefs branches as would only 
{tnt to divert the ^onrie of that fap which is in- 
tended for its nouriihment, and to make it bear 
fruit. The gardener forms nothing : all he does 
is to keep at a diflance every thing that would 
interrupt nature in its operations. It is nature 
caufes the young plant to grow* and the inward 
energies of nature which extend to every part*'^ 

Dodrina fed vim promovet iniitam» 

Redlique cultus pedora roborant. 

But learning nd<vances the native ftrengtb to per^ 
feSiion^ and right culture ftrengtbens the invuard 
foivers, HoR. 

Injudicious parents are apt to think it hard, that 
their child muft work fo much, when they provide 
fuch various and coftly afliftance. They are apt 
alfo to be unreafonably impatient in expedling to 
reap very early the fruits ot their own expence and 
their child's labour. They are difplcafcd if they 
fee not a hafty improvement : Let them attend to 
Plutarch, •* he who plants a vineyard, foon eats tiie 
grape; fo in other plantations a few months bring 
the fruit of oar labours to our eye and tafle. Oxen, 
horfes, iheep, &c. foon bring us profit, and do us 
much fervice in return for a little expence and 

trouble. 



ON PRIVATE STUDY, Sec. 259 

trouble. But man's education is full of labour 
and coft. The increafe is flow, the fruit and com- 
fort far off, not within fight." 

Sicuti enim horologii umbram progrefTam fenti- 
mus, progredientem non cernimus : et fruticem 
aut herbam crevifle apparet, non apparct crefcere, , 
ita et ingeniorum profedlus. For as nv£ perceive 
that the JbadonjQ is moved upon the dial^ yet do 
not fee it moving ; and as it appears ^ that the 
Jhrub or the gra/s is grown, though it does not ap^ 
fear to be growing; juft fo is the impro<vement oj^ 
the underftanding, Joach. Fort. RingeL. 

Crescit occulto velut arbor ^vo, 
// grov»'s lih a tret under tbf un/een operation ojf 
fimff HoK* 



['260] 

SECTION XXVL 



ON LATE LEARNERS, AND ON PERSONS WHO 
WISH TO RECOVER THE ACQUISITIONS OF 
THEIR YOUTH. 

t^ TH^ ctTravi'©^, xtSap^iK T»;\i.Y«T^ «» ; fc^urlof, hfrsv, 
^ l-^tlJuc/M Ltaci r, u\i.a.^ri. Socrates in his old age hup' 
f^ned to be playing on the lyre, and thrumming wwa^ 
upon the firings y ijohsti fomebody came up and /aid ^ 
What ? are you y at your time of life, playing on the 
lyre ? Jye, faid he, it is better to learn a thing late^ 
than not to learn it at all. Demosthenes. 

Cato> literas Grzecas actate Jam declinata didicic, 
ut efl'et hominibus documento, ea quoquc percipf 
pofl'e quaj fenes concupifcent, Quintilian* 

THE paflion for letters fhews itfelf at dif- 
ferent periods of life. Many perfons 
have pafTed through a fchool, without exhibiting 
either inclination or ability for literary purfuits, 
who have afterwards fhone in the world of let- 
ters with diftinguiftied luftre. The faculties of 
their minds have expanded at a later period than 
common, or peculiar occafions have occurred 
to excite their induftry and emulation. 

Others there are, who never were placed at a 
claffical fchool, and have either not had, or have 
not availed themfelves of other opportunities of 
improving themfelves \ but who,, when their" 
judgment is matured by obfervation and expe- 
rience, 



ON LATE LEARNERS, &c. zOi 

rience, earneftly wifh and endeavour to furnifli 
themfelves with the learning of a gentleman. 
They often mifcarry in thdr attempt, not from 
want of affiduity or of perfeverance, but from 
ignorance of a proper method *. 

The 

* The following is a letter of Erafmus, con- 
taining advice to a fludent : 

Cum te incredibili quodam ardore literarum fla- 
grare minime dubitarem, hortatore nihil opus cfl'e 
putavi, fed ejus quam ingreffus efles viae duc« 
modo, ac tanquam indice, id quod mei ofhcii efl'e 
judicavi, videlicet, ut tibi vedigia quibus ipfe a 
puero eilem ingre/lus commondrarem. Qux fi tu 
pari cura accipias, qua ego didurus fum, tuturum. 
confide, ut neque me monuifTe, neque te paruifie 
pcenituerit. 

Prima igitur cura fit, ut praeceptorem. tibi deli- 
gas quam eruditidimum. Neque enim fieri poteil, 
uc is rede quenquam erudiac qui fit ipie inerudi- 
tus. Quem fimulatque nadus fueris, fac omnibus 
modis eflicias, ut ille patris in te, tu filii vicifsim 
in ilium induas afFedum. Ad quod quidem cum 
ipfa honefti ratio nos debet adhortari, quod non 
minus debeamus iis aqaibus rede viyendi rationem 
quam a quibus vivendi initia fompfimus ; turn ilia 
mutua benevolentia tantum ad difcendum habec 
momenti, ut fruftra fis literarum prsceptorem ha- 
biturus, nifi habueris et amicom. 

Deinde, ut te illi et attentum et aiSiduum prae* 
beas. Contentione enim immodica nonnunquam 
obruuntur ingenia difcentium. Aifiduitas ver6 et 
medioccitate fua perdurat, et quotidiauis incre- 
mentis majorem opinione acervum accumulate 
Satietate ciim omnibus in rebus tum in liieris ni- 
hil perniciofius. Laxanda ed igitur aliquoctes 
ilia literarum conteptio, intermifcendi lufus; fed 

liberales. 



l62 ON LATE LEARNERS,' Ac. 

The firft great error of ftudents of this de- 
icription is, that they read in a defultory man- 

ncr, 

liberales, fed Uteris digni, ct ab his non nimis 
abhorrentes. Imo mediis ipfis fludiis perpetua 
quxdam voluptas eft intermlicenda, ut ludum po- 
tius diAzendi quam laborem exiftimemus. Nihil 
enim perdiu fieri potefl, quod non agentem aliqua 
voluptate remoretur. 

Optima qaxque ftatim ac primum difce. Ex* 
trema eft dementia difcere dedifcenda. Qaod in 
curandp ftomacho folent prsecipere medici, idem 
tibi in ingeniis fervandum puca. Cave aut noxio 
«ut immodico cibo ingenium obruas, ucroque enina 
juxta ofFenditur. 

Initio non quam multa, fed quam bona perci- 
pias refert. Sed jam rationem accipe qua poffis 
non folum reflius, fed eciam facilius difcere : hoc 
«nim in homine artifice praeftare folec artis ratio, 
«t tantundem operis cum reftius expeditiufque, 
turn ievius etiam efHciat. Diem tanquam operai 
partito. Principio, quod caput eft, praeceptorem 
interpretantem non atcentus modo fed avid as au* 
fcaltato: non contentus impigre fequi difFerentem, 
aliquoties prxvolare contende. Omnia illius dida 
memoria;, pracipua etiam literis mandabis, fide- 
liilimis vocum cuftodibus. Quibus rurfus ita con* 
Adas cave, ut dives ille ridiculus apud Senecam, 
qui iic animum induxerat, ut fe tenere crederet, 
quicquid fervorum quifquam meminiflet. Noli 
committere ut codices habeas eruditos, ipfe ineru« 
ditns. Audita ne efHuant, aut apud te, aut cuna 
aliis retradla. Nee his contentus aliquam tcmporis 
partem tacitae cogitationi triboere memento: quam 
unam divus Aurclius turn ingenio turn memoriae 
imprimis conducere fcripfit. Conflidlatio quoque 
ct tanquam palsftra ingeniorum, nervos animi 

praecipue 



ON LATE LEARNERS, &c. 263 

mtTj every thing which falls in their way. They 
begin with complete and extenfive treatifes, 
^when they fhould proceed gradually from ele- 
tnentary introduftions. The^ are ufually un- 
. acquainted with proper editions of books, and 
voftend fpend much time and attention on publi- 
-cations, M^ich, when compared with original 
^ompofitions, are contemptible both in ftyle and 
•in matter. They often confine their attention 
to Englifli books ; from an idea, that the lan- 
guages are not eafily to be learned by an adult.» 
The confcquence of their miftakes is, that their 
conceptions, though multiplied by reading, are 
sconfufed and imperfeft, and though they find 

praecipue turn oftcndit, turn expitat, turn adauget. 
Nee fcifcitari fi quid dubitas, nee caftigari ii quid 
crrabis, fit pudor. Noflurnas lucubrationes atque 
intempelliva ftudia fugito : nam et ingenium ex- 
tinguunt, et valctudinem vehementer ofFendunt. 
Aurora musis amica est, apta ftudiis. Pran- 
fus aut lude, aut deambula, aut hilariiis confa- 
bulare. Quid quod inter ilia quoque iludiis locus 
effe poteft f Cibi non quantum libidini, (cd 
quantum valetudinl fatis fit, fumito. Sub ccenam 
paulifper inambula; coenatus ide<Ti facito; fub 
fomnum exquifiti quippiam ac dignum mcmoria 
jegito ; de co cogitantem (bpor opprimat ; id ex- 
perredtus e teipfo repofcas. Plinianum illud fem- 
per animo hifideat tuo omne perirb tempus 
quoD STUDIO NON iMPEHTiAS. Cogita juvcnta 
nihil effe fugacius : quae obi evolarit femel, redit 
nunquam. v>ed jam hortator efTe incipio, indicem 
pollicitus. Saaviilime Chriftiane, banc form am, 
aut fi quam poteris meliorem, fequere, ac bene 
vale. 

amufement 



264 ON l^ATE LEARNERS, Sec. 

amufement from it, they derive but little f(4i<i 
advantage. 

If they ferioufly wifli, then, not merely to di- 
vert themfelves with books, but to make a pi«o- 
grefs in learning, they muft refolve to rcj^d me- 
thodically. They muft let no temptation * in- 
terrupt their plan. They muft not indulge to 
excefs their natural love of novdty f. That 
paffion will lead them to attend folely to new 
publications, from which alone, and without a 
preparatory education, no great advantage will 
l)e received J. 

They will do right todiveft themfelves of that 
vulgar prejudice, which repre(ents it as an in- 
furmountable difficulty to begin a language, or 
an art or fcience, at the age of manhood. To 

♦ . Fortis, omiffis. 

Hoc AGE, deliciis. 

Have ypirit enough to give up jour indulgences^ 
end mind the one thing needful, Ho R • 

f Dura aliquis pnecepta Vocet nea ; dura fatemar 
Efle ; ied, ut valeas, multa ferenda tibi. 

Awf one may. call my precepts hard \ I confe/s they 
are hard^ but many things are t^ -he borne by you in 
order to he wuelL 

\ Sum ex iis qui mlror antiques: non tamen^ 
ut quidam, temporum noflroFum ingenia defpicio. 
Neque enim, quafi Jaffa, et effacta natura, ut nihil 
jam laudabile pariat. / eun one of tbofe *who ad* 
mire the antients ; hut yet not fo much as^ like fome^ 
to de/pi/e the ingenious produQions of our ovon times, 
for nature is not^ as it nver^, 'weary and barren^ fo 
as ttoiv to bring forth nothing worthy ofpraije, 

Cicero. 

be 



ON LATE LEARNElCS, Bcc. 265 

be under the influence of this opinion, will be 
an efFeftual bar to their advancement. Let 
them rather call to mind the many inftances of 
great improvements made in the faiences, by 
thofe who did not begin to cultivate them till 
they were arrived at a middle age. Hiftory and 
Biography will furnifh feveral examples of old 
men, who have begun to ftudy in old age, and 
have yet made a great proficiency *• 

I am aware, that rules and method in ftudy, 
which I thus ftrongly recommend, are at pre*. 
fent rather out of fafliion ; but I am convinced, 
that the late ftudent will never lay afolid found- 
ation without them. He fhould every day fet 
apart certain hours f, and I would advife that he 

borrow 

• See Beattie's DifTertation on Memory and Ima- 
gination. 

" Some think, that after forty we feldom make 
pew attainments in this way;, an opinion, which, 
though it may hold good in moll caies, will how- 
ever in many be found erroneous. The elder Cnto 
is a memorable exception, who did not ftudy Greek 
till he was very old, and yet made great progrefs 
in it ; and Ogilvic, who tranflated Homer and Vir- 
gil, though no extraordinary poet, was a man of 
confiderable learning, is faid to have known little 
of either Latin or Greek till he was part fifty. 
Study the languages therefore while ye are young, 
and ye will eafily acquire them ; but let not thofe 
inen, whofe youth hath been without culture, cvr 
defpair of making a competent proficiency, while 
they are willing to beftow the neceffary pains.'* 

Bt ATTIE, 

t " In ftudics let a man have fet hours for thoftt 

** fubjefts, which are contrary to his natural in, 

N «« clination . 



266 ON LATE LEARNERS, &c. 

borrow a few from his raornUig repofe; not 
only becaufe he can then read without interrup- 
tion of his other bufinefs and engagements, but 
becaufe the morning, it is well known, is parti- 
. cularly favourable to the mufes. The injury 
which the health, the eyes, and the fpirits wiU 
infallibly fuftain from a long continuance of 
no£lurnal ftudies, will induce every prudent 
perfon to avoid the lucubrations of midnight* 
£arly rifing contributes to health and cheerful- 
ncfs, while it furnifhes the fineft opportunities 
for ftudy. 

It is not eafy to prefcribe a plan of ftudy, or 
a courfe of reading, whijch will fuit all circum^ 
fiances. The direftions which might ferve a 
few, might poffibly miflead more *. In general, 
therefore, the ftudent may be advifed to apply 
to fome friend, to a refpedlable clergyman or 
fuperintendant of education, who has himfelf 
been regularly trained, and who fupports a 
chara£ler of learning and judgment. Such a 

*' cH nation ; but for thofe agreeable to his nature, 
•* he need appoint no fixed times ; becaufe his 
'* thoughts will fpontaneoufly fly to them, as other 
*' fludies and bufinefs give leave." Bacon. 

* Erafmus being aflced how a man might be- 
come learned, replied. Si do(flis affidue conviveret; 
fi dodtos audiret non minus fubmifse quam hono- 
Hfice ; fi doftos ftrenue Icgeret ; li dodos diligen- 
ter edifceret ; denique ii fe doftum nunquam pu- 
taret. If he Jhould li<ve conftantly ^witb the learned^ 
if he Jhould lifien to the learned not lefs fuhmijp<vely 
than refpeSifully , if he Jhould read the learned aiten" 
ti'vely, if he Jhould get the learned bj hearty if he 
Jhjuld ngver think himfelf learned. Erasmus.. 

director 



ON LATE LEARNERS, &c, 267 

direflor will b^ able to confider the age, the pre- 
vious opportunities that have been enjoyed, the 
degree and the kind of improvements already 
gained, and the abilities and difpofition of the 
fludent*. He will give dirediions fuggefted 
by each of thefe circumftances in particular, 
and all of them combined. I mean not that he 
fhould a£l as a tutor. The late ftudent muft, 
for the moft part, be his own inftruftor, after 
he is once taught the way that he fhould go, 
by fome friend who is poflefled of judgment 
and experience. An adult will feldom fubmit 
to a tutor, with that implicit obedience which 
may be neceffary to render ^ tutor's method 
and inftruftions fuccefsful. I think it therefore 
better, only to afk advice of the judicious, than 
to engage with a private tutor. Some cafes, 
however, may render a private tutor highly 
proper. But in general I may aflert, that where 
parts and inclination are united, and the di- 
redions of a fenfible friend attended to, the late 
Itudent, as I have termed him, may proceed 
alone, and obtain a profperous paflage in the 
way to learning. There is a vigour and cheer- 
fulnefs which operates moft favourably on ftudy 
when the mind purfues the diftates of its own 
propenfity. Volunteers In learning obtain the 
moft honourable and ufeful vidlories. 

It is very common to find perfons, who, 
though they^ have been good fcholars at their 

• He will alfo ad as an arbiter elegak^. 
TiARUM, a judge of elegance^ in pointing out 
books; and fupplyirig an bruditum luxum, a 
learned Iwcurj^ 

N 2 fchool. 



268 ON LATE LEARNERS, &c. 

fchool, and have made a great proficiency in 
learning, in the juvenile age, have forgotten it 
amidft the ple'afure and the bufinefs of an adive 
manhood. When the bufy fcene is pafied, 
they call to mind thofe fweets of literary pur- 
fuits which they formerly enjoyed, and wifh to 
tafte thpm once more. They are at a lofs for 
fomething to fill agreeably thofe vacuities of 
time, which were lately occupied in adive em- 
ployments. They, therefore, endeavour to re- 
cal what they acquired in their youth. 

Perhaps the beft advice which can be given to 
perfons under thefe circumftances, is, that they 
purfue the eaficft, the moft entertaining, and the 
moft compendious methods. Difficulty will 
difguft and impede them. Amufement is the 
end propofed by them ; and the means which 
lead to it muft, if poffible, be rendered amufing. 
As they have once been acquainted with the 
elementary parts, they will recolleft what is 
eflential in them without much labour. If they 
wifh, for inftance, to recal their knowledge of 
Latin, I would advife them to begin at once 
with reading^an eafy author, wfth Beza's Latin 
Teftament, and Cordery's Colloquies, and gra- 
dually afcend to the higheft claffics. If they 
poffefs natural abilities, they will find them- 
ielves improve by this method with great 
rapidity. 

But in general, though not without many ex- 
ceptions, it would perhaps be better, for perfons 
advanced beyond the meridian of life, not to 
attempt learning, or recovering what they have 
forgotten, in the Latin or the Greek languages. 

Amufement 



ON LATE LEARNERS, &c. 269. 

Amufement is their principal objeft, and they 
may derive it in fufficicnt variety in Englifh. 
But in Englifh they fhould read with fome me- 
thod, and not, as is ufually the cafe, U'hatever 
offers itfelf, without tafle and felefiion. It will 
be faid, that, if they are innocently amufed, it 
fignifies little with what book. From this opi- 
nion I mufl diflent. The pleafure which arifcs 
from reading, and feeling the beauties of ele- 
gant works, is much greater than is received 
by an indifcriminate and vague perufal of every 
publication *. Improvement ought alfo to be 

regarded j 

• If much and ill-chofen reading tended to 
make men wife, every fubfcriber to a circulating 
library, fays Dr. Beattie, would have it in his power 
to be wifer than Socrates, and more accompiiihed 
than Julius Csefar. 

** There is a great variety of intelledual errors, 
into which, without a proper condud of the un- 
derflanding, or, in other words, without a found 
and well cultivated judgment, the young (ludent will 
be extremely apt to fall. Of thefe I fhall fingle 
out only one, againd which it feems at prefent 
more peculiarly necefTary to caution him, and that 
is, an in/at table thirft for novelty. The Athenians, 
we know, in the decline op their state, 
/pent their time in nothing elfe but either to tell or t» 
hear fome nenv thing. In this refpeft, whatever may 
be the cafe in others, we fall very little fhort of 
that elegant but corrupt people ; and the greater 
part of thofe who write for popular applaufe, are 
determined at any rate to gratify this extravagant * 
paflion. For this purpofe, they hold it necefTary 
to depart, as far as poflible, from the plain direft 
road of nature, fimpiicity and good fenfe ; which 
N 3 being 



270 ON LATE LEARNERS, &c. 

regarded ; and furely more improvement, whe- 
ther it be moral or intelle<9:ual, is to be derived 

from 

being unfortunately pre-occupied by thofe great 
mailers of compofition, the AntientSy and fuchof the 
moderns as have trod in their ileps, leave them no 
room in that walk for the diftinflion at which they 
aim. They ftrike out, therefore, into untried and 
pathlefs regions, and there flrain every nerve, and 
put in pradice every artifice, to catch the attention 
and excite the wonder of mankind. Hence all 
thofe various corruptions in literature, thofe af- 
feftations of fingularity and originality, thofe quaint 
conceits, indecent alluiions, wild flarts of fancy, 
any every other obliquity of a dlftortednjoit^ which 
vitiate the tafte, corrupt the morals, and pervert 
the principles of young and injudicious readers. 
Hence, too all thofe late profound difcoveries, that 
to give youth a religious education is to fill them 
with bigotry and prejudice ; that the right way to 
teach morality is to make vice appear amiable ; 
that true wifdom and philofophy con^ft in doubting 
of every thing, in combating all received opinions^ 
and confounding the moft obvious dictates of com- 
mon fenfe in the inexplicable mazes of metaphyfical'. 
refinement ; that all eftabliftiments, civil and reli- 
gious, are iniquitous and pernicious ufurpations on 
the liberties of mankind; that the only way to be 
a good man is to dijbelie*ve one half of the Gofpel ; 
that piety and felf-government are duties not 
worth a wife man's notice ; that bene*volence is the 
fum of all virtue and all religion ; and that one 
great proof of our benevolence is to fet mankind 
afloat in uncertainty, and make them as uneafy 
and as hopelefs as we can." Bp. Porteus, 

I mufl do myfelf the honour of adding my praife 
of the true Chriftian piety » and of the warm zral 

for 



ON LATE LEARNERS, Sic. 271 

from books of charafter, than from trifling, ob- 
feu re, and injudicious compilations. 

I cannot 

for the Gofpel of Jesus Christ, which, in a 
fceptical and irreligioas age, appear with To pecu-^ 
liar force and beauty in tiTe prelate, from whofe 
excellent fermons I have tranfcribed the above paf- 
fage. The union of the polite fcholar and the 
true Chrillian in his character, afrords a fine ex- 
ample to all who are in the purfuit of a liberal 
education* 

" 'Tis not improbable (Mr. Harris obferves), 
that fome intrepid fpirit may demand again, What 
avail thefe fubtleties (the fubtleties of criticifm) ? 
Withotit fo much trouble, I can be full enough 
pleafed. I know what I like. We anfwer, and fo 
does the carrion crow that feeds upon a carcafc. 
The difficulty lies not in knowing what we like ; 
but in knowihg how to like, and what is worth 
liking. Till thefe ends are obtained, we may ad- 
mire Durfey before Milton; a fmoaking Boor of 

Hemfkirk, before an apoftle of Raphael 

As to what is worth our liking, that is bed: known 
by fludying the beft authors, beginning from the 
Greeks, then pafling to the Latins ; nor on any 
account excluding thofe who have excelled among 
the moderns. 

" And here, if while we perufe fome author of 
high rank, we perceive we do not inftantly reliih 
him, let us not be difheartened— let us even feiga 
a relifh till we find a relifh come. A morfel per- 
haps pleafes us — let us cherifh it— Another morfel 

ftrikes us let us cherifh this alfo. Let us thus 

proceed, and fleadily perfevere, till we find we 
can relifh, not morfels, but wholes ; and feel that, 
uhat began in fJdlion, terminates in reality. The 
film being in this manner removed, we fhall dif- 
N 4 cover 



27© ON LATE LEARNERS, &c. 

regarded ; and furely more improvement, whe- 
ther it be moral or intelle<S):ual, is to be derived 

from 

being unfortunately pre-occupled by thofe great 
mailers of compofition, the AntientSy andfuchof the 
moderns as have trod in their ileps, leave them no 
room in that walk for the diftinflion at which they 
aim. They ftrike out, therefore, into untried and 
pathlefs regions, and there ftrain every nerve, and 
put in pradice every artifice, to catch the attention 
and excite the wonder of mankind. Hence all 
thofe various corruptions in literature, thofe af- 
fe6lations of fingularity and originality, thofe quaint 
conceits, indecent alluiions, wild flarts of fancy, 
any every other obliquity of a diftorted w/V, which 
vitiate the tafte, corrupt the morals, and pervert 
the principles of young and injudicious readers. 
Hence, too all thofe late profound difcoveries, that 
to give youth a religious education is to fill them 
with bigotry and prejudice ; that the right way to 
teach morality is to make vice appear amiable ; 
that true wifdom and philofophy con^fl in doubting 
of every thing* in combating all received opinions^ 
and confounding the mofl obvious dictates of com* 
mon fenfe in the inexplicable mazes of metaphyfical'. 
refinement ; that all eftablifliments, civil and reli- 
gious, are iniquitous and pernicious ufurpations on 
the liberties of mankind; that the only way to be 
a good man is to dijhelie*ve one half of the Gofpel ; 
that piety and felf-government are duties not 
worth a wife man's notice ; that hene*volence is the 
fum of all virtue and all religion ; and that one 
great proof of our bcyievolence is to fet mankind 
afloat in uncertainty, and make them as uneafy 
and as hopclefs as we can." Bp. Porteus. 

I muft do myfelf the honour of adding my praife 
of the true ChriiHan piety, and of the warm zeal 

for 



ON LATE LEARNERS, Ac. 271 

from books of charafter, than from triflings ob- 
fcure, and injudicious compilations. 

I cannot 

.for the Gofpel of Jesus Christ, which, in a 
fceptical and irreligious age, appear with fo pecu- 
liar force and beauty in tiTe prelate, from whofe 
excellent fermons I have tranfcribed the above paf- 
fage. The union of the polite fcholar and the 
true Chrillian in his character, affords a fine ex- 
ample to all who are in the purfuit of a liberal 
education. 

" 'Tis not improbable (Mr. Harris obftrv^s), 
that fome intrepid fpirit may demand again, What 
avail ihefe fubtleties (the fubtleties 0f criticifm) ? 
Without fo much trouble, I can be full enough 
pleafed. I know what I like. We anfwer, and fo 
does the carrion crow that feeds upon a carcafc. 
The difficulty lies not in knowing what we like ; 
but in knowihg how to like, and what is worth 
liking. Till thefe ends are obtained, we may ad- 
mire Dur fey before Mij ton; a fmoaking Boor of 

Hemfkirk, before an apoftle of Raphael 

As to what is worth our liking, that is bed: known 
by fludying the befl authors, beginning from the 
Greeks, then pafling to the Latins ; nor on any 
account excluding thofe who have excelled among 
the moderns. 

" And here, if while we perufe fome author of 
high rank, we perceive we do not inftantly relifh 
him, let us not be difhv;artened — let us even feiga 
a relifh till we find a relifh come. A morfel per- 
haps pleafes us — let us cherifh it— Another morfel 

ftrikes us let us cherifh this alfo. Let us thus 

proceed, and fleadily perfcvere, till we find we 
can relifh, not morfels, but wholes ; and feel that, 
uhat began in fJdlion, terminates in reality. The 
film being in this manner removed, we fhall dif- 
N 4 cover 



,2}t^ -ON LATE LEARNERS, &c. 

I cannot clofe this topic, without earneft}y 
recommending to all clafles above poverty, and 
the lower employments of trade and mechanics,, 
the cultivation of a tafte for letters. Merchants 
and traders, even if, from unavoidable circum- 
ftances, they have been negleiled in their youth, 
ihould endeavour^ at a fubfequent perrod, to 
acquire a love of reading. Retirement is their 
' object. But how are they to enjoy, this retire- 
ment ? . They promife themfelves much hap* 
pinefs, butj alas } they feldom find it *• They 

know 

cover beauties which we never imagined ; and 
contemn for puerilities, what we once foolifiily ad- 
mired. 

*• One thing, however, in this proccfs is indif* 
penfably required ; we are on no account to ex- 
ped that fine things {ra xaXa) fhould defcend to 
us ; our tade, if po&ble, mufl be made to afcend to 
them. 

*• This is jhe labour, this the work; there Is 
pleafure in the fuccefs, and praife even in the at- 
tempt. . . . 

" By only feeking and perufing what is truly 
excellent, and by contemplating always this, and 
this alone, the mind infenfibly becomes accuftomed 
to it, and finds that in this alone it can acquiefce 
with content." Harris, 

* Otium fine literis mors eft, eX vivi hominis fe- 
pultura. Lfi/ure ^without hooks, and a tafte for 
them, is death and the burial of a man even lAjhin 
aliue, Seneca. 

Nifi ad haec admitterer, non fuerat operae pre- 
tium nafci . . . O quam contempta res eft homo> 
nifi fupra humana fe erexcrli ! Unlefs I iveie ad- ' 
mitted to thrfc things ^ it ^ixould not be 'worth ii^hils 

19 



ON LATE LEARNERS, &c. 27J 

know not. how to pafs that time, which was 
before fcarcely fufficient for their occupations* 
They have recourfe to the bottle and to cards^ 
Thefe, indeed, prevent refledion for a time ;, 
but they often afford no folid fatisfaftion. How 
happy would pafs their days of eafe and afflui- 
ence, if the tranquil purfuits of literature formed! 
a part of their amuferaent ! 

The confideration, that a tafte fbr letters is 
able to furnifh one of the beft pleafures of old 
age, fhould induce parents of all ranks above 
the loweft, to give children a tinSure of polite 
learning, whatever may be their deftination- 
If they are fixed in trade, and are faccefsful, 
this will enable them to enjoy a fortune. It 
will fill up their leifure * with fatisfaftory em- 
ployment^ 

fo he hdrn • • • O bofw contemptilU a thing is mam^ 
unle/s he raifes himfelf above human things / 

Seneca* 
Religion, indeed, is the bed employment of old 
age, or the feafon of retirement ; but a taHe for 
letters contributes greatly to increafe the pleafurea- 
of religion. 

learning fomething continually j /aid Solon* 

Sit bona librorum ec provifae frugis in annual: 

copia. HoR. lib. i. ep. i8. 

Let there he a good ftore of hooks laid up as parP 
of the pro^ifions for the enjoyment of the year • 

News-papers feem to conftitute the only readings 
of a great part of the nation. I fear, notwithftand- 
ing their merit, utility, and power of pleafing^ 
they are, upon the whole, injurious to tafte and 
learning. They engrofs or diftraft that attention 
which would othcrwife be paid to found literature^ 
N5 Sui;» 



J74 ON LATE LEARNERS, &c. 

ployment, and will better enable them to fup- 
port the charadier of gentlemen, than the opu- 
lence which j^ives them the name. 

Bat, at the Tame time, their valae in a preb 
COUNTRY, is TRULY GREAT, as they forjtn one 
of the beft fecurities of freedom. 

The fubjed of this Sedion calls to mind a cha- 
racter of l^heophraftus. 

Theophraftus delineates an Opfimatbes^ or late 
learner, and renders him truly ridiculous ; but it 
muft be remarked, that the qualifications which his 
Qpjmathes purfues are pomparacively trifling, and 
puerile, 

Rideat it pul/et la/civa decentius atas. His epfi* 
matbes is iixty years old ; at that age it is a folly 
to begin to learn to fing, fence and ride, and more 
particularly foolifh to be often tatious of fuch ac- 
complifhments even before they are maftered ; but 
it is not too late to begin to improve the mind at 
that or any age, if it has not been done before, 
becaufe the improvement of the heart accompanies 
the improvement of the mindset nunquam ftra 
eft ad bonos mores via.. 



C 27s ] 

SECTION XXVII. 

ON THE LITERARY EDUCitTION OF WOMEN. 

TO nocfMo^i^v yvvxTxa vqmp. Tlont h ToiutfTriv ovrt 
X/^vo'oqf ovri o-jkba^Ay^^f ovri xoxx^* a^^' oo-dc 0-f/:AiroT};'7<^9 
iwla^ia?, flti^^J,,- «,u,^«o'i» «ri^nid>3<ru Ornament, as Gratis 
faid^ is that quality nvbich pojjeffes the pq^er of ad^ 
ding grace. But that quality foffeffes the po^wer of 
adding grace ^ tubicb renders a tuoman more graceful. 
NotAj it is neither gold, nor the emerald^ nor the purple 
dye^ *which does this ; hut it is that, ijuhate^er it is, 
nvhich exhibits indications of <virgin dignify and deli* 
f^<y» tf^ well-regulated mind ^ and of modefly . 

Plutarch. 

THERE arc many prejudices entertained 
againft the chara£ler of a learned lady; 
and perhaps, if all ladies were profoundly learn- 
ed, fome inconveniencies might arife from it ^ 
but I muft own it does not appear to me, that 
a woman will be rendered lefs acceptable in the 
world, or worfe qualified to perform any part 
of her duty in it, by having employed the time 
from fix to fixteen, in the cultivation of her 
mind. Time enough will remain after a few 
hours every day fpent in reading, for the im- 
provement of the perfon, and the acquifition of 
the ufual accomplifhmcnts. With refpe<Sk to 
thcfe accomplifliments, I will not prefumc to 
direcSl the method of purfuing them. I will not 
fo far intrude on a province, which by no 
means belongs to me. The ladies themfclvcs, 
and their inftrudlors, want no diredions in 
matters of external ornament, the end of which 
N 6 is 



ty6 ON THE EDUCATIONT 

is to pleafe on intuition. However arrogant tft 
men have been in their claims of fuperiority 
they have ufually allowed the ladies the poflef- 
fion of a delicate tafte in the improvement and 
perception of all kinds of beauty *. 

The literary education of women ought in- 
dhfputably to be varied according to their for- 
tunes and their expeftations. Much refine- 
ment, and a tafte for books, will injure her, 
whofe time, from prudential motives, muft be 
entirely engrofled by oeconomy. Few women 
are indeed exempted from all attention to do- 
tneftic care. But yet the unmarried, and thofe 
who enjoy opulence, find many intervals which 
they oken devote to fome fpecies of readings 
And there is no doubt, but that the reading 
would be feleSed with more judgment, and 
would aflTord more pleafiire and advantage, if 
the tafte were formed by early culture. 

I will then venture to recommend, that la- 
dies of this dcfcription ftiould have a claffical. 
education. But let not the reader be alarmed. 
I mean not to advife, that they fliould be ini- 
tiated, without exception, in Greek and Latin; 
but that they fliJuld be well and early acquaint- 
ed with the French and the Englifti claflics. 

As foon as they can read with fluency, let 
them begin to learn Lowth's Grammar, and to 
read at the fame time fome very eafy and ele- 
gant author, with a view to exemplify the rules^ 
They ftiould learn a part in grammar every 
morning, and then proceed to read a lefTon, jutt. 

* It is to the men alone that what the Greeks 
call ey^iXoxxXic, a ixjatit of fenjihility for beauty ^ 
can be imputed. 

2 ia 



O F W O M E N. 277 

in the manner obferved in claffical fchools in 
learning Latin. After a year fpent in this me- 
thod, if the fuccefs is adequate to the time, they 
ihould advance to French, and ftudy that lan- 
guage exactly in the fame mode^ In the French 
grammar, it will not be neceflary to go through 
thofe particulars which are common to the 
grammars of all knguages, and which have 
been learned in ftudying Englifli. 

Several years (hould be fpent in this elemen- 
tary procefs ; and when the fcholar is perfe6^1y 
acquainted with orthography and grammar, fhe 
may then proceed to the cultivation of tafte. 
Milton, Addifon, and Pope, muft be the ftand- 
kig models in Englilh > Boileau,. Fenelon, Fon- 
tenelle *, and Vertot, in French j and I wifli 
ititk to be attended to folely for a confiderable 
time. Many inconveniencies arife from en- 
gaging young minds in the perufel of too many^ 
books. After thefe authors have been read over 
with attention, and with a critical obfervation 
of their beauties, the fcholar may be permitted 
to feleft any of the approved writers of France 
and England,: for her own improvement. She 
will be able to fele6i with fome judgment, and 
will have laid a foundation which will bear a* 
good fuperftrufture.. Her mind, if &e has been 
Aiccefsful in this courfe, will have imbibed an 
elegance which will naturally difFufe itfelf over 
her converfation, addrefs, and behaviour f. It 

iSL 

♦ Though Fontenelle is accord by the critics of 
deviating a little from the claffical ftandard, he ir 
yet a very pleafing writer. 

t Cornelia was the daughter of Scipio Nafica» 
2Xkd the wife of Pompey the Great.. Platarch 

Ipeaks 



i;8 ON THE EDUCATIQJ^ 

is well known, that internal beaaty contributes 
much to perfeft external grace. I believe it 
Will alfo be favourable to virtue *, and will 
operate greatly in retraining from any conduA 
grofsly indelicate^ and obvioufly improper. Much 
of the profligacy of female manners has pro- 
ceeded from a levity occaiioned by the want of 
a proper education. She who has no tafte for 
well- written books, will often be at a lofs how 
to fpend her time f ; and the confequences of 
fuch a ftate are too frequent not to be known^ 
and too fatal not to be avoided. - 

Whenever a young lady in opulent circum-* 
ftances appears to poflefs a genius, and an in- 
cliifation for learned purfuits, I will venture to 

fpcaks of her thus in his life of Pompey. 
'Lpkv o'i TJJ iitoei nOAAA <J>IATPA ^»;g* T»)? d^' ta^eu^* «J 

y«^ OT€^< yfeifjLfjLoiloc KotKuf riatci^f Kj wtft Xu^ar, x) yf^r- 

nvere in this lady many charms hejides htr beauty. 
Fdr Jhe ivas finely accomplijhed in literature y in mu- 
ficy and in geometry y and Jhe u/ed to attend to phi- 
losophical DISCOURSES ivitb great advantage. 
She had alfo manners ferfeSly pure of all aufteritj 
and impertinence, Plutarch. 

* Care muft be taken in the choice of books, 
for, it mud be acknowledged, that without the care, 
the learning of a lady may expofe her to great 
corruption. 

•f How happy is it to know how to live witTi 
onefclf, to leave onefelf with regret, to find one- 
felf again with pleafure ! The world then is l^fs 
necefiary to one. 

Marchione^ de Lambert. 

fay. 



OF WOMEN. 275 

fay, {he ought, if her fituation and connections 
permit, to be early inftruded in the elements of 
Latin and Greek. Her mind is certainly Jts 
capable of improvement, as that of the other 
fex ♦. The inftances which might be brought 
to prove this, are all too well known to admit 
of citation f. And the method to be purfued 

mud: 

♦ But many ftill will fay with an old Writer 
'* Let them learne plaine workes of all kinde. 
In (lead of fonges and moficke, let them learne 
cookerie and laundrie. And, inftead of reading 
Sir Philip Sydney's Arcadia, let them reade the 
groundes of good hufwifery."" Powel's Tom of 
all Trades, quoted by Mr. T. Warton. 

And, indeed, fo much of the comfort of oar 
lives depends upon* the clever management of the 
miib-efs of a family, that no woman, in the mid- 
dle ranks at leaft, fhooki think herfelf excufed, 
by her attention to books, from acquiring th^ 
humbler kind of fkill which appears fo amiable 
and ufeful at our tables, at our fire-sides, 
and in the regulation of every part of that feat of 
folid happinels, our home. 

\ Weak, wicked and vain men have always 
taken a great deal of pains to loweR' the fe- 
male sex, and to reprefent them as incapable of 
real virtue and folid excellence. It is eafy to fee 
their fcope. Even fome authors of great name 
among the profligate, have endeavoured to con- 
firm the degradation of female dignity. The at- 
tempt, when fuccefsful, often becomes to both 
fexes the caufe of poverty, difeafe, fhame, remorfe, 
fuicide, and of every evil with which God AU 
mighty has thought proper to vifit voluntary, pre- 
furoptuotts, and continued tranfgreflion of thofe 

laws 



aSo ON THE EDUCATION 

snuft be exadly the fame as that which is ufed 
in the private tuition of boys, vfhen it is judici- 
oiiHy conducted. 

And here I cannot refrain from adding, that 
though I diiapprove, for the moft part, dF pri- 
vate tuition for boys, yet I very ferioufly re- 
commend it for girls, with little exception. AU 
fcnfible people agree in thinking, that large fe- 
minaries of young ladies, though managed with 
.all the vigilance and caution which human abi- 
.lities can exert, are in danger of great corrup- 
tion. It has been aiked, why I approve of 
public education for boys and not for girls, and 
whether the danger to boys in large feminanes 
is not as great as to girls ? I muft anfwer, in 
general, that the corruption of girls, is more 
fat^ in its-confequences to fociety than that of 
boys ; and that, as girls are deAined to private 
and domeftic life, and boys to public life, their 
education fliould be refpeftively correfpondent 
to their deftination. Vanity and vice will be 
introduced by fome among a large number, and 
the contagion foon fprcads with irredftible vio- 

laws which w^re fird written on the heart, and 
then in the fcript ares ^ the laws of sjps.AL and 

RELATIVE DUTY. 

The woMEx indeed may become the best 
HEFOftMERS. The dignity of female virtoe, con* 
iiftently fupported, is better calculated than any 
moral Itffon, to (Irike confufion and awe into the 
breafl of the empty and artful villain* 
But the vices of one part of their fex, and ths 
VARIOUS hikdr .KCES TO M ARRiAGE, have oftea 
driven the virtuous to fubmiflions which may Ia 
time verify the aiTertions of their fatirifb. 

leoce^ 



O F W O M E N. - istSi 

lence. Who can be fo proper an inftruftor and 
guardian, as a tender and a fenfible mother ? 
Where can virgin innocence and delicacy be 
better protefted, than under a parent's roof, 
and in a father's and a brother's bofom ? Cer- 
tainly no where ; if the parents are fenfible and 
virtuous, and the houfe free from improper or 
dangerous connexions. But v^here the parents 
are much engaged in pleafure, or in bufmefs ; 
where they are ignorant or vicious ; where a 
family is expofed to the vifits or conftant com- 
pany of libertine young perfons ; there it is 
certainly expedient to place a daughter under 
the care of fome of thofe judicious matrons, 
who prefide over the fchools in or near the 
metropolis. But I believe it often happens, 
that young ladies arefent from their parents' eye 
to thefe feminaries, principally with a view to 
form connexions, or to acquire external graces. 
I leave it to the heart of a feeling father to de- 
termine, whether it is riot cruel * to endanger 

the 

• It muft be remembered, that only thofe pa- 
rents can incur this cenfure, who keep their daugh- 
ters at fchool after a certain age. 

A» yvvaiice^f tv^v^ dvo ncra-afta-xdi^iicec Iruv, viro T«l^ 
dv^fuv Kv^ian fca.7\ovv\ai* roiyapovv o^uo'ai, on aTO^o fih 
ov^U, ot,v\ou<; -ar^o^-enj y^ovof ^\ atryKoiiAuaBou tok dv^^datt^ 
d^yroylai xfltXAwTrt^scrSa* xj |y tooIw taaa-oti; f;^£H' rd<; 

a>.>,u) rifJLuviM* n ru Koa-fjuteti (painc^on^ xj d\^iiiJLon^ w 
oru(pc<rvir-^ Women from fourteen years old are flat^ 
tered ivitb the title of mtftreffes by the men. There ^ 
-fore perceiving that they are regarded only as qua^ 
lifed to flcafe the men, they begin to adorn themfehes ; 

auk 



aU ON THE EDUCATION 

the morials of his offspring from motives of in- 
tereft or vanity*. 

a/id in that to plea/e all their hopes. It 'is ivorth 
nvhile^ therefore^ to fix our attention on making them 
/en/ihle, that they are efteemed for nothing el/e, but the 
appearance of a decent y and modeji, and difcreet 
bebanjiour* Epictetus. 

* One of the ftrongeft arguments in favour of 
the literary education of women, is, that it en- 
ables them to fuperintend the domeftic education of 
their children in the earlier periods, of their dau- 
ghters completely. We are told, in the very ele- 
gant dialogue on the caufes of the decline of elo- 
qaence, that it was the glory oftheantient Roman 
matrons to devote thetofelves to oeconomy, and the 
care of their children's education. —Jamprim^m 
filius ex cafta parente natus^ non in cello, emptdt 
nut r ids educabatur^ fed in gremio ac iinu matris, 
cujus pracipua laus erat, taeri domum et infervire 
liberis. ... Sic Corneliam, Gracchorum, fie Aa- 
reliam, Julii Cicfaris, fic Attiam, Augufti matrexn, 
praefuifle educationibus liberorum accepimus.— 
jis foon as a fan luas born of a chafe parent, he. 
njuas not brought up in the cottage of fotne hireling 
nurfdy but in the lap and the bofom of his Another ^ 
nvhofe principal merit it 'was to take care of the 
boufcy and to de'vote herfelf to the fervice of the chil- 
dren. . . Thus are nve toldy Cornelia ^ the mother of 
the Gracchi J thus Aurelia, of Julius Cafar, thus At- 
tia, of AuguftuSy prefided oijer the education of their 
children 

'* But when the Romans had loft the virtues, 
together with the liberties of the antient republic, 
thefe generous cares, with every other rational and 
laudable attention, gave way to the falhionable 
diffipations of thofe degenerate days. 

•' The little child was now configned to the 
care of fame paltry Greek female, in conjunction 

v<ith 



O F W O M E N. 2«3 

with two or three other ignorant and vitious do^ 
medics, equally unqualified and indifpofed for the 
important ofiice of tuition; From the idle tales, 
and grofs manners of this low and illiberal tribe, 
the foft and dudile mind was fuifered to receive 
its earlieft and deepeil inaprcflions. The parents 
thcmfelves, indeed, far from training their young 
families in the principles of virtue and knowledge, 
were the firft to lead them, by their own encou- 
ragement and example, into the moil luxurious 
indulgencies and mod unprincipled licentiocfneis 
of manners. . A paflion for horfe- races, theatrical 
entertainments, and gladiatorial (hews, the favou- 
rite occupations of that frivolous age, was fown 
even in their very womb : and when once the 
feeds of thefe contemptible and unmanly plea- 
fures have early taken root in the heart, they 
neceflarily over-run and deftroy every afFeftion of 
nobler growth. The author from whom the ge- 
neral purport of this melancholy reprefentation is 
^ taken, was a living and lamenting witnefs of the 
manners he defcribes : and he complains, that all 
converfation was fo univerfally infefled with to- 
picksof this unworthy nature, that they were the 
conftant fubjeds of difcourfe, not only amongft 
the youth in their feminaries^ hut e^en of their 
TUTORS THEMSELVES. For it was not, he re- 
marks, by ft rider morals ^ or fuperior genius^ that 
this order of men gained difciples ; it was by the 
meaneft compliances ivith their pupils^ and the moft 
fer<vile adulation of their patrons, 

** Whether this pidlure of degenerate Rome 
bears a flriking refemblance, in all its features, to 
thofe of more modem days, is left to the reader's 
coniideration : and his own refleftion cannot fail 
of reminding him, that by this total depravation, 
of morals, and confequent neglefl of education, 
the fair fabric of civil liberty, which had been 

raifed 



284 ON THE EDUCATION 

raifed by the manly principles of the^r brave arr- 
ceftors, was gradually undermined till it fell into 
total ruin. Thus the once virtuous Romans, fink- 
ing i. to a race of abandoned voluptuaries, became 
the worthy flaves of the moft execrable fuccefljon 
of. tyrants that ever difgraced human nature I 
Pighii an. iii. Cic. Brut. 53. de feneft. 9. dc 
orator, i. 45." Mr. W. Melmoth. 

And with refpedl to its not being the cuilom to 
leach ladies Latin, we may fay in the words of 
the learned matron in Erafmus, Quid mihi citas 
vulgum, peflimum rei gerendae auftorem ? Quid 
mihi confuetudinem, omnium malarum rerum 
magiftram ? Optimis afluefcendum : ita fiet foli- 
tum, quod erat infblituni ; ct fuavefict, quod erat 
i.ifuave; fiet decorum, quod videbatur indecorum, 
fP^fy do you tell me of the generality of people^ tht 
<very luorft pattern of condu£i ? Why do you talk to. 
me of cujlom, the teacher of all that is bad f Let ui 
accuftom ourfel^es to that tvhich nxje knovj is beji : 
So that loill become ufual njjhich iMas unufualy and 
that lAJzll become agreeable ivhich ivas difagreeable, 
and that fajhionabh ixjhfch appeared unfapiotf 
able. 

He of whom antiquity boafts itfelf as of the 
wifeft of mortals, was inftruded in many elegant 
and profound fubjefts of learning by a lady. 

^^lo^iHuv T^oycv. . . Jfpafa the learned lady^ ^was 
the preceptrefs of Socrates in rhetoric. Athenjeus, 

TiXa-yv r^jv Tu {pcirr,v wap ocvlriq <pr,c\ uoi^it: TOt Wo7\,k[k1COLm 

Flato fays, that Socrates learned politics of her, 

Harpocratio.ic, 
See feme excellent remarks on the fubjedt of 
giving daughters a learned education, in Eraf. 
Epift. to Budaeus, cited in Jortin's Eraf. vol. ii* 
p. 366. 

Some 



OF WOMEN. 28j. 

Some ladies may be of opinion, that I aiEgn 
them a talk rather too humble, when I urge the 
propriety of their educating their little boys and 
girls in the firfl period. I can only fay, that I 
am jullificd in my advice by the example of the 
greateit writers, and the best women of anti« 
quity. And I will only aik, whether the import- 
ant buiinefs of dressing and goin^ to public 
places, will be fo fatisfa^lory a few years hence, as 
the confcioufnefs of having fown the feeds of vir- 
tue, taile, and learning, in the infant bofoms of 
their own oftspring. 

An amba/Tador of Perfia afked the wife of Le(ym 
nidas, why they honoured women fo much in La- 
cedacmon ? It is becaufe, faid (he, they alone know 
how to make men. A Greek lady fhewed her 
jewels to Phocion's mother, and aflced to fee hers. 
SJbe Jbeztjed her her children , and faid to her^ thefe 
are my drej's and ornaments ; / hope one day they 
•will be all my glory. 

Marchioness de Lambert. 

Before I clofe the fubje^ of female learning, I 
.will take the liberty of adding a caution againft 
pedantry, and againft an authoritative air 

OF CRITICISM AND DICTATION, which fomC 

minds, furnifhcd with a little learning, are 
apt to difplay. In fuch there ufually appears 
great ill-nature, and no ingenuity. Thehufband, 
if a lady with fuch difagreeable qualities has th« 
good fortune to find one, ufually fuffers fevcrely, 
which induced Juvenal to write thus: 
Non habeat matrona 

Dicendi genus, aut curvum fermone rotato 
Torqueat Enthymema, nee hiilorias fciat omnes : 
Scd quxdam ex libris et non intelligat. Odi 
Hanc ego, quas repetit^ vol\?irque Palxmonis ar« 
tern, 

Servatfi 



C .^^1 ] 
SECTION XXVIII. 

ON THE FEAR OF APPEARING PEDANTTICU . 

rocyi^iCcc^YtG-ofAiv^y uq Kala(jLUKr.e-oi4.ivu'f a-ov ftoTO^uv^ uq 

rjfMf ottPir, ^ op^v<i ; XT AE O^PYN MEN MH IXHI* 
rtit ^i piT^Wuv aoi ^^woyuivuv cvluq epi^ov* «? t/wo rov &sou 
T*]aiJ«v^ £K rdiPi%v r%v Ta|i»' M£MN'H2X) z^E, OTI 
EAN MEN EMMElNHi: TOIS AYT012, OI KATA- 
TEAn^TESSOY nPOTEPON, OTTOI SEYSTEPON 
QAYMASOYSIN. EAN AE HTTHQHL AYT«N, 
AinAOYN riPOSAH^H KATArEAmv. 

EpICTETUS. 

If you hwve an earttejf defire of attaining to phi-- 
lo/opby, prepare your/elf from the 'very fir ft to be 
laughed at i to be sneered by many ^ to hear them 
fay, ** He is returned to us a philofopher all at once ; 

* and^ Whence this fupercilious look ?^* Nonxj for 
your party DO not have a supercilious look 

I N DE K D ; hut keep fteadily to thofe things twhich ap' 
pear beft to you^ aS one appointed by God to this 
ftation. For RtM mber, that if you adhere 

TO THE SAME POINT, THOSE VfcRY PERSONS 
\VHO AT FIRST RIDICULED, WILL AFTERWARDS 
ADMIRE YOU. BuT If YOU ARE CONQUERED 
BY THEM, YOU WILL INCUR A DOUBLE RIDI- 
CULE. Mrs. Carter's Tranf, 

Ayuai^'^ct fxzf ^^ar<^, T^oyuruio; ^e oxpo* (^thi, IgnO" 
ranee indeed occafions audacity ; but a. poiver and ha^ 
bit ofjuft reafoning, hefitation. Thucydides. 

Redla 



a38 ON THE FEAR OF 

Refta ingenia debilitat verecondia, perverfa con- 
£rmat audacia. Modefty debilitates a gwd genius 
und, difftfitioH \ audacitj gives aJfuraHce to the per^ 
^er/e^ Plinius. 

IN this age, true pedantry is not very com- 
mon. Men of learning have extended the 
objeds of their purfuit. They, ufually ftudy 
to accommodate themfelves to the external 
manners, if not to the fentiments, of thofe with 
whom' they daily converfe. They willingly 
throw off the folemnity of wifdom, and afllime 
that airy gaiety, which has formerly diftinguifli- 
cd the profefled men of the world. They find 
it an advantageous exchange, to refign fomething 
©f the diftant veneration which they might juftly 
claim, for the pleafures of an eafy and familiar 
intercourfe. 

The ridicule which has been thrown on the 
chara6ler of the pedant, has contributed to effeft 
this revolution. The ridicule was often juft; 
but dunces have availed themfelves of it unjuftly. 
They have injured by derifion the modeft ftu-^ 
dent, who, while his mind is engaged in ftudy, 
can fcarcely avoid expreffing, in converfation, 
fome of thofe ideas with which he is animated. 
A feeling and ingenuous mind is often hurt by 
the derifion of thofe whom it ought to defpife; 
and the name of pedant, given by a blockhead 
to his fuperior, has greatly injured the caufe of 
true learning *• 

None 

* *• The laft maim givea to learning has been 
by thefcorn of pedantry.'* Sir W. Temple. 



APPEARING PEDANTIC. 289 

' None, indeed, but very weak perfons, can fall 
into very ridiculous pedantry. Converfation % 
on fubjeds of literature in liberal and welUedu- 
cated company, is by no means pedantry f. 
Learning and books conftitute a veiy pleafing, 
as wpll as rational topic of converfation {. It 
is agreeable, and is expedled that a fcholar 

It is faid, that the fafhion of throwing Hdicule 
on learning, by giving it the name of Pedantry, 
owed its origin to the Jefuits in France,' who fee- 
ing gentlemen begin to acquire that learning of 
which they had fo greatly availed themfelves, were 
afraid they ihould lofe fomething of the influence 
which their fuperiority in learning gave them, and 
therefore exerted their well-known arts in fixing on 
every learned gentleman the name of Pedant. 

*, See feme good remarks on fafhionable con- 
verfation, and on feveral other fubjefts of the 
higheft importance to perfons jufl entering into 
life, in Mrs. Chapone*s Mifcellanies. I will alfo 
recommend the Letters on the Improvement of the 
'Mind^ by the fame ingenious Lady, to boys as 
well as to girls ; for the latter of whom they were 
indeed chiefly defigned. 

f Indeed I cannot help thinking, that one of 
the moft valuable effedts of polite learning, or a 
knowledge of morals, hiftory, eloquence, and 
poetry, is, that it furniflies inexhauftible matter 
for iLEGANX CONVERSATION. They who can- 
not partake in fuch converfation are glad to ex- 
clude it, by giving it the name of pedantry j and 
they too often fucceed. 

X Nothing more improving. Nothing more 
truly delightful. They are the luxury of the foul, 
and its beil employment, next to a£ts of benevo- 
lence and piety. 

O (hould 



:9^ Xyt^ THE PEAR t)F 

Ifliould fometimes talk on fcholar-like Aibjefts ; 
j\ox is he in the leaft more culpable or ridicu- 
jous than the military man, the merchant, th^ 
ingenious artift, who naturally love to expatiate 
.on thoTe things which claim their daily atten- 
ition. 

Yet the fear of the imputation of pedantry,, 
Jias prevented many a young man, not only from 
xiifplaying, but acquiring Jonowledge. As I 
Vf'i&i to remove every obftacle which can im.- 
-pede the improvement of the ingenuous ftudent, 
I cannot help exhorting him to afTume a fufii- 
•cient degree of courage *, to defpife the ridicule 
of thofe whofe praife would be fatire f* Such 
is that of thofe unfortunate perfons who ha vie 
little tafte for any gratification but the.grofler 
pleafures of the fenfes, and who have malignity 
.enough to wifh to reduce all others to their ow^i 
level %. 

' * Sapere aude. Dareto he'wifi. 'How. 

Quaefitam meritis fume fuperbiam. jiffume tba^ 
confidence ijuhich your merit jufiifies. 

t «* And whether there be aay fuch or no, I 
cannot well tell : yet I heare-fayej.fome. young gen- 
tlemen of ours, count it their (hame to bee counted 
learned ; and perchance 'they count it their fhamfi 
to bee counted honelLalfo. For 1 heare faye, they 
onedle as litleiWiththe one, as wich the other." 

ASCHAM. 

^ I hope -the Author of the Eilimate of the 
Manners, &c. of the Times, was under the ma- 
lignant influence of.fpJeen, when he told the world, 
that among the great, '* all knowledge and learn- 
ing, excepc.4n gaminjj, wagers, good-eating, .bo- 
rough-jobbing, and intrigue, is ridiculed Jinder 
4he name and mafque of rf dantrx." 

He 



APPEARING PEDANTIC. 291 

He who profeffcs learning, muft be confcious 
of it, and it is blameable pufillanimity, not to 
aflume a proper degree of modeft confidence. 
It is to give the illiterate and the vain an ad- 
vantage which they cannot deferve. Boldneft 
is feldom among their defedls 5 and Where a 
proper fpirit is wanting to oppofe them, they 
will feldom hefitate to trample on genius, and 
put modeft merit out of countenance *^ I do 
tiot recommend an unfeafonable difplay of learn- 
ing. No ; I prefuppofe that the poflcflbr of it 
is not deficient f in good fenfe, and with that he 
will feldom be guilty of a real indecorum. I 
am not fmgular in tninking, that men of great 
'merit oftener injure themfelves and others by 
too little, than by too much confidence. 

With refpedl to external behaviour, a fubjeft 
on which fo much has been lately faid, I will 
sdvife the ftudent, who values the approbation 
• of his own heart, to let sincerity he the prin-i 
ciple of his converfation. Notwithftanding 
\vhat has been faid on the art of pleafing, a 
behaviour void of art or fincerity, in word and 
deed, will ultimately beft,pleafe the pofleffor of 

* Gl'huomini scacciati po/Tedono la meta 
del xnondo. Bold and Jhamekfs men pojfefs half th$ 
n/ooM. A dag. Italicum. 

Menander. 

Since learning /V nothing fivithout a NOTI, or pra* 
deuce, 

Sapere eft principium et fons. Good fcnfe is the 
/ource and principle of all, H R . 

O 2 it. 



^92 ON THE FEAR OF 

ft*, and thofe with whom he conferfes through- 
out life. Let the ftudent frequent good com- 
pany, with good nature, good fenfe, and a proper 
degree of fpirit and vivacity to retort the malig- 
nant fhafts of the ignorant, the forward, the vain, 
and the envious, and he will foon make a figure 
in it truly refpeftable. Let him know his own 
value, and modeftly afliime his natural rank f , 
and he will become both agreeable and eftima* 
bk, though he fhould never pradife either 
emulation or diffimulation J. Deceit of any 
kind argues a little, mean, and cowardly heart. 
It will, one time or other be certainly detedled, 
^nd when detected it mult be defpifed §. But 
the liberal ftudent, according to an idea I have 

■• Te tibi reddit amicum. // cau/es you to he on 
^ood terms 'with your/elf. HoR. 

t Invitta coppia e confidenza et arte. Reed 
Jkill and proper ajfurance united are iwvincible* 

Adag. Ital. 

J Injuria autem nulla capital ior eftquam eorutn, 
qui, cum maxime fallunt, dant operam ut viri 
boni videantur. ^here is not a greater piece of in^ 
juftice than that of thofe, nnho, at the 'very time they 
are moft engaged in vv. ACT ism G deceit, doallthey 
€an to appear mighty good sort of men. 

Cic. 

§ Dare to be what you are, is a good maxim ; 
but it will only be put in pradlice by thofe who 
are what they ought to be. Every one, however, 
may reft aflured, that they are generally known for 
what they are, and that falfehood, like Cain, has 
a mark fet upon it by Heaven. Mrs. Chapone. 
See the whole EfTay on AiFedtation and Simplicity, 
in her Mifcellanies. 

formed 



APFEARING PEDANTIC. 295 

formed of him, fliould, in his intercourfe with 
company, think, fpeak, and a<R: nothing * which 
is not laudable ; nothing which will not bear 
the broadeft daylight, and acquire a luftre from 
being rendered confpicuous. Leave it to the 
fordid attendants on the great f , and to thofe 
who fee no other good but interefl*, to facrifice, 
in the fhort period of life, fome of the moft vii^. 
luable purpofes J of living, the free ufe of rea* 
fon, and the aflertion ©f the dignity and liberty 
of a man. 

Before I difmifs this fubje(5, I will again 
caution the ftudent againft talking on learned 
(ubjeds unfeafonably, and incurring the appel* 

* Nihil non laudandunr. Nothing but ivhat ijtjill 
admit of praife. . Pati^rc. 

f ViLEs ANiM-flE et eiFrontes, Lucelli causa, u.t 
mufcae ad mul6tra, ad nobilium et heroum menfas 
advolant in fpem facerdotii. File and impudent 
fpiritSy <who, for the fake of a little gain, hover , like 
[flies at a milk-pail^ round the tables cf the great, in 
hopes of getting a living , Luther. 

With refpe^ to patronage in the prefent times, 
we raay fay : Praeftat dentifcalpia radere, quam 
literariis monumentis magnatum favorem emen- 
dicare. jTou 'will get more from the great as ^ dbn>- 
TiST (or mahr of toothpicks )y than as aiAjriter, 

Satyr. Menip. 

Patronage kept writers in a flate of fertility. I 
think no man of fpirit, who is exempt from real 
want, need repine at the want of it. He enjoys 
liberty, and is not obliged to fatter, Lucro ap- 
ponat. 

J Propter vitam, vivendi perdere caufas. For 
the fake of life, to give up the purpofes of living. 

Juv. 

O J lation 



±^2 ON THE FEAR OF 

ft*j and thofe with whom he con? erfes through- 
out life. Let the ftudent frequent good com- 
pany, with good nature, good fenfe, and a proper 
degree of fpirit and vivacity to retort the malig- 
nant fhafts of the ignorant, the forward, the vain, 
and the envious, and he will foon make a figure 
in it truly refpec^able. Let him know his own 
value, and modeftly afliime his natural rank t> 
and he will become both agreeable and efrima* 
ble, though he fhould never pradifc either 
fimulation or diffimulation J. Deceit of any 
kind argues a little, mean, and cowardly heart. 
It will, one time or other be certainly detedled, 
9nd when detected it mult be defpifed §. But 
the liberal ftudent, according to an idea I have 

* Te tibi reddit amicum, // caufes you to he on 
^ood terms ivith your/elf. Ho r . 

f Invitta coppia e confidenza et arte. Reed 
Jkill and proper affurance united are in<vincible, 

Adag. Ital. 

J Injuria autem nulla capitalior eftquam eorum, 
qui, cum maxime fallunt, dant operam ut viri 
boni videantur. 7'here is not a greater piece of in- 
jujiice than that of thofe, njoho, at the 'very time they 
are moft engaged in v^ ACT ism G deceit, doallthey 
€an to appear mighty good sort of men. 

Cic. 

§ Dare to be what you are, is a good maxim ; 
but it will only be put in pradlice by thofe who 
are what they ought to be. Every one, however, 
may reft aflured, that they are generally known for 
what they are, and that falfehood, like Cain, has 
a mark fet upon it by Heaven. Mrs. Chapone. 
See the whole EfTay on AiFedtation and Simplicity, 
jnher Mifcellanies. 

formed 



iPPEARING PEDANTIC. 2^f 

ttt difplay of hrs attainments^ Tt i> 

imidity to conceal them on proper 

it is ridicule us arro^nce to obtrude^ 

iDitig and injudicious obfenxrs^*. 

Modelljf 

the terras l>c precipe, aod yet, not^ 

the fpealcer be a pcdajit, if he talk- 

I cither to place or time." 

nng dory may perhaps iJluArate thi^ 

A learned do^r of Paris was oncc- 

IM pair of flockings, but Dcfortanatcly 

none ihat were cither /bong enough, or 

oagh. Give mc, fays he to the hofier,, 

1$ of matter coKriwuous, not of matter 

* Cited from the Menaglaai by Mr, 

will do right to remember the advice of 

philofopher. 

I p&irVo ^^itt iTH'jrcr^a/.^xt J^ififf Tisrif urti tk^. 
ftavTi^m Bi net iiefirous of fcQiutng cff n.vitB 
vnvlfJge J and if you /am to am^ to he fome^ 
, //// iitJJrufl jourjeif. 

vmII take this opportunity of in ferting from thi« 
llofopher, feme confolatory piflage^ for the 
Ul\ which fchobrs and the lovers of wifdom^ 
en find. 

truxjif avjm Ikuho^* h ^t kukx, ^ij 



O 4, ££>.»^» 



294 ON THE FEAR OF 

lation of a literar jr prater. And though I have 
advifed him to exercife himfelf in compofition, 
yet I will alfo caution him againft the itch of 
fcribbHng, or the love of writing without the 
pain of thinking. Let him never take the pen 
in hand, nor place the paper before him, till he 
has beftowed much time atid deep thought on 
the fubjeft. To the want of this previous at- 
tention we owe the numerous produAions 
which difgrace letters, and die almoft as foon as 
they are brought forth * ; which, like the weeds 
in a garden, fpring up lu^xuriantly without culti* 
vation, which are ufelefs er.noifome,. and which 
only ferve to impede the growth of falutary 
plants and pleafant flowers. 

Pretenders f arife in every department, and 
difgrace it. Let the liberal and foHd fcholar at- 
tend to the circumftances of timei and place %» 

in 

* There is no end of making books, faith the 
Wife Man. Eccl. xii. 20.. 

** No end," faith the great Lord Coke, remark- 
ing on this pafTnge ; but it mufl be uhderftood of 
thofe books- which are written to no end. Qui 
^lec rtictam fibi nee finem proponunt. 

t MATAIOTEXNOI. They are often fuccefsful 
in the world ; for they afTume appearances, and de- 
ceive the fuperficial patron who is furrounded with 
adulators, and feldom able to difcover the naked 
truth refpedllng chara^ers. 

J Ubi, quomodo, quandd. Where ^ Jbow, 

nuhen, 

*'* Learning and fcience, or rather learned and 
fcientific terms; when introduced out of feafon, 
become what.we call pedantry. The fubjcft xnay 

hatitfe 



APPEARING PEDANTIC. 795; 

in the modeft difplay of his attainments^ It'isr 
unmanly, timidity to conceal them on proper 
occafions ; it is ridiculous arrogance to obtrude:- 
upon, unwilling and injydicious obfervers*,^ 

Modefty 

liave merit, the terms be precife, and' yet, not- 
withilanding, the fpeaker be a pedant, if he tall^i 
without regard either to place or time." 

The following ftory may perhaps illullrate this- 
aflertion. ** A learned doAor of Paris was once- 
purchafing a pair of (lockings, but unfortunately 
could find none that were either ftrong enough, or 
thick enough. Give me, fays- he to the hofier,. 
ftockings of matter continuous, not of matter 
difcrete.^^ Cited from the Menagiana by Mr. 
Harris. 

* He will do right to remember the advicr o5 
the ftoic philofof^her. . 

MvjJ'sjr ^ou\cv ^oX£i¥ i'^WcuT^at^-KXf ^o^nc Tifflf eivvA n?. 
a-TTirii a-iavru. Be not dejirous of Jhoioing off *wttB 
jiour knoijoledge ; and if you feem. to arvf to be fome^ 
tody, fill diftruft youffelf 

I will take this opportunity of inferting from this 
philofopher, fome confolatory paflages for the 
negleA which fchohr* and the lovers of wifdont- 
often find« 

trij ^^cK^gstv an ^{, oTt iTo;(^ey avTut iKhtoq* si ^f jccckx, [/uri 
a^ovt otk cu nvTcJv ovk srvx,^^* fAifA**JO'o Js on ov ^vvaa-on 

f4>VI roCVTCt TTOIUV TTpo^ TO Tvfx»ni9^ TU9 OVX. if* i^TVf IKtiVUt 

Yluq yoi^ taot 6%8»i' himraij o yi.'i (po\rZv liri Sypaj rwlq 
Tflij ^o»Tft>KT» ; /xn w»fx'nrifA7ruf rta iroi^oc'ni'j.TroyTi ; o f-m 
tva^vuv rat i'^ra^vot}vr^ ; a&iKo^ oui tern x^ unXrso^t U /xi9 
VfoSifxtvof Tccvrat «>$ uv txiivx friv^ffcrxiTai, v^oTxoc avrx 

O 4 J oSoXmi^ > 



«96 ON THE FEAR OF 

ModeAy is the charafteriftic of real merit, and 
firmhefs of confclous dignity. The man of 

fenft 

•boXoOy a» ovra tv^jt* av ov» tk WfoXifjuto^ rov oboXor^ 
yutloyi ^fi^ex,xo^qy av ^i fAn ^pcisfjitvog fcj Aab«;(9 /ia^ oIqv 
•!^aT7oy f%cty Tov AftWocTOv:* cJ$ yap ijchyoi ixji^ Spt^axa^y, 
ovTAf'^t/ Toy o^oXoy^ oV ovx i^uKoci* Toy avTcy ^i Tpovoy xai- 
'rd(W(%* Of/ OTpoafxXt/d)}^ f^ sriotffU tu'o^; ov yap s^uKa^ tu 
««t>vo«vT» TToa-ov fru>\h to ^etTryoy* EIIAINOY ^ dt/ro nvuyHi^ 
©EPAIIEIAL' feu>^i* ^05 oJy to ^ia(ps^cv^ e( <roi Xoo"i- 
TiXti to TrcvXcvjEAEyoy. it ^l x»XiTva Sfi^gi? /x)} icr^oVfcrSctt^ ^ 
n'jtyTa hayJoamvj ctTrXnro^ i.f Kj abcATepof. "opoa ov9 
«X**5 **''*■* '**•*' ^'^'^vf'O ; spjjij? /X£y ow* to /m,») iTraiuaat rovr 
To», or tux nSfeAsr, to jw-r avt^sa^ai dvrov sw* Ti?c itd'ooot/* 
Js any one preferred before you at an entertainment^ 
pr in a compliment, or in being admitted to^ a coH" 
fultation ? If thefe things are good, you ought to re* 
joice that he hath got them : Andy if they are e^vil, 
do not be grienJed that you ha've not got them • And 
remember y that you cannot, ^without ufing the fame 
means 'which others do, to acquire things not in our 
poiver, expeSi to be thought ^worthy of an equal Jhare 
of them. For hew can he 'who doth not frequent the 
door of any great man, doth not attend him, doth 
not praife him, ha've an equal Jhare 'with him 'wh6 
doih ? You are unjuft then and unfatiable, if you are 
un'willtng to pay the price for 'which thefe things 
^refold, and 'would have them for nothing. For ho'w 
much are lettuces fold ? A halfpenny, for injlance. 
If a7iother then, paying a halfpenny, takes the lettuces ^ 
and you, not paying it, go 'without them, do not ima- 
gine that he hath gained any adfuantage o'uer you. 
For as he hath the lettuces, fo you ha-ve the halfpenny 
ivhich yen did not give. So, in the prefent cafe, you 
ha've not been iwvited to fuch a perfon^s eriiertainment ; 
becanfe you ha've not paid him the price for fwhich a 
flipper is fold. It is fold for praife : it is fold for 

attendance. 



A-pTPEAKrNG PEDANTIC. 297 

. fenfe will be diffident, but at the fame time will 
have fpirit enough to repel Xhe inYolent attacks 
of ignorance and envy. 

attendance* Gi^e him then the 'value, if it he for 
your adi>antage. But if you ivouldy at the fame 
time^ not pay the OTie, and yet recei've the other, you 
€ire unfatiahle and a blockhead, Ha^ve yoii nothing 
then injiead of the f upper ? Tes, indeed you ha<ue ; the 
not praifing him ijohcm you do not like to praife ; 
the not bearing ^th his behaviour at coming in, Qr 
(according to Simplicius) the attendance in his anti- 
chamber, Mrs. Carter's Tranflation, 

True learning. (I may add), true tafle, and trua 
genius, can fcarcely coniifl with abjed f(?rVilit)r. 
Yet perfons with the charadiers of thefe qualities 
have often been difgracefully fubmiflive to rank 
and opulence. Let the liberal fcholar affert his in- 
'dependence of fpirit. The pleafure of it will re- 
pay him. Leave tho'fe to be rewarded by fortune,, 
who court her favour. They become voluntary 
flavcs, and dearly earn the wages of their fervi- 
tude. The man of a good heart, and enlightened . 
mind, and an independent fpirit, may be 

Ka^ -cjmr.^ I^!^, tCj <J>rA02 AGANATOIS. EpICT* 
As Iris poor, and yet the friend of Gods. 

EIlo 

Liberque et fapiens — 

Be free and luife. Pe R s I u s . 

iove fix'd it certain^ that whatever day 
lakes man a flave, takes half his worth away. 

Pole's OdyfTey. 

The pride, infolence, ignorance, and folly of 

many among thofe who inherit titles, and who are 

falfely called the great, are fuch as no man of 

O 5 learning,^ 



298 ON THE FEAR OP 

learning* fenfe, and fpirit, can or ou^Ht to en« 
dore. Yet if he wiihes to be admitted to their 
tables, and hopes to be rewarded with the prefer- 
ments which they have to bellow* he mud not ven* 
tore to CONTRADICT THEM, Or indeed to ex- 
prefs his own fentiments with that freedom which* 

AS A MAN* AND AS A WELL-EDUCATED MAK, 

he ought to claim. Is a mean* fervile* avaricious* 
and lafcivious lordling, equal to an honeft, vir- 
tuous* generous, and learned commoner? No* 
furely; the lordling is fo far beneath him, what- 
ever be his title or edate, a? not to deferve hit 
notice, on any other account than the common 
motives of pity or philanthropy. 

The polite private tutors of the young nobility 
fhould not conceal from their pupils the £ne fen- 
timents of the eighth fatire of Juvenal. 

Sanctvs haberi* 

JUSTITI^C^B TENAX FACTI8 OICTISQXJB 
MBRERIS? 

Agnosco procerem. — Salve, Getulice, feu tu 
Silanus, quocunque alio de fanguine rarus 
Civis et egregius patriae contingis ovanti ; 
Exclamare libet populus quod clamat, Ofyri 
Invento. Quis enim generosum dixerit hunc* 

QUI 

Indignus generb et prjeclaro noViinb 

TANTUM 

Insignis ? Nanum cujufdam Atlanta voca- 

m^us. • . 
.... Canibus piGRis fcabieque vetufta 
Lxvibus et ilcca; lambentibus ora lucernae, 
Nomen erit Pardus, Tigris, Leo, Si quid 

adhuc e(l 
Qnod fremit in terris violentius. Ergo cavebis 
£t metues, ne tu sic Creiicua aut Camerinus* 

— •— — — IMA FLEBfi Quiritem 

f* Facundttm 



APPEARING pedantic; 29^, 
Facundum invenies : folet hie defenderecaufas-: 

NOBILJS INDOCTI, &C, . 

See this Satire poorly* tranfla ted by Stepney in-* 
Dryden's Juvenal. It is to be lamented tha^- 
Dryden orDr. Johnfon have not tranflated all 
the fatires of the fpirited Juvenal, the force and ^ 
fire of whofe genius they, feem greatly, to havec 
participated. 



O 6 



[ 3^0 j 
SECTION XXIX- 

ON PRIVATE TUITION. 

Non tali auxillo. Such aid nve luant not. 

ViRO.. 

I AM not now entering on a comparifon be- 
tween the advantages of private and public 
education. I have already given the preference 
to public *. But as many will ftill chufe a pri- 
vate education, and as in feveral cafes it will be 
neceflary, I will add a few obfervations on the 
mode of conducting it. 

The great objeft is, to fecure as many of the 
advantages of public education, with as few of 

* Since this Sedlion was written, I have met 
with the following pafTage from Lord Clarendon : 
•* And that they may make this progrefs with the 
moft advantage, J muft rather recommend the edu- 
cation in public fchools and communities, than 
under governors and preceptors in the private fa- 
milies of their parents, where are only one or two 
or more of the children of that family ; and where 
the vices of all the fervants are every day expofed 
to them, with too much of their company, which 
no care in thole places can prevent. There is fo 
jnuch bei^efit arifing from the mutual converfation 
of many children togeiher, of different ages and 
different parts, and the imitation and emulation 
that arifes from thence, that we feldom fee a boy 
continue long of a childifh underftanding in thofe 
companies." Lord Clarendon on Education. 

its 



ON PRIVATE TUITION, 50? 

its fnconveniencies as poffible.. I thi'rtk it 
therefore advifable that the plan of public edu- 
cation fhould be adhered to, as clofely as the 
ilifference of circiimftances will ;^dmit. I know 
very well, that a thoufand whimfical modes are 
purfued by private tutors. They are generally 
fuchas the inventors and adopters warmly re- 
commend. Both are fmcere in their recom- 
mendation y for we naturally love our own in- 
ventions, and the objefts of our adoption. No- 
velty has alfo that irrefiftible charm, which in- 
duces parents to enter their fons, witli eagernefs, 
on a plan which has the appearance of improve- 
ment and innovation. But as education is an 
affair of high importance, I wifh that no fcheme 
may be generally purfued, which has not receiv- 
ed the fancSion of experience. The welfare of 
the community is at ftake, when a general 
change is introduced in the forms of education *. 
I ihould think it right, in private tuition, to 
ufe the fame grammars, books of exercifes, and 
editions of daffies, as are received in the beft 
fchools. Neither partiality for an editor, nor 
for fome fingular method, which has the ap- 
pearance of plaufibility f , but wants the feal 

of 

* It has been faid re^a inflitutio eji mundt reno* 
*vatio» 

f Almoft every private tutor, who, according to 
the prefent fafhion, takes parlour pupils at an im- 
moderate price, pretends to fome nostrum, or 
NEW AND EXPEDITIOUS METHOD of teaching; 
which proves infallibly, that all the mafters that 
have prciided at Eton, Wcftminfter, Wincheilcr, 

5 the 



S02 ON PRIVATE TUITION.^ ^ 

of experience,, fhould induce the private tutor 
to receive a book, or purfue^ a plan, of which 
he has never knowiv the ef{e£t;s; He may. mean 
to try experiments ; but the pupil is to be pitied^^ 
whofe improvement is to be hazarded by the 
trial of experiments. If I were to cultivate a 
farm, I would rather be guided by the practical, . 
though ilJiterate farmer, who had managed it 
with fuccefs, than by the writer on* hufbandry, 
whofe (kill in the art is acquired in his library* 
So, I would rather. condudi a pupil in the beaten 
path,- which . has led tens of thoufands to the 
fummits of learning, than by untried ways ; 
notwithftanding that they are pointed out by the 
truly ingenious as fhoher and pleafanter.-^ 
Schemers and projeftors are feldom much re^ 
lied on by the prudent in any department. 
They commonly are hurried, by a warm ima- 

the Charter-Houfe> Merchant-Taylors, and St. 
Paul's, were fools and blockheads, in comparifon 
with the redoubtable and felf-important innovator 
or empiric. 

I am aware that what I have advanced in favour 
of public education, may be attributed to-^ regard 
to my own intereft, fince it is my lot to prelidc over 
a public Cchool—aliorum fit judicium ; let others 
judge. I think it right that the reader in weighing 
this matter, fhould put this circumilance into the 
fcale. I will only add, that I think there are many 
cafes in which private edacation is the bcft, but I 
doubt whether it is in general. Perhaps, as it has 
been obferved, that which is beft adminiilered is 
bcft. Succefs in either mode of education depends 
on a thoufand circ urn fiances, which cannot be fore- 
feen^ defcribed^ procured^ or prevented. 

gmation) 



ON PRIVATE TUITION. 303 

glnati6n, beyond the limits of truth and reafon^ 
A machine will often appear to anfwer the in- 
tention in the model, which is afterwards found 
unable to perform its movements, when erefted 
in the proper magnitude and fituation* 

One great error I have fometimes difcovered 
in the condudl of private tuition. The care of 
grounding boys> as it is called ,^ in the elements 
of Latin grammar, has been often negledted* 
Though the pupils have been enabled to con- 
ftrue an eafy author without much difficulty, 
yet they were often flopped at an unufual con- 
ftrudion, and appeared to be totally unacquaint- 
ed with Propria quce marihus^ As in prafenti^ 
and the Syntax* Indeed, fome tutors have 
made a merit of not burthening the boy's me- 
mory with Latin rules. 1 hope that they found 
their method fuccefsfuL All I can fay of its 
fuccefs is, that I never yet found a fcholar un- 
acquainted with thefe rules, who> in reading the 
claffics, was not often at a lofs,. and often mif- 
taken. I imagine that, as the bufinefs of hear- 
ing the frequent repetition of the rules, is cer- 
tainly not the moft agreeable part of his employ- 
ment, a tutor .may fometimes have peifuaded 
himfclf, that it was unneceffary. But, if I might 
be attended to, the pupil mould be obliged^ 
during feveral of his^ firft years, to learn gram- 
matical parts in the evening, and repeat them * 
every morning, in the manner of the moft ap- 
proved fchools. He fhould alfo be obliged to 
parfe the pafTage which he conftrues, and to ex- 
emplify the rules of the grammar in every leffon. 
This bufinefs, though not very amufing to the 
teacher, wiU give tJie fcholar a ciearnefs and a 

precifion^ 



'J64 ON PRIVATE TUITION. 

* prccifion, iprhich, are of the utmoft canfcquence 
m contributing to thefuccefs of his purfuits. 

There can be no exercifes better adapted to 
the improvement of boys, thaathofe which are 
ufually appointed as evening tafks at a great 
fchool. Such are the making of Latin, and 
the compofition of themes, veries, and declama- 
tions both in Latin and EngHfli. A copy of 
fome of thcfe fhould be required of the pupil 
every morning, or once in two or three days : 
according to the length and the difficulty pf the 
compofition. The fame ftriSnefs of rule, re- 
gularity of method, and fteadinefs of difcipline, 
fliould be obferved in exafting thefe exercife^, 
as is in a well-regulated fchool. 

The private tutor poflefles peculiar oppor- 
tunities for the infufion of moral and religious 
principles, and peculiar advantages for the re- 
ftridtion of his pupil from the contagion of vi- 
cious example. I finccrely wifh, that thefe op- 
portunities and advantages may never be ne- 
gleded, and that private tuition may prove, that 
it has juftly claimed the power of producing 
better men, if not better fcholars, than are 
ufually formed in a public fchool. I am the 
more induced to exprefs this wifh at prefenr, 
becaufe I have obferved, that private tuition 
feems lately to have prevailed in this country, 
more than ever * 3 and yet, at the fame time it is 

confcfTcd, 

* Clergymen have found it a \try convenient 
•mode of encreafing their incomes, which indeed 
are ufually too narrow. And it is certainly a very 
reputable method of acquiring money; but it 

ought 



ON PRIVATE TUITION. 305 

confefled, that profligacy of manners was never 
more confpicuous^ 

It has indeed been the cuftom among the 
richer orders, to endeavour to combine the ad- 
vantages of a public and private education, by 
placing their fons at a celebrated fchool, and at 
the fame time under the care of a private tutor *^ 
refident in the fchool, or in its neighbourhood. 
The bufinefs of the private tutor is often, in this 
cafe, little more than to make the boy's exer- 
cifes for him. If the difcipline of the fchool i& 
duly maintained, the afliftance is not necc/Iary^ 
We do not find that the great fcholars produced 
a century, or even half a century ago,, had any 
other aid than that afforded in a good fchool^ 
and feconded by their own aifiduity. Very 
weak boys will indeed want leading-ftringF, or 
crutches ; but the boy of parts derives new 
ftrength from being accuftomed to confide in 
his own efforts. A private tutor, whofe whole 

OQght to be remembered,- that not every man who 
pretends to learning, and is viilling to encreafe 
his fortune by taking pupils, is acquainted with 
the proper and pradlicable methods of inftrudirg 
boys. Boys are often placed under private tutor* 
after they have been at a public fchool, and 
made a great proficiency there, in which cafe, 
the laft inftruAor, or the private tutor, from whofe. 
hands the pupil goes into the world, ufually en- 
grofles all the reputation. 

* A private tutor may certainly be particularly 
ufeful in promoting the improvement of very little 
boys, who are learning the accidence ; and vvho 
arc not attended to at great fchools, io much as 
their feniors, though they want more attention. 

employmcat 



3o6 ON PRIVATE TUITIONT. 

employment confifts in removing the difficultier 
attending the difcipline of a great fchool, is un- 
intentionally a promoter ofidlenefs-, and confe-. 
quently of ignorance, vice, and mifery; 

The opulent and luxurious wifli for learning,, 
and would often mod readily buy it, if it were 
to be purchafed, without labour or confinement. 
But it is not to be bought * ; it is to be earned- 
by long and perfevering endeavours. AfBftancc 
may indeed be procured in abundance by means^ 
•f riches ; but it happens in this cafe, that they 
who proceed with the leaft extraneous aid, more 
than is quite neceflary,. proceed with the greateft: 
fuccefsf. 

* Univerfities can give degrees, a king can con- 
fer titles; but neither they nor he, nor all the. 
worldy can give learning by diploma. And. 
' Tu quod es, e populo, quilibct efle potcft'— 

What you are^ any one of the lo'weft of tbi peofU 
might be if fortune had pleafed \ 
may be'faid to the greateft potentate on earth who 
19 illiceratey but not to the fcholar or genius. 

t The venerable name of Mr. Locke, who 
fpeaks OB thefe fubjedts in a tone nnufually deci-* 
five and peremptory, has induced many to prefer 
private tuition, and to avoid Latin exercifes.— 
** But after all (fays he), if the boy's fate be ta 
go to fchool to get the Larin tongue, 'tis in vain 
to talk to you concerning the methods I think beft 
to be obferved in fchools ; you muft fubmit to that 
you find there ; nor expedl to have it changed for 
your fon ; but yet by all means obtain,^ if you ' 
can, that he be not employed in making Latin ^ 
themes and declamations^ and leaft of all 'verfes <f any 
kind»*^ But Mr. Lorke is an argumeat againft hi^ 

OWUi 



ON PRIVATE TUITION. ^aj 

own dodlrine, and is a (biking indance of the ex- 
cellent efed of that mode of education y which, in 
the warmth of the reforming fpirit, he was led to 
difapprove. For I will remind the reader, that Mr. 
Locke was of Weftminfter-fchool ; that he conti- 
nued there till he was nineteen ; that he then went 
to Oxford^ became a fludentof Chrift-church-CoI- 
lege, and diftinguiihed himfelf there by a copy of 
Latin 'ver/eSf addrcffed to Cromwell on his peace 
with the Dutch in 1653.' They indeed are not re- 
markably excellent, for Mr. Locke's genius was 
not poetical. Perhaps his judgment in polite leara- 
ing may be difputed ; for he was a profefTed ad- 
mirer of Blackmore, as appears by one of his letters 
to Mr. Molyneux. But the fruits of his philofo- 
phical genius, his diilinguifhing talent, fufficiently 
difplay the excellence of the mode in which they 
were cultivated. Had his genius been equal in 
poetry, the effefts of that mode would probably 
have been equally confpicuous in poetical compo- 
iition. The exercife of his mind, while a boy, 
even in the mechanical part of Latin verfiiicacion, 
even if he had no poetical ideas, tended to encreafe 
that acumen for which he afterwards became il- 
luHrious. 

In the book which this great and good man has 
written on the fubjeA of education, he profe/Tes 
to prefcribe for the gentleman and not the fcbolar ; 
a diilindion which will not be generally admitted 
in a v^ry enlightened age. The fuperficial know- 
ledge of antient languages and learning, which 
he recommends to this gentleman, would be de- 
fjjifed by many a fchool-boy. A very fmall part 
of the treatife is appropriated to learning ; an ex- 
traordinary circumllance in fo great a fcholar. A 
man of lefs folidity has very ftrongly recommended 
to his fon, amidft fome lefs valu ble advice, a 
frefound knoiuledge of Greek and Latin ; to a fon, 
who was to be almoit profeffionally a man of fajhion* 

From 



joS ON PRIVATE TUITION. 

From a mati (o devoted to exteriors, this is an ho- 
nourable teftimony in favour of that Greek an<f 
Latin, which the noftrums of educating quackery 
often fupcrfede. 

With refpeft to the propriety of placing boys 
under private tutors, parents muft be influenced by 
thofe CIRCUMSTANCES, which cannot be forefeen 
or completely defcribed, and which render a prac- 
tice right in particular cafes, which in general is 
to be reprobated. 

The following are among the fenfible remarks 
of RoufTeau, and recommend private and domeftic 
education to women : 

** Pour aimer la vie paifible et domeftique il 
faut la connoitre; il faut en avoir fenti les dou- 
ceurs des Tenfance. Ce n'eft que dans la maifon 
paternelle qu'on prend du gout pour fa propre 
xnaifon, ct toute femme que fa mere n'a point 
clevee, n'aimera point elever fes efans. Mal- 
heureufement il n'y a Pitts' d*education priv^e dans 
les grandes villes.* La fociete y eft fi generale et 
fi melee, qu'il ne refte plus d'aiile pour la retraite^ 
ct qu'on eft en public jufques chez foi. A force 
de vivre avec tout le monde en n'a plus de fa- 
mille, a peine connoit-on fe parens ; on les voit 
en etrangers, et la fimplicite des moeurs domef- 
tiques s'eteint avec la douce familiarite que en fai- 
foit le charme. C'eft ainii qu'on fuce avec le lait 
le gouc des plaifirs du fiecle et des inaximes qu'on 
y voit J-egnerJ* Rousseau. 



L 3<>9 ] 



SECTION XXX- 



ON THE UTILITY OF EXAMINATIONS* 

Te fcire hoc fciat alter. 

nat you kmnjj this, Ut others alfo knoivm 

PfiRSIUS. 

TQUBLIC examinations haye of late been efta- 
J blifhed in feme colleges, and nothing has 
been found to contribute more to the fuccefs of 
the academical difcipline.^ The fame falutary 
confequences will flow from the practice, if it 
fhould be generally imitated in the nurferies to 
the univerfity. 

A mailer cannot beftow an hourly and parti- 
cular attention on all the younger fchol^rs of a 
large feminary. It is certain, that the firft ele- 
ments may be even better taught by diligent af- 
(iftants of inferior learning and abilities. Pa- 
tience, attention, and temper, are the principal 
qualities required in teaching the accidence ; 
for the method will be prefcribed by the book 
itfelf, or by the fuperintendant* But I think it 
indifpenfably fequifite, that the mafter fliould 
examine every clafs at leaft once in a fortnight. 
The confcioufnefs that an account is to be 
given of the degree of improvement made with- 
ia a limited time, will caufe a greater degree 

of 



3IO ON EXAMINATIONS, &c. 

of diligence both in the fcholars and in the affift* 
ants ••• 

Periodical 

♦ 1 will cite the following pafTage on the fub- 
je£l of ufhcrs from Gold fmith, who was himfelf 
.an ulher, and therefore fpeaks from experience. 

*' We fend boys (fays he) to board in the coun- 
try, to the moft ignorant fet of men that can be 
imagined. But^ left the ignorance of the mafter 
be not fufHcient, the child is configned to the 
ufiier. This is commonly fome poor needy ani- 
mal, little fuperior to a footman either in learning 
or fpirit, invited to^his place by an advertisement, 
and iccpt there merely from his being of a com- 
plying difpoiitioR, and making the children fond 
of him. You give your child. to be educated to a 
flave, fays a philofophcr to a rich man; inftead of 
one flave you will then have two." 

Goldsmith, 

Ufhers, however, when well qualified and well 
behaved are very valuable perfons, and oaght 
tp berefpefted. I cite another j>aflage from Gold- 
fmith and, coincide with him on the necefli^y of 
a mafter's fhewing refpecfl, and making the boys 
ihew refpeft to the ufhers. They are oKen cruelly 
and contemptuoufly treated, to the great injury of 
the fcholars as well as of themfelves. But let us 
hear GcHdfmith again, who fpeaks very truly and 
f3elingly upon the fubjedl. 

** Jf a gentleman, upon putting out his fon to 
one of thefe houresj(country boarding-fchools), fees 
the uiher diCregarded by the mailer, he may de- 
pend upon it,, he is equally difregarded by the 
boys. The truth is, in fpite of all their endea- 
vours to pieafc, they- are generally the laughing^ 
ftock of the fchool. Every trick is played upon 

lh« 



<i'N EXAMINATIONS, &c. 3K 

Periodical examinations at fhort intervals, 
^will caufe the mind to retain what it receives *, 

The 

-the ufher; The oddity of his manners, his drefs, 
or his language, are a fund of eternal ridicule. 
The mailer himfelf cannot help, now and then, 
joining in the laugh ; and the poor wretch, eter- 
nally refenting this ill-ufagc, feems to live in a 
flate of war with all the family. This is a very 
proper perfon, is it not, to give children a relifh 
for learning f They mud efteem learning very 
much, when they fee its profefTors ufed with fucti 
little ceremony. If the ufher be defpifed, the fa- 
ther may be aiTured the child will never be pro- 
perly inftrudled." Goldsmith. 

I muft bear my teftimony againft the imperious 
ufage which ufhers fometimes receive from mailers, 
and the infolence with which boys are often al- 
lowed to behave to thefe ingenious but unfortunate 
men. They are allowed to infult the ufher with 
. impunity, left the parents fhould be offended, if a 
poor man's part fhould be taken againll the froward 
•CHILD OF THE RiCH,towhom a mercenary maHcr 
-meanly crouches. 

* Thefe are ftudies wherein our noble and our 
^gentle youth ought to beftow their time in a dif- 
ciplinary way from twelve to one-and-twenty, un- 
"leis they rely more upon their anceftors dead, than 
mpon themfelves living. In which methodic;al 
courfeit isfo fuppofed, they mufl proceed by the 
"ileady pace of learning onward, as at convenment 

TIMES, FOR MEMO-^y's SAKE, TO RETIRE BACK 
INTO THE MIDDLEWARD, AND SOMETIMES IN- 
TO THE REAR. OF WHAT THEY HAVE BEEN 
TAUGHT, UNTJL THEY HAVE CONFlRMfcD ANO 
SOLIDLY UNITED THE WHOLE BODY of their 

perfeded knowledge, like the laft embattling of a 
Homan legion. Miltoh's Traftate. 

Educatio 



512 ON EXAMINATIOirs, &c. 

The mind is prone to indolence, and will fuffer 
that to efcape, which no immediate hopes or 
'fears induce it to preferve. But when it fore- 
fees the certainty of a ftridl inquiry into its ac- 
quifitions, it will not only retain much which it 
would otherwife lofe, but will retain it with 
accuracy*. Periodical examinations will alfo 

furnifh 

Educatio firmatur crebra ante traditorum repe- 
tition f, quam velira frequentiffimam efle, ncc 
tamen triflem aut morofam, fed per interrogatiun- 
•culas fuaves jucundafque eorum quas le^a vel au- 
dita fuerunt. Education is confirmed by a frequent 
repetition of things that ha*ve been pre'vioujly taught, 
<which repetition 1 ivould ha've 'very frequent y yet not too 
JiriS orfe'vere, but by means of pleafant and entertain^ 
ing little quejiions concerning things lAjbich ha<ve been 
read or heard, Schefferus. 

* Tanaquil Faber fays, in his method of Teach- 
ing, which contains feme ixleas not fo generally^ 
to be approved, '* I always examined my fcholar, 
before he went to bed, in what he had learned 
that day ; for I take this to be the bed means to 
retain the fugitive ideas, and to ftrengthen the 
memory; without which all the ftudying and read- 
ing is but to draw water with a {i^xqJ*^ 
"Another excellent method of improving the 
elder boys is, to let them fometimes hear the 
younger. For one of the fureft means of being 
taught, is to teach. And the fenior boys of a 
good fchool are often as capable of inftrudling 
their juniors in the elements of learning, as the 
affiilants or the mailers. Quicquid didiceris, id 
confellim doceas. Sic et tua firmare et prodeffe 
aliis potes. Simul atque in literarum judicio pro- 
moveris nonnihil, enitare ut per totum diem, £\ 
£eri poifit, doceas ; ea doce^ quae noveris^ fi non 

omnia 



ON EXAMINATIONS, &c. 313 

furnifh occafioa for the difplay of excellence^ 
and will confequently excite a defire to make a 
good appearance. Praifes, rewards, difgrace, 
and punifliment, beftowed in a ferious manner 
on a folemn occafion in the light of the whole 
fchool, will have a better efFeft than when given 
feparately, and in private. 

By being accuftomed to give unpremeditated 
refponfes to unexpefted interrogations, the mind 

will 

omnia noili. Sedulo curandum, ut vel prece, vei 
pretio, habeas unum, cui ea, quae veils, poffis re- 
cicare. Si pro horis fingulis exiguam pecuniam 
dederis auditori, atque hoc modo quatuor aut 
quinque aureos expenderis, tantum comperies, te 
profecifTe turn in literis, turn in forma docendi, ut 
vel palam ea audeas profiteri. 

Wbat/oe'ver you hwve learned teach it immediately. 
So you may fecure your onj^n, and benefit others,-^ As 
foon as you ha've made fomi impro'vement , endeavour , 
if pojjible^ to teach all day long. Teach that little 
you do knoiUi though you do not knoiu every thing* 
You muft take particular care, that either for love^ 
or money, you may have fome one to nvhom you may 
repeat iv hat ever you chufe. If you pay a hearer Jo 
much an hour, and it coft you a fenu guineas, you 
ivill find jfourfelf improve fo much in learning, and in 
a method of teaching, that you may foon venture 
openly to profefs them, 

RXNGELBERG. 

Ad comparandam folidam do6lrinam via tutiiH- 
ma certiffimaque eft docere. Signum enim fcientis 
eft poffe docere, imo et gradus ad fcientiam fir- 
mifCmus. To procure f olid learning, the fafeft and 
fureft method is to teach. For to he able to teach, is 
a fign a man underftands things bimfelf ; and it is 
alfo the fureft ftep to knonjoledge. Fichetus. 

Vol. I. P Alios 



^1+ ON EXAMINATIONS, kc. 

.tinll acquire thofe valuable habits, a quicknefs 
pf recolledtion, and a readinefs of reply. 

So many, indeed, and fo important are the 
beneficial effe6b of this pradlice, that 1 will for 
once moil confidently recommend it to all, as 
fecuring and increafing improvement in every 
ftage of the fcholar's progrefs, and in every part 
of his purfuits, while under fcholaflic or acade- 
mical authority*. 

Alios quoqae doceas; nufqaam enim melius de- 
prehenderis quid intelligas, quid non. Atque in'- 
terim nova qaxdam occurrunt commentanti diile- 
rentique. Teach others alfo ; for hy no means ivill 
you better difccver ^what you underfiand^ and ^what 
not. And^ in the mean time, nenv ideas occur to you 
nuhile you are commenting and di/courfing, 

Erasmus. 
' Pauca pucri doceantur: fed accurate et ita ut 
hsreant in mentibus. Meminerit preceptor in- 
genia puerorum efle velut vafcula angufti oris, quae 
fuperfufam liquoris copiam rerpuant,y^«/€w inftilla- 
tarn recipiant. Itaquefape interroget ac eorum quse 
dixerit, rationem mode ab his, mode ab illis re- 

pofcat. JUVENCIUS. 

Peritiores difcipuli qua: fuerint explicata repecent 
Tudioribus, aliquando, et familiariter explanabunt. 
Sic utrique plurimuin proficient ; nee raro accidit, 
ut ab o'qualihus difcant faciljus pueri, quam a 
magifiro, Juvencius. 

* As this fedlion nearly clofes the topic of li- 
terary inftru£iion, I will add a few concluding re- 
marks. 

I have particularly recommended clafflcal learn- 
ing; but I do not recommend it exclusively^ 
. . I think it ought to claim the earliest atten^ 
tion^ and to form the foundation; becaufe no 

other 



ON EXAMINATIONS, kc. ary 

other learning contributes fo much to open and 
to po]i(h the mindr 

After this polifli and expanfion are acquired, 
and this foundation laid, I recommend an atten- 
tion to the fciences, to natural hiftory and experi- 
mental philofophy, to botany, to chemiftry, to 
painting, to fculpture, to architefture, to mecha- 
nical works, and in general to all the prod unions 
of human ingenuity. A capacious mind will view 
the univerfe, and all that it contains, as one vaft 
volume laid before it for perufal. Philology alone 
is comparatively a confined, though elegant at- 
tainment. 

Now the fciences are not fo difficult as at firfk 
fight they appear to be. The appearance of diffi- 
culty arifcs from their having been ufually treated 
in a dry and technical manner. I will advife the 
liberal fcholar to begin with the moft popular 
and eafiefl treatifes, fuch, for inftance, as are Dr. 
Watson's Essays, in the particular department 
of chemistry, lately publiihed, Clare's Mo- 
tion of Fluids, Cotes's Lectures, and many 
other popular Treatifes, equally remarkable for 
perfpicoity of expreflion. 

From thefe the fiudent will acquire that love of 
the fciences, which will gradually lead him to 
perfect his fkill in them, by ftudying them in the 
beautiful accuracy of fyftematic and original wri- 
ters ; but, if he is difgufted at firfl, he will perhaps 
relinquifh the purfuit for ever. 



END OF THE FIRST VOLUME. 



I 

i 



THE UNIVERSITY OF MtCMGAN 
GRADUATE UBRARY 

DA1I DUi 






o 




^HtvtRsn- &f •*\t^'f*{ 



"3 9015 02242 4447 



^ 



S^P/N(7 



(^S£ 



ONLY 



^^£ ONfy 

DO NOT REMOVE 

OR 
MUTILAII-CllUL 




