4 


APP EA 
. 
* | | 
MEN OF GREAT BRITA 
; IN BEHALF OP | 8 9 
ZW o - 4} 
Let it be remembered, that the efficacy 4 ignorance wi been 


long tried, and has not produced the conſequences expected. 
Let knowledge therefore take its turn, and let the patrons of pri- 
vation ſtand 2 while aſides aud admit the operation of poſitive prin- 


_ ciples. he Jonxson. 


: ' 
4 


* 


PRINTED FOR J. JOHNSON, sr. PAUL'S CHURCH= 
YARD; AND J. BELL, OXFORD-STREET, 


hs... ? * 


1 


* 


1798. 


3 of” corte Uni ES. - 
4 8 KKRVARD” COLLEGE UT * 
5 | 1 bart 0 br THE LIBRARY:OF THE} 


— or austukss 40 0 N e 


S. nl, 19 37. 


* T Or 


, ” * 0 * " 5 * * , = - 
* | i * 3 F F | | | 
# * A 3 7 * Fs - 4 1 8 4 3 

* 1 *. 3 4 43 3 4.4 | 


1 * * x * 
* 
LS £ 
Ul 
5 % 
10 n 

4 > A 

* 9 * 
— — — 4 
% 
* 


ADVERTISEMENT. 


THE READER. 


I: is neceſſary to inſorm the reader, that the 
greater part of the following pages, was written 
and arranged nearly in the preſent form, ſome 
years ago. The ſubject though at all times of 
general concern, had then likewiſe ſome degree 
of novelty to recommend it ; in ſo far at leaſt 
as that no work had appeared, I believe, for 
the profeſſed purpoſe of advancing and defend- 
ing the pretenſions of women, to a ſuperior 
degree of conſideration in ſociety, to that which 
they at preſent enjoy. 


Tn public too at that time was at leiſure, 
and ſeemed diſpoſed, to encourage the endea- 
vours of individuals to inſtru&, or amuſe; and 
in ſuch circumſtances the following little work, 
without any claim to extraordinary attention, 


a 


— 


— —— — eager 


Advertiſement to the Reader. 


except in the intereſting nature of its ſubject, 
might have come in for its ſhare of notice, with 
other things of the ſame degree of merit. But 
times and circumſtances are now ſo different, 
that ſome apology is neceſſary for obtruding it 
on the public; after having kept it back at a 
moment, when it might have been better re- 


ceived. 


WariLz I was purſuing my work with all the 


enthuſiaſm common to a firſt attempt, and to 


my natural diſpoſition ; a gentleman of diſtin- 


guiſhed abilities and learning, but not one of 


thoſe who wiſh to confine all knowledge to 
their own ſex, ſent me—Letters from Barbary, 


France, Spain, Portugal, &c. by an Engliſh 


officer. Perhaps the moſt ſingular. part of 


that very ſenſible and ſpirited performance, is 
the author's opinions with regard to women 


and I was at firſt highly flattered to find that 


the ſentiments I had pre-conceived on that ſub- 


ject, were nearly ſimilar to thoſe. of one, whoſe 
abilities, in every point of view, appeared ſo 
reſpectable. And who was certainly leſs liable 


Advertiſement to the Reader. 


to prejudices, which, —however much I endea- 
voured to guard againſt them, — l always feared 


might influence my own opinions. 


Tus E were my firſt reflections on reading 
Major Jardine's Letters ; but thoſe which ſuc- 
ceeded were not fo agreeable, and retarded for 
a conſiderable time the finiſhing of this ſketch; 
For, it could not but occur to me, that, as he 
had—though, but incidentally—treated the ſub- 
ject of it ſo well; thoſe who ſhould come im- 
mediately after him, could have little claim to 


notice. 


As it is not however an eaſy matter to give 
up a favourite purſuit, upon which the mind 
has accuſtomed. itſelf to dwell with complacency 
and partiality, after a pretty long receſs I found 
it not difficult, to reaſon myſelf into my own 
good opinion again; and in fact, reſumed the 


buſineſs, with more ardor than ever. 


Jus at this period, and when I had the goal 
almoſt in view; and, as if the very demon of 


A dvertiſement to the Reader. 


intelligence were let looſe, to perſecute me with 
information, though in an obſcure corner of the 
the Rights of Woman by Miſs 
Wollſtonecraft was ſent by a friend, for my 


kingdom 


peruſal, 


MoxTiFied ſtill more I muſt candidly ac- 
knowledge, by this ſecond anticipation ; becauſe 
by its pointed title, and declared purpoſe, it 
was more likely than even the firſt, to impede 
the ſucceſs of an attempt, which now had leſs 
claim to that novelty which enſures at leaſt _ 
temporary notice; I flung aſide my little ſketch 
in favour of women, with a degree of diſdain, 
which, I begin to hope, it did not deſerve. I 
likewiſe hope, nay 1 moſt ſincerely believe, 
that one ſpark of envy, did not lurk at the 
bottom of this conduct; though we have it 
from too good authority, that, the heart is del- 
perately wicked. Be this as it may, ſufficiently 
diſcouraged, and defpairing of being able at 
the time, to give it the finiſhing touches with 
that degree of ſpirit, which, only, can render | 
a work of any kind acceptable to the public; 


Advertiſement to the Reader, 


1 laid afide all thoughts of it for a conſiderable 


time, 


Bur though a ſtill greater interval than the 
laſt elapſed, before I could prevail on myſelf 
to finiſh the ſketch as it now appears; yet I had 
gone too far, and beſtowed too much pains 
upon it, eaſily to relinquiſh my purpoſe. In- 
deed, when we conſider how many books are 
written, and read upon every ſubje&—T may 
rather ſay how many myriads of books of 
every difterent degree of merit, are abſolutely 
neceſſary, to ſuit the different taſtes, capacities, 
and judgments of mankind—before the public 
opinion is influenced to any great degree, far 
more before any new doctrine can be firmly 
eſtabliſhed ; there is perhaps no great preſump- 
tion in ſuppoſing, that each may in ſome degree, 
more or leſs, have its effect. 


I wouLD have it underſtood, however, that 
I found my pretenſions, whatever they may be, 
rather upon the merits, than,—as is too often 
the caſe among writers,—upon the alleged de- 


„ 


—— 2 


—— — DN Yer — — 8 — 


— — 


. — —— — 


— 22222 —— —— ͥ — 


— faianerded wane owonodn en 
* — 


— 


Advertiſement to the Reader. 


fects of thoſe who have treated the ſame ſub- 
jets. So far indeed, are works of very ſupe- 
rior merit, from ſuperſeding the neceſſity of 
others; that on the contrary, it is too evident, 
that ſuch are not akvays the moſt popular ; or, 
at leaſt that ſome time generally elapſes before 


they become ſo. That which raiſes them in 


the eyes of the few, either ſets them beyond 


the reach of the multitude; or, what is in- 
finitely worfe, renders them obnoxious to its 
hatred and perſecution. If any thing indeed 
can be objected to, in the works to which 1 
have alluded, it is an error but too commonly 
attendant. on genius; who ſeldom deigns, by 
managing, and ſympathizing with, the preju- 
dices of mankind, to make new and unexpected 


truths palatable to common minds, 


YET to manage with ſome degree of tender- 
neſs the prejudices of the generality of mankind; 
to reſpect even theſe till the multitude can be 
perſuaded that ALL PREJUDICES are inimical to 
its happineſs and intereſts ; can neither juſtly be 
eſteemed immoral, or deceitful. It is only doing 


Advertiſement to the Reader, 


that by gentle means and by degrees, which 


can never be done well by any other. 


Tux taſk be mine then, of preſenting a ſketch, 
which preſumes. to recommend this. gradual 
reformation, this gentle emancipation from er- 
ror; and from error too as deeply rooted, and 
as fondly cheriſhed, as any in the whole circle 


of humanity. 


WHATEVER the fate of this attempt may be, 
I ſhall not have my friends to blame, nor to 
thank, for uſhering it into the world; for the 
truth is, that the fear of appearing in a new 
character before them, though not a very nu- 
merous body, is one of the reaſons which de- 
termine me to take ſhelter behind the ſcenes ; 
and I am at this moment in a ſituation perhaps 
as truly ludicrous as can well be conceived. 
For, having written a book which I wiſh to 
expoſe to the public; I yet have not the reſo- 
lution to ſubmit it, to the eye of friendſhip or 
aſſection; whether moſt, from fear of partiality 


or cenſure, I ſcarcely myſelf know. But this 


— * 
* 
—— c — — — 


— — — —ũ——6—— oa ns — — 
—ꝗ—äj — 
: - 


Advertiſement to the Reader, 


I know, that here I am with my APPEAL in my 


hand, determined to print and publiſh, —yet 
not knowing a printer or publiſher in the whole 
world, to whom to apply; and at preſent de- 
termined to interpoſe no medium, between me 
and thoſe formidable gentlemen. 


How long this farce may laſt, I cannot pre- 
tend to gueſs; but I have a ſtrong pre-ſentiment 
that after all diſcouragements, the following 
ſketch will appear before the public at laſt. 


INTRODUCTION. 


I T may at firſt fight appear abſurd to addreſs 
the following pages in behalf of women, to the 


men of Great Britain; whoſe apparent intereſt 
it perhaps is, in common with that of all other 
men, that things ſhould remain on the footing 
they are. But as the men of Great Britain, to 
whom in particular I chuſe to appeal, have to 
their everlaſting honor, always been remarkable 
for an ardent love of liberty, and high in their 
pretenſions to juſtice with regard to themſelves; 
it is not to be believed, if the ſubje& of the 


preſent work were taken into their ſerious con- 


ſideration, but that the ſame ſentiments would 

be freely and generoully extended to that claſs 

of beings, in whoſe cauſe I though unworthy 

appear. A claſs, upon whom the Almighty has 

ſtamped ſo ſublime, ſo unequivocal marks of 
A 


uu INTRODUCTION. 
dignity and importance, that it is difficult to 
conceive why men ſhould wiſh to counteract 


the benevolent deſigns of Providence in their 


favour; by leading in chains, too often galling 


to their ſenfible and tender natures, thoſe, 


233 „ — 


whom heaven having in its wiſdom formed the 


— — roo — — 


equals, could never ſurely, ſave in its wrath, 


* — 
—— — — — 


doom to be the ſlaves of man. 


cms 


— - — 
„„ — 


— ETC 
— r 


To man then, to him alone who of all cre- 
ated beings challenges equality, nay more, who 
challenges ſuperiority over the injured party, 
is this little work ſeriouſly recommended. If it 
were equal to the fervent wiſhes of the author 
to render it worthy of whom it is addrefled, 
and of the public in general, oh how perfect! 
how intereſting would it be! But as it is, with 
all its imperfections on its head, if the writer 
indulges no romantic hopes, neither does ſhe 
ſuffer any abje& fears. Dans les pays de 
ſervitude, le bien des hommes eſt mepriſe & le 
citoyen qui les aime y gemit & ſe tait, Mais 
dans le ſéjour de la liberté, on eſt ſir de 


Veſtime publique & Pon travaille a leur bon- 


INTRODUCTION. 11 


heur. On vous fait gre du déſir & de la ten- 
tative, meme infructueuſe; & c'eſt la que 
Petranger lui- mème doit verſer ſes lumieres.“ 


In Britain then, in the favorite abode of 


liberty, ſhall a daughter of the ſea-girt iſle” 


tremble to appear before the tribunal of her 
brethren ? 


No! with a cauſe in hand ſo intereſting to 
every individual, I come forward on the con- 5 
trary with confidence, and to you fathers, bro- 
thers, huſbands, ſons, and lovers, I ſubmit the 
following pages. By all thoſe tender ties may 
you be led to conſider of what importance it is 
to ſociety, to improve the underſtandings, the 
talents, and the hearts of thoſe, who muſt one 
way or other, ill or well, act ſuch principal 
parts on the ſtage of life. The conſequences 
of this attention to their improvement, how- 
ever good, however happy for them, are I ap- 
prehend equally intereſting for you, which 1 


flatter myſelf that I ſhall be able to prove; if, 


not alarmed or diſguſted by the pretenſions 
already hinted at, you will deign to peruſe the 


— 3 


iv INTRODUCTION, 


following attempt to reſtore female character 
to its dignity and independence; though I 
truſt, neither at the expence of the peace, the 


happineſs, or the ſelf-importance of MAN. 


Marv I be permitted to introduce my defence 
of the female ſex by that of an obſcure indi- 
vidual, who wiſhes not to be thought even the 
anonymous circulator of opinions, which how- 
ever juſt in themſelves, might in their tendency 

breed animoſities, where peace and mutual con- 
fidence had before been only known. The 
reader may ſmile at theſe conſequential fears, 


and account the danger not very alarming; 
but, few indeed, and little, are the talents re- 


quired, to do real and laſting miſchief. 


© Picctola è Pape, e fa col picciol morſo, 


Pur gravi, e pur moleſte le ferite,” 


I muſt therefore repeat it, that the fear, the poſ. 
ſibility of doing harm, would certainly prevent 
me from making even my ſentiments on the ſub- 
ject public, did not the complaints and diſſatisfac- 


INTRODUCTION, „ 


tions of the ſexs againſt each other ſufficiently 


prove, that they are, generally ſpeaking, far from 
being on that footing, where danger is to be 
apprehended from reaſoning on the ſubject ; or 
on that footing of which thinking and rational 


| beings may be ſuppoſed capable. And ſurely 


at a period when the pulpit, the preſs, and the 
ſtage, teem with reflections on the vices of the 
one ſex, and the follies of both; it cannot be 
deemed impertinent nor unneceſſary, to ſubmit 
to candid and cool examination ſome ſimple 
though unacknowledged truths, which if ſeri- 
ouſly taken into conſideration, might have a 
tendency to promote the equality, and the con- 
ſequent -peace and happineſs of the ſexes. 


Know, however, that I come not in the garb 
of an Amazon, to diſpute the field right or 
wrong ; but rather in the humble attire of a 
petitioner, willing to ſubmit the cauſe, to him 
who is both judge and party. Not as a fury 
flinging the torch of diſcord and revenge 
amongſt the daughters of Eve; but as a friend 
and companion bearing a little taper to lead 


1 INTRODUCTION. 


them to the paths of- truth, of virtue, and of 
liberty. Or if it lead not to theſe, may it be 


utterly extinguiſhed. © If the arguments here 


advanced appear chimerical, unfounded, or ir- 


rational; let it periſh, let it be obliterated, let 


no memorial of it remain.“ 


APP E AL 


TO THE 


MEN or GREAT BRITAIN, 
IN BEHALF or 


W O M E MN. 


ARGUMENTS ADDUCED FROM SCRIPTURE 
AGAINST THE SUBJECTION OF WOMEN. - 


Tur claim of ſuperiority on the part of the 
men is of ſo high antiquity, and from ſo great 
authority, that it can neither be lighted, nor 
paſſed over without notice. Before however 
one word more is ſaid on this ſubject, let it be 
underſtood, that there exiſts not man, or wo- 
man, who has a higher veneration for the 
ſcriptures, than the writer of this work ; and 


whoſe opinion it has ever been, that if any 


* 
2 a Ot. AYER 


2 APPEAL TO THE 


object can be more diſguſting than a man pro- 


feſſing a contempt for all religion, it is a woman 


of the ſame deſcription. 


AFTER this declaration we may go on and 
occaſionally mention, without the cenſure of 
levity, paſſages of that Book which of all others 
bears examination the beſt. And which inde- 
pendent of the veneration in which it is held by 
the author of this ſketch as an individual, in a 
religious point of view; deſerves attention and 
reſpect, as the foundation of all the laws of 
Chriſtian and poliſhed countries. This part of 


the ſubject however will be diſcuſſed in as few 


words as poſſible; for to enter into any laboured 


Inveſtigation of the-matter were vain. Opinions 


on this particular point, however important, are 
ſoon and eaſily formed. 


# 
F 


RN 
* Inprxd the reader will be diſappointed who 
Z 0 to find the following attempt any thing 


like a finiſhed performance i in any of its parts; 


it only aims at the merit of an outline or ſketch; 


? . | 4 *%% 
and is drawn rather from common ſenſe, from 


— — 


_ $45, bo WR. A "FP W's ; % 
— ** 1 P 
3 i . $ WT . 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN, 3 


experience, and obſer vation, —all however very 
keen ſearchers of human character and con- 
duct, —than from philoſophy or learning; to 
which, as the writer has no pretenſions, ſhe 


advances no claim. 


Ir muſt be acknowledged then, that even 
before our firſt parents left the garden of bliſs, 
a woman was poſitively, and unequivocally 
doomed to be- ſubject to the power and au- 
thority of her huſband. When however it is 
attempted to bring this power forward, and 
into action, againſt women in general ; there 
are I think two ways of obviating or evading 


the claim; either of which appear perfectly fair 


and ſatisfactory. Is it not true, that the ſame 


chapter, almoſt the ſame verſe, which entails 
this curſe upon woman—tfor as a curſe it is 
evidently given—entails, and for the very ſame 
crime, another upon man equally clear and 
explicit, and equally deſigned as ſhould ſeem 
for the whole ſex ? Is it not expreſsly ſaid, that 
man ſhould earn his bread by the ſweat of his 
brow, until his return to the earth from whence 
Þ 


- — 
1 
n vat Oe” * 
=_ 5 e : - 
2 


4 APPEAL TO THE 


he came? Yet did it ever occur to woman, 


amongſt all her imputed abſurdities, to inſiſt, 
that man, however favoured by different cir- 


cumſtances, was everlaſtingly bound to this 
_ ſervitude? By what mode of reaſoning, by 


what rule of juſtice then can it be, that that 
part of a poſitive command which regards 
women, is ſuppoſed to hold good to all eternity, 
however different circumſtances may favor them, 
and as is often the caſe, impel them to better 
their ſituation; while that part of it which 


regards man may be broke through the firſt 


opportunity, and ever after diſpenſed with ? 


IT can indeed very well imagine, that to man 
and woman preciſely in the ſtate in which Adam 


and Eve are deſcribed to have been, ſuch a 


fabmiſſion as is enjoined the woman, might 
have been neither impracticable nor unreaſon- 
able. When ſhe ſaw her huſband daily tolling 
for her ſupport and that of her offspring; when 


the faw that by the order of the Almighty 


thorns and thiſtles were produced by the earth, 


if he on his part were not a flave for her ſake; 


e 


- — * e 
—_— — — 
e — 


1 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN, 5 


when added to this ſhe felt the humiliating con- 
ſciouſneſs of guilt, and the ſtill more dreadful 
conſciouſneſs of having ſeduced her huſband, 
and involved him in her guilt, and the calami- 
tous conſequences ; was it poſſible that ſhe on 
her's ſhould not look up to him, with a mixture 
of gratitude, affection, reſpect and pity, which 
made this command, now deemed ſo hard, the 
ſweeteſt part of her duty? 


Bor now the ſcene is completely changed. 
The circumſtances in which our firſt parents 
were placed, were ſo extremely unlike whatever 
has, or can take place in common life, that to 
ſuppoſe ſubjection on the part of women to be 
from ſuch a cauſe the conſtant and unalterable 
appointment of Heaven; is ſuch a perverſion 
of the ſpirit as well as of the letter of the law, 
as does not come ſhort of abſolute and decided 
abſurdity. I muſt therefore repeat, that it is a 
moſt extraordinary circumſtance, and not to 
be accounted for upon any of the common 
principles of reaſoning ; that a wiſe, a juſt, a 
beneficent Creator, ſhould frame laws, and 


- „ —— — 


— 


— 
- — "VS 
— 


en re LED 
ci lis n — 


84 8 * 
8 


— 


5 
whe Gus een tone —— 


- * 


— 
Wh 
onto 
—ͤ——Dũ —— ñ̃ͥ 
3 


0 
„C00 net Na ie ne 


6 APPEAL TO THF 


enact puniſhments for a race of beings, all 


equally dependent upon him, and equally re- 


ſponſible for diſobedience ; yet allow ſome to 
deviate from his will with impunity, and others 


not. Indeed it has always appeared to me fo 


ſhocking to imagine, if either of the male- 


dictions had been intended by the Creator to 
have been handed down to poſterity, that they 
ſhould not have literally taken place; that if 1 
may be permitted to give my explanation of 


the paſſages, I think the plain and obvious 


+ 


meaning of them muſt have been a puniſh- 


ment for the firſt pair, and for them only. 


I THEREFORE upon the whole ſum up my 
argument with this concluſion, that if thoſe 
texts of ſcripture that we allude to, are con- 


ſidered as binding and entailed upon the hu- 


man race; abſurd as it may appear, the men 
are as much bound to perpetual toil and hard 


labor, as the women to perpetual and undiſtin- 


guiſhed obedience. And that men, by breaking 


through laws of equal authority, with thoſe by 


which they endeayour to enſlave the other ſex ; 


E n 5 
1 f 2 


— — rr e e 
L — — aol 8 n n Woah 2 3 * 

- os 2 4 - 7 24a L x x r 2 1 4 "ev wb 83 1 3 - * 

= I * 8 8 . a0 * r [en Kh bn oe ates. 4 of 1d. a * 3 4 5 Mo FR on A * 
132 „„ ee LENS 1 E OT ESTs OS. Wy _— CP rn” 2 2 pes, =, © i =o » 

3 1 - Mt ES; —— ib. LESS in SE 8 r ͤ ͤ i, OG] * 7 1 ** * 
ae ' No 7 * gee C 2 „ PW A Es oe 2 8 — * 
"" : V4 1 = — 1 n 3 og he: 3 4 
* * 2 


e 
E 1 " 33 
* 2 P of — 


5 va 
'F 
*% 
i 
. 
7 
2 
1, 
4X 
wel. 
1 
Ka * 
& 
N 
* 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. 7 


| with all their boaſted ſuperiority, ſet women a 


very bad example, both in principle and prac- 


tice. If however the paſſages in queſtion are 


underſtood as I explain them ; the antediluvian 


claim of divine authority, to domineer over 


women, falls with the firſt pair to the ground 


Where peace to its manes!— And obli- 


vion to its memory | 


Tuus much for thoſe, who eſteem it a main 
point of orthodoxy, to believe in the fall of 


man in its molt literal ſenſe, 


Bur there are others, and thoſe not unworthy 
of being attended to, who believe, and of this 
opinion were many of the primitive Chriſtians; 
that the Moſaic account of the fall of man, was 
merely an allegorical, or mythological hiſtory ; 


in which ſenſe it cannot be denied, but that it 


18 beautiful, rational, and comprehenſible, ac- 


cords with the uſage of eaſtern nations, and is 
adapted to their taſte and capacity ; for, their 
moſt ſublime inſtructions were couched under 


the veil of fable and allegory. And it is ſurely 


no impeachment on the veracity of Moſes,” and 


* 


————— 


_ oY 
— — 
—y—U—U— . 


- 1 oy. * 2 : — 
r ** \ EY 
- % n 
4 Fe p44 4a" * oy 
oY 2 3 — ———ͤäc 
. - 2 
— 222 5 — 


- 
— e — 
— —— I» 


—— 


7 


— = —_ 
4 * 
: —— 3 
—— — — 1 


8 APPEAL TO THE 


does infinite honour to his judgment, that he 
took the ſhorteſt, the moſt impreſſive, and the 
moſt favorite mode of inſtruction, to inculcate 
good morality, upon an ignorant and obſtinate 
race. 


Max v pious believers indeed there have 
been, and are, who aflert, that a literal inter- 
pretation was never dreamt of by the early 
Jews, but was an after-thought of deſigning 
men, or of enthuſiaſts. Certainly the other 
ſenſe is beſt ſuited to the reaſoning faculty of 
man; and therefore moſt likely to be adopted 
by thoſe, who are commonly eſteemed, liberal 
and candid enquirers; and certainly taken in 
this view, a finer leſſon of morality was never 


imagined. 


Bur again, viewing it merely as a tradition 
ſomewhat obſcured, of a former ſtate of more 
perfect virtue, and conſequently of purer bliſs, 
it warms the heart of man, and inſpires him 
with the divine ambition of regaining by the 
road of virtue, the height from which he hath 


* 


ame 5 e 
EE 


23 


we 


_—_— 


: 
" 
5 
I 
5 


K r 
+ 8 £4 2 — 2 
Ip 8 51 — 7: 


Ou. 


PN ola” 
wo es EK; 


ww; 5 {4 2 2 
* 8 


ans nt * 
pe KN 1 
ok Sy f 
7 „ Taps WE. 
LE n ** 


15 
i 


ö 
1 
* 
A 
% 
. 
F 
3 
# bY 
+ 8 
3 
8 
„ 


* 3 
pa ? 3 


2 Y n 2 2 — xg K < 
„ ny E IF; PAT”, EIS: | Rn a, oF, r apa. p E "RES" ö 
e S . 8 8 Ste 2 ee ns 4 r 
4 Janne 4 tl rs n Py * . PIR Be em 


* F 

— 1 = I r 3 

a FR. fs, ES ae £P EP IE oa ads CR Tas el U 9 

A4 . "# * * ot 8 Fe 3 4 &. 4 c 1 28 We 2 e 3 ws I + Ta 2 3 ; *, 
„ FI . * 82 wr 4 5 5 Se 7 * * 8 

- Ca 2 4 , * FW, 2 * # ww n 1 s 3-4 . - IIA : Gs 1 2 wer . A 
* Tr 4 


gp 2 5 S 
e ES br 
2 —_— BF 
RR tes RES La Be 


8 * ö oy” - 
W 2 oF 2 Hh 2 8 
- „% — 


Fs th 7 


EY. 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. 9 


fallen. This indeed ſeems to be a light in ſome 
degree imparted to every nation under the ſun, 
for he ſhines not upon that region, where ſome 
fond memorials are not to be found, ſome be- 
lief traced, of an early ſtate of innocence, upon 
which the ſoul of man loves to linger with 
melancholy delight; but this melancholy is 
ever accompanied by the ſoothing and animat- 
ing hope, that the return to ſuch a ſtate may 
at ſome period arrive When, the pure ſpirit 
freed from the incumbrance of paſſions and 
frailties, from which even the moſt perfect of 
the human race in their preſent ſtate of exiſtence 
are not exempted, ſhall perhaps be permitted 
to know, why ſuch pains and penalties were an- 
nexed to its moral condition 


When perhaps 
we ſhall not only be permitted to- believe, but 


be compelled by the force of conſciouſneſs to 


acknowledge, that it was for crimes committed 
by our proper ſelves that we ſuffered thoſe 
many and heavy afflictions, to which even the 
happieſt of mortals are doomed in this world 
ef cares and calamities. 


1 


10 APPEAL TO THE 


I caNNoT however deny but that this view of 
the ſubject appears to involve in it the belief of 
the ancient, and nearly exploded doctrine, of 
the Metempſychoſis, or Tranſmigration of ſouls; 
nor can I but acknowledge that this doctrine 
has ever appeared to me, not only rational and 
philoſophical, but chriſtian and conſolatory. 
Far different indeed from the dreams of pagan 


philoſophy in general, and thoſe of Plato in 


particular, which one would imagine that no 


one awake to ſober ſenſe could attempt to un- 


derftand, far leſs to explain; though beautiful 
and faſcinating charms are ſcattered among 
them. 


Max I hope to be forgiven if I add that 


there are, who prefer this doctrine of the pre- 


exiſtence of ſouls, and that upon what they 
fuppoſe to be chriſtian and rational principles, 
to that of Original Sin, which has ever been a 
lamentable ſtumbling block to thoſe, who not 
being able to '* reaſon but from what they 


'know,* look upon it as totally inconſiſtent with 


the juſtice, the goodneſs, and the mercy viſible 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. . CI 


through every diſplay of the Almighty, to 
puniſh millions yet unborn, for one crime 


committed by one frail creature, 


I BELIEVE it muſt be obvious to the reader, 
that the view now produced of the ſubject in 


queſtion, is though laſt not leaſt in our 


eſteem.” I myſelf feel that it is written con 
amore, when compared to the frigid details 
which precede it. | 


Bur be all this as it may, nothing can be 


more true, than that in whichever light the 
hiſtory of the fall of man is here taken, all are 
_ equally compatible with a ſincere belief of the 
Scriptures ;. and therefore in whichever ſenſe it 
is adopted, it ſerves our purpoſe equally well ; 
as it looſens every hold that might be taken of 
an original or divine claim, of authority over 
. women. 


IT would far exceed the bounds I preſcribe 
to myſelf in this flight ſketch of an important 
ſubject, to ſearch the Scriptures, and produce 
C 


- APPEAL TO THE 


every text, for, or againſt my argument. I have 
neither time, inclination, nor abilities for ſuch 
a taſk; nor do I think it would tend much to 
enlighten the ſubje& if I had. For, the maſs 
of the Jewiſh inſtitutions can only be conſidered 
as local, and ſuited chiefly to the people, for 
whom they were framed; and their gradual 
diſuetude, in every Chriſtian country, without 


* K 


—— eu re oo — 


2 — os un 
L 9 
ED 
1 1 6 N 2 80 — 
_ — 2 . hs rr —— rs ow BE * G_ 
Prong 


reflection, and even without obſervation, evinces 
the truth of the remark ; and which indeed is 
decidedly proved, by our Saviour's anſwer to the 
Phariſees on the ſubject of divorce, which will be 
afterwards morefully noticed, Amongſt thoſe in- 


CORR —ů —ů ů—— — „ 
* 


- _— - 
1 4 — 


r 2 Wax 
ä — —— een 
— 


* 
— 
* 


ſtitutions there may have been, and there ſurely 


were, temporary ones, ſome in favor of women, 
and ſome much againſt them, neither of which 


1 Lam anxious to produce; but in the tables of 
| the law, emphatically and pre-eminently called 
| the Commandments, and to each of which 


every good man, may put his hand to his heart 
and ſay, Lord incline our hearts to keep this 


law ;* amongſt theſe in vain ſhall man ſearch for 
an excuſe, to aſſume an unreaſonable power 


over his fellow creatures. If proofs were want- 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN, 13 


ing of the divinity of their origin this were one; 
for had they been fabricated by mere man, he 
undoubtedly would have introduced, ſome ty- 
rannical, ſome unjuſt, ſome vexatious clauſes 
againſt poor defenceleſs woman. Whereas, the 
fountain of juſtice, of mercy, and of peace, 
framed his laws ſuch, as might be obeyed by 
all nations, peoples, and ſexes. Would to God, 
that man, whom he has made after his own 
image, were able in this to imitate him! But, 
alas 1—1—— | 

We come now to a part of our ſubject, 
which among Chriſtians muſt be deemed of the 
higheſt importance, and I muſt therefore be 
excuſed if I enlarge a little upon it. I feel that 
I approach ſacred ground, and it is neceſſary 
for my own. vindication that I ſhould put my 
ſentiments in a fair point of view, though at 
the expence of a few more words than 1 could 
wiſh, or than perhaps I at firſt intended. 


LiTTLE then, as men have to boaſt of in the 
Old:Teſtament, in ſupport of their favorite ſyſ- 


14 APPEAL To THE 


tem, yet leſs will there appear for it in the 
New; and eſpecially if we conſider only, ſuch 
paſſages applicable to our ſubject, as were de- 
livered by our Saviour himſelf. It is rather 
ſurpriſing that this reſtriction ſhould run the 
riſque of offending any calling themſelves Chriſ- 
tians, yet I am well' aware that it may. For, 
moſt of them ſeem to regard the Apoſtles, and 
immediate ſucceſſors of Chriſt, with the ſame 
veneration as they do their divine maſter. 1 
think I may confidently ſay, that no good 


reaſon can be aſſigned for this; on the contrary 
it has perhaps been productive of every thing 
abſurd and complicated, that has been imputed, 
to the moſt fimple, pure, and rational religion, 
1 that mankind have ever been bleſſed with. 
ſ Much reſpe& is due to their writings, and 


much to their memories; and much we wil- 
lingly bear them, as the contemporaries, the 
friends, and the diſciples of Jeſus ; and the 
witneſſes, and vouchers, and hiſtorians of his 
life and miracles; for ſo far nothing ſurely can 
be more conformable to Scripture and reaſon, 
But that we oughr to carry our zeal for them 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN, I5 


ſo far, as to conſider their maxims and precepts 
as of equal weight in regulating our belief and 
obedience with: thoſe of our Saviour, is what 
one may be a perfect good Chriſtian ; and yet 
deny. For, what were they but men, ſubject to 
all the paſſions and prejudices of men; though 
no doubt refined and ſubdued, by the example 
of their great maſter, as well as by his advice 


and rebukes, which were not unfrequent? 


In ſhort what I mean to infer, from what I 


have ſaid is this, that whatever is neceſſary for 
man to know to lead him to happineſs in this 
life and the next, is to be found in the precepts 
of our Saviour; and that therefore we are under 

no neceſſity to take them at ſecond hand. His 
are almoſt throughout, clear, ſimple, practical, 
and merciful; or where they are otherwiſe, 


they are ſo clearly figurative, that one would 


think they could ſcarcely be miſtaken if not 


willingly. Theirs on the contrary, amid much 
wiſdom, zeal, and ſound precept, bear evident 
 marks,—1 hope I may fay it without a charge 
of blaſphemy,—of human frailty, and caſual 


_ « ——A 4 * 


16 APPEAL TO THE 


inconſiſtency. But that they come ſhort of 
perfection, is not to ſtagger our faith, nor is 
it in' the main againſt them. It only tells us 
they were men, and ſerves to remind us, again 
to aſcend to the fountain head for inſtruction, 
where only inſtruction is to be found, in purity 
and in truth. And where all have acceſs to go, 
the wiſe and the ſimple, the rich and the poor, 
the tyrant and the flave. And where all who 
pant for emancipation of ſoul, and who are 
happy enough, and wiſe enough, to hold this 
beſt of all books their rule of conduct, may ſee 
within what limits their deſires are lawful and 
reaſonable. 


Having expreſſed my ſentiments candidly 
on .this ſubject, and I hope in ſuch a way as 
not to give offence to liberal and charitable 
minds, it is time to come to the point in queſ- 
tion, viz. what ' paſſages can be gathered as 
delivered by our Saviour himſelf, applicable to 
our ſubject; and I believe it will be very readily 
and generally allowed, that every thing that can 
be collected, is clearly and decidedly in favor 
of women. 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. 3 5, 


In the firſt place then, he himſelf ſeemed 


ſo far from conſidering women, as in any de- 


gree inferior in point. of underſtanding to the 
other ſex; that on the contrary upon every 
occaſion he talks to them on ſubjects of the 
higheſt importance; moſt of his miracles were 
performed in their preſence; and many of them 
at their particular requeſt. I am well aware 


that the unbeliever in Jeſus, and the contemner 


of women, may ſmile at this proof of their 


ſagacity; and tell me, that the weakneſs of 
women, and their conſequent belief and delight 
in the marvellous, made them very fit ſubjects 
to work upon, and very proper tools to uſe, 
on ſuch occaſions. I muſt beg however of ſuch 
to conſider, that their argument is very far 
from being concluſive, againſt the capacities of 
women in particular; for, upon what other or 
better proofs, have many men of the greateſt 
judgment, and moſt acute penetration, and of 


all nations and ages, been moſt ſincere believers? 


As the general tenor of our Saviour's conduct, 
bore honorable teſtimony to the character and 


18 APPEAL TO THE 


conſequence of women; ſo his maxims with 
regard to them, were in the moſt perfect con- 
formity to his conduct. Accordingly, after the 
ſtricteſt examination it will appear, that not a 
word is attributed to him, that even glances at 
their inferiority in ſpiritual concerns; and if 
any thing can be of more importance in heaven 
or on earth, Judge ye! ; 


Wr of courſe come next to that point fo 
eagerly and ſo univerſally claimed by the men, 
and in general ſo ſeverely felt by the women. 
Need I ſay the claim of authority over them, 
and of obedience and ſubmiflion from them ? 
But does our benevolent and merciful legiſlator, 
by any means, or by any one hint, encourage 
ſuch pretenſions ? It may be anſwered, that he 
came to fulfil the law, and not to deſtroy 8 
but it yet remains to be proved, that the law, 


J mean the law of God, was explicit on this 
| ſcore againſt women; which I think cannot 


eaſily be done, as our Saviour expreſsly ſays 
that it was not ſo of old, on a point where 
analogy enables us to draw, very clear infe- 


MEN OF GREA'T BRITAIN. 429 


rences. For, when the Phariſees came tempt- 
ing him on that ſubject, is not his anſwer highly 
intereſting, and worthy of the attention of both 
ſexes? What I particularly allude to is on the 
ſubje& of divorce. Indeed the whole paſſage 
is ſo forcibly told, that I cannot do better than 
tranſcribe it, for who ever yet ſubſtituted their | 
own for Scripture narrative with any tolerable 
degree of ſucceſs ? | 


THE Phariſees alſo came unto him, tempting 
him, and faying unto him,—ls it lawful for a 
man to put away his wife for every cauſe? 
And he anſwered and ſaid unto them, Have ye 
ye not read, that he which made them at the 
beginning, made them male and female? And 


faid, For this cauſe ſhall a man leave father 
and mother,* &c. | | 


ITuxx ſay unto him, Why did Moſes then 


command to give a writing of divorcement, 
and to put her away? 


D 


29 APPEAL TO THE 


© Hz ſaith unto them, Moſes, becauſe of the 
hardneſs of your hearts, ſuffered you to put 


away your wives, but from the beginning it 


was not ſo.? 


Tusk verſes are repeated almoſt word for 


word in the four Evangeliſts, and it is in vain 


to argue that it is not a caſe in point; for 
though it does not include the whole of the 
authority claimed, it was at that time a very 


material part of it, and what the men of thoſe 


days with very ill will gave up. For, even the 
diſciples of Jeſus ſaid to him, If this is the 
caſe it is not expedient to marry ;* clearly. in- 
timating, that if ſuch was the nature of matri- 
mony, and ſuch the equal terms on which man 


and woman went together; it was too great a 

confinement to the licentious ideas, and over- 
bearing diſpoſitions of men; ever graſping 
at authority without controul. 


I Do not know if I am right, but this chapter 
has always appeared to me as ſtrongly againſt 
the pretenſions of the men to ſuperiority, as 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN, * 21 


any one in the Old or New Teſtament ; and as 
ample and honorable a teſtimony of the equality 
and conſequence of the female character, and 
that from the firſt authority, 


© Have ye not heard that he who made them 
from the beginning, made them male and female, 
and for this cauſe a man ſhall leave father and 
mother,” &. Too much licence is certainly to 
be condemned, in explaining paſſages of Scrip- 
ture, to ſuit any opinion or ſyſtem advanced. 
But ſurely he who runs may read, that our 
Saviour very clearly here ſays; that God created 
mankind male and female, different indeed in 
ſex for the wiſeſt and beſt purpoſes, but equal 
in rank, becauſe of equal utility; that no human 
laws, though they may be adopted in peculiar 
ſituations, can ſupercede the law of nature; and 
that though ſuch were permitted as the Phariſees 
alluded to, they were only ſuited to a hard- 
hearted and ſtubborn race, and could not be 
other than temporary ones, and could hold no 
place whatever in a ſyſtem founded on love, 


and charity, and equality; ſo far as human 


er TO THE. 


circumſtances and human frailty can admit of, 
to which every rational being muſt in ſome 
degree bow. 


AccoRDINGLY we find that our Saviour is 
ſo far from giving men any encouragement to 
aſſume authority over their wives, and put them 
away for every cauſe; that he does not even 
allow them to put them away for any cauſe 
whatever; except for a crime which he ſeems 
clearly to conſider as of equal enormity, whether 
committed by man or woman. For, when this 
very crime was actually proved againſt a woman, 
and ſhe brought before him to be judged ; does 
he not put all her accuſers to ſhame and to flight 
by a ſimple, and unexpected appeal to their own 
conſciences; by bidding him who is free caſt 
the firſt ſtone? And does not this as clearly as 
words can exprels it, place woman on a footing 
of equality, where ſhe could leaſt of all perhaps 
expect it, and ſay—Ye unjuſt, ye unreaſonable, 


ye tyrannical beings! Are ye not all formed by 
the ſame hand? made of the ſame fleſh and | 


blood? and ſubject alike to common frailties ? 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN, 23 


And ſhall this woman though guilty, be judged 
and puniſhed by you not leſs guilty than the ? 


No caſe could be adduced more ſtrongly 
in favor of women than this, becauſe it is a 
crime to which our Saviour upon every occaſion 
ſhews the moſt decided abhorrence, as it is in- 


deed of all crimes, the one moſt ſubverſive 


of the peace and happineſs of ſociety. And it 


is therefore to be preſumed that he would have 


more ſeverely cenſured the guilty woman, had 


he not ſeen it of {till more conſequence to man- 


kind, to inculcate that uſeful leſſon upon every 
individual, of doing to others as they would be 
done by. And would men conduct themſelves 
more, upon this noble yet ſimple principle, they 
would either be leſs rigid to women; or what 
| would {till have infinitely more influence on the 
reformation of manners, be more correct in 
their own conduct; when, by adding example 
to precept, they would have an undoubted title, 


to animadvert on that of the other half of their 
ſpecies, 


on . 
* — * 4 
* Fg Oe . — — 
7 88 
— _ — — — — 
2 —— — — 


24 APPEAL TO THE 


Ir may perhaps be argued that J have been 


| contending with a ſhadow, becauſe that in no 


Chriſtian country do men now pretend to the 
right of putting away their wives, ſave for 
the crime of infidelity alone, I know it ; but 1 
bring this very ſtrong inſtance home, becauſe, 
reaſoning from analogy,—which is undoubtedly 
fair where there are no facts on the other ſide 
to oppoſe ſuch reaſoning,—it is clearly to be 
preſumed that the ſame benevolent foreſight 
which dictated theſe checks to the tyranny of 
man for the ſecurity and happineſs of ſo great 
a proportion of the human race ; deſigned that 
the ſame ſpirit of juſtice ſhould pervade the 
whole of his ſyſtem ; and that it ſhould not be 
teft to the caprice or hardneſs of men's hearts 


to uſe authority over their wives for any cauſe, 


SURELY this reaſoning is fairly and candidly 
deduced; for, if our Saviour puts woman on a 
footing of equality, where, as I hinted before, 
the could for many ſtrong reaſons leaſt of all 
expect it; how much more ſhall ſhe hope to be 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. 25 


ſo, in caſes, where nature, humanity, and every 


common rule of juſtice, ſeem to demand it! 


Havixc I hope already ſaid enough to con- 


vince unprejudiced readers, that in the Chriſtian 
ſyſtem, as delivered by its divine founder, there 
is not I believe I may boldly ſay, a ſingle ſen- 
tence that even can be tortured into a meaning, 
againſt the liberty, equality, or conſequence of 
Woman; I ſhall endeavour next to convince 
my readers, as much as I am myſelf convinced, 
that reaſon goes hand in hand with religion in 
oppoſing the claims of the one ſex, to a right 
of ſubjecting the other, 


: 1 
: 
1 
. [if 


— 


\ 
: 
: 


„ — — 


_—_ * 


- 


ARGUMENTS ADDUCED FROM REASON 
AGAINST THE SUBJECTION OF WOMEN. 


| 1 SHALL introduce this part of the ſubject 
by a quotation from an excellent author. He 
indeed is talking of reaſon in religious matters, 
for I wiſh not to pervert, but to apply what 
ſo exactly fits; indeed ſo exactly, that we have 
only to apply it without altering a ſingle word. 
ce In the tumultuous ſcenes of life the voice of 
Reaſon is too weak to be heard, or too difficult 
to be underſtood. In the indulgent anarchy of 
fancy, her language is too ſimple or too ſevere 
to perſuade ; but where authority bears ſway, 
ſhe is enjoined compliance or reduced to filence. 
Thus we ſee in one quarter ſhe is ſtared at as a 
ſtranger, in another ſhe alarms as an enemy, 
and in the third ſhe is treated as a ſlave. Here 
indeed her caſe is at the worſt. She may fami- | 
liarize herſelf to the ſenſual man, ſhe may be 
reconciled to the viſionary, but with authority 
ſhe can come to no compoſition. And yet it 1s 
, © againſt this laſt foe to Reaſon that the following 
| ſheets are chiefly directed. | 
E 


28 APPEAL TO THE 


\ Trey are indeed directed to you, oh man 
clothed with authority of your own aſſuming, 


and clothed with ſtrength to maintain what you 
have aſſumed. You maintain it by the ſame 
law by which the ſtrong oppreſſes the weak, 
and the rich the poor; and by which the great 
and powerful, cruſh the friendleſs, and him who 
has none to help him. At leaſt this is what 


women ſuppoſe to be the real ſtate of che caſe. 
I would therefore earneſtly wiſh to perſuade 


you at all events, to examine if all this is true 


or not ;——if you maintain your empire by 


force alone; or if it is founded on the eternal 
and immutable laws of nature, and ſupported 
. by, juſtice and reaſon. If, after a fair examina- 
tion, this laſt caſe is really found to be the true 


one; women have then only to remain as con- 
tented as poſſible, under the circumſtances in 
Which it may have pleaſed Providence to place 
them. But while they are perſuaded as they 
now are, that they deſerve a better fate; and 


that it is to man alone to whom they owe their 
humiliating ſtate in ſociety; they will repay by 
their folly, in which only they are permitted to 
be pre- eminent, —the imputed injuſtice of man. 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. 29 


Now that I am fairly afloat, I begin to 
tremble at my own temerity ; for againſt a hoſt 
of foes, againſt man's apparent conſequence, 
againſt the accumulated prejudice of ages !— 
Inſe& of a day !|—what am I? ; 

Tims only I have to plead for my preſump- 
tion, that I think, — moſt ſeriouſly think, — that 
I am pleading the cauſe of the men, more, if 
poſſible, than that of the women. For your 


— EI 


own ſakes therefore, and in ſupport of that 
character you aſſume of ſuperior rationality; in 
the name of every thing that is candid, open, 
and generous; be perſuaded to conſider the 
matter in a fair point of view, as you would 

any other ſubje& of equal importance; and be 
not contented with I ſecurely repoſing under 
the cool and venerable ſhade of authority,“ but 
come forth and look Reaſon boldly in the face. 
To be fure this requires ſome reſolution, and 
moſt of you would rather face a cannon, or ſee 
a ſpectre; but take courage, for though ſhe 
will ſpeak ſome dreadful truths, to your con- 
ſciences, yet you mult agree at laſt, if you bring 


30 APPEAL, TO THE 


bl not the fiend Prejudice in your train, If how- 
J ever you come thus accompanied, you may be 
| b very aptly compared, to a man who going to 
| be reconciled to his wife, ſhould bring the 
11 miſtreſs along with him, who had been the 
cauſe of their ſeparation; and in whoſe com- 
pany the Cara Spoſa would have as bad a 


chance; as dignified, unbending, conſcious Rea- 
ſon ; with the dear,—deluding,—long-loved, 


—long-cheriſhed, —convenient Prejudice. 


Ir is neceſſary to make ſome attempt at 


arrangement and method in purſuing my ſub- 
jcct; and I ſhall therefore divide this part of 
1t-under the following heads, viz. 


IIR erroneous ideas which men have formed, 


of the characters and abilities of women. 


What men would have women to be. What 


women are. And, what women ought to 
be.——All of which, as they at preſent ſtand, 
I take to be eſſentially and neceſſarily different 


| from each other, 


— 


— _— 


— 1 — — 


—— — — 


OF THE ERRONEOUS IDEAS WHICH MEN 
HAVE FORMED, OF THE CHARACTERS 
AND ABILITIES OF WOMEN. 


—O—_— —ꝛP ß —— —2— 


Trax © moſt women have no character at 
all,” it is feared men in general endeavour to | 
make themſelves believe ; and that too perhaps, 
not from the moſt upright motives. For con- 
firming and diſſeminating this pleaſant idea, the 
women of Great Britain are much indebted to 
the very ſilly line of Pope's which I have juſt 


quoted ; and who by the way, with all his 


wit, had a great many filly ones on that ſubject. 
Upon this principle however, ſuch as it is, men 
have formed a ſtandard, to which they would wil- 
lingly reduce the whole ſex. Like the barbarous 
tyrant, who is reported to have ſtretched or 
amputated the limbs of his ſubjects, or ſtrangers, 
to ſuit his miſerable caprice; ſo men, not con- 
| tented with women as they come from the hands 
of the all-wiſe Creator, with that endleſs variety 
of character, that variety which is the ſoul of 
beauty, the moſt potent charm in ſociety z men 
will not allow their companions to be, what 


q 1 
j 
d 16 
i 
2: 


32 APPEAL TO THE 

Heaven has made them, and intended them to 
remain ; but muſt model them anew after their 
own faſhion ; to ſuit their paſſions and preju- 
dices; and fo as to give the leaſt check poſlible 
to that unbounded freedom to which they have 
always aſpired, and the leaſt chance poſlible for 


women to emancipate themſelves. 


* 


I MEAN in the firſt place to combat this de- 


grading idea of the inanity of the ſex, and to 
advance, —it would perhaps be too bold and 
conceited to ſay prove, that notwithſtanding 
what has been ſaid by wags and wits of all 


; denominations, every woman not a fool has a 
character of her own, not leſs diſtinctly, though 
more nicely, difcriminated than man's. 


I cannoT however deny but it appears to 
me, that notwithſtanding this variety of indivi- 
dual character, there is likewiſe one which is 
appropriate, which excluſively belongs to the 
ſex, and which differs eſſentially from man's; 
and partakes of the extreme delicacy, by which 


the ſhades of their individual character are diſtin- 


8. 


* 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN, 33 


guiſned. May it not be owing to this extreme 
delicacy, that the ſlighteſt deviation from female 
character ſhocks ſo much ? But does this argue 
any mental inferiority—any defect? Does it not 
on the contrary, rather imply, ſomewhat ap- 
proaching to perfection? For, the nearer to 
perfection any thing is ſuppoſed to be, the more 


ſtriking, and the more offenſive, is every devia- 
tion from it. 


To aſcertain however, the talents and capa- 
cities of women, it may be thought neceſſary 
to draw a compariſon between thoſe of the one 
ſex with the other; but here one great difficulty 
always occurs, becauſe to do it with any degree 
of fairneſs and preciſion, women mult have been 
educated with the ſame attention to mental im- 
provement as men ; and I know of no age or 
nation, where this has been generally the caſe. 
We mult therefore, as on moſt other occaſions 


where women are concerned, take up their cauſe 
with all its diſadvantages. 


Bur independent of this objection, a little 
reflection muſt ſhew, that ſuch a compariſon 


—_—— 
= — 


} 


— 
— —_ 
mm 
—— 
—— 


— 
—_—— —ů 
— 


—— — nn — AE 


22 
= — 8 
— — — 


— . . —-— xs 
Sr "7 
— — 
— 2 wie 


Me — _— 4 - 
—_— —— . \ — 


3 — 
_ ahwo — 


= ab —— — 5 — 


34 APPEAL TO THE 


is a taſk almoſt unſurmountably difficulr, a 
taſk ſcarcely indeed to be accompliſhed, as it 
ought to be nothing leſs than a hiſtory of man- 
kind from the earlieſt ages to the preſent. For 
a few inſtances, ſelected and compared, can carry 
no conviction on a ſubje& of ſuch magnitude. 
A ſubject indeed whoſe very nature is ſuch, 
that no deciſive proofs can be gathered, but 
from a maſs of information judiciouſly ſelected, 
and properly arranged. Such an accumulation 
of facts therefore, as would diſplay the conduct 
and genius of both ſexes in all the different 
ſituations, under all the difficult circumſtances 
and varieties of human exiſtence, would be the 
only ſolid ground from which to draw the 
neceflary concluſions, 


No work of this kind has however been at- 
tempted with a view to aſcertain the pretenſions 
of the ſexes upon fair and rational principles; 


and by drawing juſt and clear inferences, from 


theſe principles. I fear, as I ſaid before, that 


ſuch an undertaking is almoſt unconquerably 
difficult. But we have materials to which we 


can appeal, though they are too numerous and 


. MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN» 35 
2 cumberſome to bring forward ; and theſe are to 
9 be found in the works of hiſtorians and bio- 
4 graphers of credit, ancient and modern, aſſiſted 
3 by daily obſervation and experience. 

1 Ap here Semiramiſes of the North and Eaſt, 
3 Deborahs, Boadiceas, Joan D* Arcs, Elifabeths, 
1 Margarets, Catherines, and Chriſtinas, croud 


upon the © aching ſight.” Nor are the niches 
of poetry and literature unfurniſhed with female 
ornaments, from the muſe of fire of Sappho, 
down to the more chaſtened flame which beams 
in the compoſitions of the female poets, and 
proſe writers, of the preſent day. But, heaven 
defend me from drudging in the mines of hiſtory 
and antiquity, and dragging forth to adorn, and 
ſwell out my flender pages, all the precious 
jewels of ancient, middle, and modern times ! 
Life is too ſhort for ſuch an undertaking. It 
1s enough for my purpoſe that we know, that 
ſuch things as we allude to, have been, and 
are, and are moſt true... 


F 


| 
| 
f 
| 
| 


2443 did, tad = 2 
"hs 


2 — 


— 2. 


— 
U—U— — 
_ 


* Y — 2 1 * 5 N — Fo” 
* R 7 2 
* 7 
ä ———— 
— o* g 1 * 
1 * . — = 


| 
a — N 
1 * ” 
— . 
r 
— 


* — . 
do. — — 
= - P — 


— o — 


' 
: 
1 
* 


. 
— Ong — 
* — A . 
— 
—— — — — 


wil 2 * — 
—U—U—äʒ ⁴ —— — 
. pu 


36 © APPEAL TO THE 


APPEALING therefore, on the one hand, to 


men of reading and information, who are able 


to decide the queſtion upon the evidence of 
well-known and eſtabliſhed facts, which muſt 
readily occur to their memory; and appealing 
on the other to the maſs of mankind, who are 


fully competent to judge, upon the principles 


of common ſenſe, and from daily obſervation ; 


I aſk thoſe of both claſſes, who have ſufficient 
ſtrength of mind to caſt prejudice aſide, whe- 


ther, taking into account the very few women, 


who have received a ſuitable education; the 


numbers who have ſhone, as ſovereigns, as 
legiſlators, in politicks, in literature, and in 
common life; are not out of all proportion 
great? | 


LET it not be ſaid that crowned heads are 
too much out of the common road, to be 
brought forward for examples; for as they are 
neither more nor leſs than men and women, 


they come quite within our ſphere. Queens 


| may at all events be fairly ſtated againſt Kings, 
and I believe will loſe little by the compariſon, 


MEN OPF GREAT BRITAIN, 37 


For, of thouſands of kings who have reigned, 
how few have come down to poſterity, with 
credit of any ſort in proportion to their number! 
Whereas of the few females who have been 
permitted to wield the ſceptre, moſt of them, 
nay nearly all of them, have made themſelves / 
remarkable, in a degree that would have equally 
ſignalized men preciſely in the ſame ſituation, 
and under the ſame circumſtances ; otherwiſe 


the argument falls to the ground, 


THAT this claſs indeed, is particularly fitted 
for the purpoſe of comparing to each other, is 
obvious; becauſe both ſexes of this claſs gene- 
rally receive an education the neareſt upon an 
equality of any other. And what have been 
Juſt what reaſonably 
ſpeaking, was to be expeQed ; that their capa- 


the conſequences ? 


cities and talents appear to be nearly ſo likewiſe, 
Ir then it can hardly be diſputed that women 
the ancients as far as we can learn from the 
extraordinary panegyricks of hiſtorians—the 
moderns from actual and undoubted proofs— 


8 APPEAL To THE 


have ruled with as much glory to themſelves, 
as much benefit to their ſubjects, and as great 
marks of ſound judgment, and knowledge in 


| 


: 
» 


_—— — 
— 


—̃ 
* * — 2 — — - 5 


the arts of government, as the greateſt princes #« 
their contemporaries; I hope it will not appear 


preſumption to ſay, that did women receive 
equal advantages of education, there is every 
reaſon to ſuppoſe, they would equal men in the 
ſublime ſcience of politicks; which as it includes 
the whole art of governing the multitude well 


— 


2 
Dt „ - 
9 — "= — 
— 
- = 


—— — 


+ — hy 
— > 57 
— SAT 
— R - 
* 


in the moſt liberal ſenſe of the word, requires 
not only ſuch talents, as the one ſex is allowed 
to poſſeſs in common with the other; but in- 
cludes likewiſe thoſe, which men are fond of 
arrogating excluſively to themſelves. Such as 
ſtrength of mind, — extenſive foreſight, —genius 


to plan ſchemes of importance, —and reſolution, 
and ſtability to put them in execution; with 
a thouſand et cæteras which will very readily 


occur to men, accuſtomed to ſtring up their 


own ſupenorities; and extremely willing to 


| | | take for granted, without much examination, 
opinions ſo creditable and convenient for them- 
ſelves, 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. 39 


On the capacity of women for politicks I 
ſhall not at preſent enter more minutely; be- 
cauſe it is poſſible I may have occaſion to touch 
more at large upon that topic, before I cloſe | 
my labors, 


TRUSTING again to the candor of my readers, 
and expecting not only forgiveneſs, but credit, | 
for not bringing forward trite, and well known 
facts; ſhall not candor allow, that in the walks 
of literature, women have been ſufficiently con- 
ſpieuous, to forward their pretenſions to equa- | | 
lity in that line likewiſe Keeping always | 
in mind however, and allowing for, thoſe almoſt | 
unſurmountable difficulties which they have 10 
conquer, when they attempt 


—— to climb 
The ſteep where fame's proud templeſhines afar.? 


Ir in the arts and ſciences women have not 1 
ſo frequently excelled, as in politicks and lite - | 
rature ; it is impoſſible to prove that it is not, 
nay there is every probability that it is, becauſe. | 
their education and opportunities have been ſtill 


40 APPEAL TO THE 


leſs ſuited, to give them a chance for perfection 


in theſe; and becauſe their natural delicacy of 


frame, nurſed to a vicious extreme, is here, 


generally ſpeaking, evidently againſt them. I 


. ſay generally ſpeaking, becauſe it is obvious, 


— — — 
ihe +- . - > 
s N 
2 rr 
3 
* — 5 — 
= * 


and frequently lamented by thinking people, 
that both the mental and bodily ſtrength of 


women, even taking them as they are; 


an 


oppreſſed, —a degraded,—and an excluded por- 


tion of the human race; are fully equal to 


= — 2 — wii 
— 2 — 
. * — 
W — — - 
=s 2 —— — — 
aa to — —-— —„—-— 


the perfecting of many of the arts, from which 
they are by the tyranny of faſhion debarred. 


1 4 | | Bur after all that can be ſaid on this ſubject, 
Wt | it is undeniably true, and I mean not to conteſt 
it, that it is in common life that women ſhine 


with moſt luſtre, if their natural talents have 


Il = been at all improved by a proper education ; 


1 6 4 

| i 5 or if even indeed they have not been quaſhed 
1 - 

an +! | ; | . Ry 
! | or perverted by an improper one. 

Wie | | | 

" 


As this portion of my ſubject, that of female 


r 
* 


excellence in common life, is above all open 
1 | to the decifions of common ſenſe, and daily 


then that my readers of all denominations would | 


* 
look around the circle of their acquaintance, 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. 41 


obſervation ; it is not perhaps therefore, the leſs 


likely to be judged without prejudice. I wiſh 


and examine, and recollect in their own minds, 
the characters and conduct of the individuals of 
both ſexes, who compoſe it. And notwith- 
ſtanding the many diſadvantages that women 
labor under, I am not afraid to ſay, that they 
have no cauſe whatever to be aſhamed of the 


compariſon, 


IxpEED 1 believe, to uſe a ridiculous but | 
well underſtood phraſe, they often laugh in 
their fleeves at being obliged to acknowledge 
ſuperiority, where they can diſtinguiſh none; 


except obſtinate ſelf love, and ſome ponderous 


qualities of more weight than value; but no- 
thing that decidedly claims the diſtinction of 
ſuperior genius and rationality, or of intrinſic 


worth and uſefulneſs in common life. 


— — m 


THAT there is ſomething unbending and in- | 
flexible either in the natural or acquired charac- 


4 4 Wn a 
[I ky IT 
EK e ET 
5 > 
— 


— . em 


42 APPEAL TO THE 


ter of man, which by no means belongs to, nor 
is at all affected by the other ſex, nobody pre- 


tends to deny. But it is rather wonderful that 


they ſhould pride themſelves upon this rugged 


quality of the mind Since it has nothing to 


do with that firmneſs and energy of character, 
without which there can be no conſiſtency of 
conduct Since it is equally tenacious of right 


or wrong——And fince it unfits men from 


enjoying happineſs themfelves, or communicat- 
ing it to thoſe about them upon eaſy terms, or 


in all ſituations. x 

Suck as it is however we willingly concede 
this amiable, engaging, and manly virtue, to 
thoſe to whom it may belong; and ſince they are 
ſo fond of it, much good may it do them! But 
we can go no further. It muſt go for nothing, 
or worſe than nothing in any fair eſtimate of 
the talents or good qualities of the ſexes. Nor 
can we be ſo complaiſant as look up as to ſome- 
thing ſuperior, to that, which is neither coun- 
tenanced by reaſon nor religion, and which 


very ſeriouſly influences againſt our happineſs 


and eaſe, 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN 43 


Uron the ſame principles we cannot help 
doubting much, whether becauſe the minds of 
women are more pliable, and yield more readily 
to the preſſure of circumſtances, without alto- 
gether ſinking under them ; that we are thereby 
entitled to brand them with weakneſs or levity. 
That elaſticity in their animal ſpirits, which has 
a conſtant tendency to reftore them to their 


natural ſtate, and which ſupports them wonder- 


fully, under many a trying ſcene, we ſhould 
almoſt be tempted to rank high among the 
virtues, from its analogy to philoſophy and 
common ſenſe, as well as its influence on general 
bappineſs——but that it ſeems to be rather a 
felicity of conſtitution,—a gift of nature. 
given to counterbalance many of the evils of 
life. 


WHATEVER is really frivolous or inconſiſtent 
in the character of woman, I mean not however 
to defend any more than the obſtinacy or pride 
of man. If ſuch are not the effects of bad habits 
raiſed upon wrong education, as I much ſuſpe& 


they chiefly are they are at beſt, but imper- 


G 


44 1; . APPEAL TO: THE 


fections of our nature, which we ſhould endea- 
your to correct, rather than ſoften and indulge. 


In ſhort, - I cannot perhaps explain myſelf 
better, than by ſaying that it appears to me, 
that women, with reſpect to mental abilities, 
compared with men, are like the French nation 
compared to every other nation upon earth ; 
who under the appearance of lightneſs and fri- 
volity, poſleſs a capability of every thing uſeful 
and agreeable, or great and good. 


THEsE obſervations on the characters of wo- 
men are at leaſt ſuch as have occurred to me in 
my progreſs through life; and as freedom of 

_ enquiry gains ground, I _do not find that I am 
— 


a Ix they are well founded then, —if the good 
qualities of the ſex ſhine, and force their way 
N through the artificial cloud that envelopes them; 
E there is not a reaſonable doubt, that if 
| their minds were as much improved to every 
uſeful purpoſe as ſo good a ſoil is capable of 


MEN OF 'GREAT BRITA Nx. 15 


being; much might be added to the happineſs 
and comfort, of domeſtic and ſocial life. 


I now then once more, make a direct appeal 
to the judgment and candor of men, and aſk 
them if upon a fair examination, at leaſt as fair 
an one as can be made under the unfavorable 


circumſtances in which women are placed; the 


compariſon does not turn out. ſhall I dare 
once more to repeat it. beyond all propor- 


q tion favorable on the part of women ? 

4 As this opinion may however partake of 
k prejudice to a favorite ſyſtem, let us drop it, 
and adopt one more likely to be nearer the 


truth; viz. that the abilities and capacities of, 
the ſexes are ſo nearly alike, that with equal ad- 
vantages it were difficult to determine to whom 
the palm were due. And this indeed would 
be quite ſufficient to eſtabliſh our argument, 
and bring us again to that equality, ſo dear to 
every feeling heart and rational head——That 
equality which holds a people, a nation, a world 


450 | APPEAL TO THE 


equipoized-——Not that chimera of the brain, 
| which never was, nor never will be realized. 


I Hors I have faid enough upon this head, 
light as the ſketch neceſſarily is, to perſuade 
reaſonable and temperate people, with what 
their own: obſervation muſt have often ſug- 
geſted, that men have in general indulged 
themſelves in erroneous opinions with reſpeQ 
to the characters and abilities of women. 


6« Implicit faith, all hail! Imperial Man 
% Exacts ſubmiſſion.” | 


YEARSLEY, 


WHAT MEN WQULD HAVE WOMEN TO BE. 
0 


O F all the ſyſtems, —if indeed a bundle of 
contradictions and abſurdities may be called a 
fyſtem, — which human nature in its moments 
of intoxication has produced ; that which men 
have contrived with a view to forming the 


minds, and regulating the condu@ of women, 
is perhaps the moſt completely abſurd. And, 
though the confequences are often very ferious 
to. both ſexes, yet if one could for a moment 
forget thele, and conſider it only as a ſyſtem, 
ir would rather be found a ſubject of mirth and 
ridicule than ferious anger. | 


 WraT @ chaos !l—— What a mixture of 
ſtrength and weakneſs, —of greatneſs and little- 
nefs,—of ſenſe and folly, —of exquiſite feeling 
and total inſenſibility,—have they jumbled to- 
gether in their imaginations, —and then given 
to their pretty darling the name of woman! 


1 48 APPEAL TO THE 
14 How unlike the father of gods and men, tite' 
[| | gay, the gallant Jupiter, who on producing 9 
14 wiſdom the fruit of his brains, preſented it to 'Y 
N admiring worlds under the character of a A 
| 0 | | 3 
female . 4 
, - 
7 
Bor in the- compoſition of Man's woman, J 


wiſdom mult not be ſpoken. of, [nay nor even 
hinted at, yet ſtrange to tell! there it mult be 
in full force, and come forth upon all conve- 
nient occaſions. This is a myſtery which, as 
we are not allowed to be amongſt the initiated, 
we may admire at an awful diſtance, but can 
never comprehed. 5: mod 0: 


12 a A 
0 * 


2 
FE 


? 
4 — 


Ac AlN how great in ſome parts of their 
conduct, and how inſignificant upon the whole; 
would men have women to be! For one ex- 
ample ;— when their love, their pride, their 
delicacy; in-ſhort, when all the fineſt feelings 
of humanity are inſulted and put to the rack, 

ubat is the line of conduct, then expected from 


as 


1 


MEN OF GREAT "BRITAIN, 49 


! 


I NxED not explain that the ſituation I here 


allude to is,. hen a woman finds: that the 


huſband of her choice, the object of her moſt 


ſincere and conſtant love, abandons himſelf to 


other attachments; and not only this, but 


when, — the natural conſequences of theſe,.— 
eſtrangement of affection and eſtrangement of 


confidence follow, which are infinitely cutting 


to a woman of ſenſibility and ſoul; what I ſay. 


is the line of conduct then expected from a 


creature declared to be, weak by nature, and 
who is rendered ſtill weaker by education? 5 
Now here 1s one of thoſe abſurdities of which 
I accuſe men in their ſyſtem of contradictions.” 
They expect that this poor weak creature, ſet- 
ting aſide in a moment, love, jealouſy, and 
pride, the moſt powerful and univerſal paſſions 
interwoven in -the human heart, and which 
even men, clothed in wiſdom and fortitude, 
find ſo difficult to conquer, that they ſeldom 
attempt 1t——that ſhe ſhall notwithſtanding lay 
all theſe aſide as eaſily as ſhe would her gown 
and petticoat, and plunge at once into the cold 


360 APPEAL TO THE 

bath of prudence, of which though the wife 
only is to receive the ſhock, and make daily 
uſe of, yet if the does fo, it has the virtue of 
keeping both huſband and wife in a moſt agree- 
able temperament. Prudence being one of thoſe 
rare medicines which affe& by ſympathy, and 
this being likewiſe one of thoſe caſes, where 
the huſbands have no objections to the wives 
acting as principals, nor to their receiving all 
the honors and emoluments of office; even if 
death ſhould crown their martyrdom, as has 
been ſometimes known to happen. 

Dear, generous creatures! 

Tx1s reminds me of a fingular circumſtance 
which I heard the other day, of a poor man 
who had the misfortune to have a cataract on 
each eye. The one was cut, or extracted, or 
what you pleaſe to call it, and ſuffered as one 
may ſuppoſe the moſt extreme anguiſh, The 
other immediately wore off, or, 1 really don't 
know well how to expreſs myſelf, diſperſed, 
nobody knows how, except by the power of 
- ſympathy ; but certainly without any operation 

being performed upon it. Now this laſt eye, 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN, 51 


this not guiltleſs though unſuffering luminary, 
is what learned phyſicians call the male eye; 
and this operation when followed by ſuch con- 
ſequences, in honor of thoſe conſequences they 
have been pleaſed to diſtinguiſh by a moſt ex- 
preſſive name, which I have however entirely 
forgot; but under it they mean in future to 
claſs, all thoſe caſes, where one part only ſuf- 
fers, and the other receives all the benefit. For, 
I had almoſt forgot to mention, that the poor 
eye on which the experiment was made, ſoon 
« Cloſed in endleſs night.” 1 0 


Bur to return to our ſubject; the ſituations 
before alluded to, though perhaps the moſt 
trying for human nature in general, and to 
minds of ſenſibility in particular, are not the 
only ones prepared for women upon which to 
exerciſe their patience and temper. For, there 
are no vices to which a man addiQs himſelf, 
no follies he can take it into his head to 
commit, but his wife and his neareſt female 


relations are expected to connive at, are ex- 
H 


52 --;- APPEAL. TO, THE 


peed to look upon, if not with admiration, 
at leaſt with reſpectful ſilence, and at awful 
diſtance. Any other conduct is looked upon, 
as a breach of that fanciful ſyſtem of arbitrary 
authority, which men have ſo aſſiduouſly erected 
in their own favor; and any other conduct is 
accordingly reſiſted, with the moſt acrimonious 
ſeverity. - 


A Man, for example, is addiQed to the de- 
ſtructive vice of drinking. His wife ſees with 
terror and anguiſh the approach of this perni- 
cious habit, and by anticipation beholds the 
evils to be dreaded to his individual health, 
happineſs, and conſequence ; and the probable 
miſery. to his family. Vet with this melancholy 
proſpect before her eyes, it is reckoned an un- 
pardonable degree of harſhneſs and imprudence, 


if ſhe by any means whatever endeavour to 
check in the bud, this baleful practice; and ſhe 
is in this caſe accuſed at all hands of driving 
him to purſue in worſe places, that which he 
cannot enjoy in peace at home. And, when 
this diſeaſe gains ground, and ends in an eſta- 


MEN OF GREAT BRITA W. 53 


o 


bliſhed habit, ſhe is treated as a fool for at- 
tempting a cure for what is incurable. : 

Tuus there is no ſtage of this diſorder, or 
any other to which man is morally liable, when 
it is accounted neceſſary or proper for women 
to interfere; or if they do ſo, men ſuppoſe 
themſelves fully juſtified to plunge deeper and 
deeper into thoſe vices, which create moſt 
miſery to their wives, in order to puniſh their 
preſumption. And thus it is that the defigns 
of Providence ſeem to be counteracted, by the 
pride and obſtinacy of man. For, the defign 
of Providence ſeems evidently to be,——that 
the ſexes ſhould reſtrain, diſcourage, and pre- 
vent vice in each other; as much as they ſhould 


encourage, promote, and reward virtue. 


| Acain, women are often connected with 
men, whoſe ſhameful extravagance leave little 
for their families to hope for, but poverty, and 
the conſequent neglect of a hard-hearted world. 
In this caſe perhaps, in the little ſphere in which 
ſhe is permitted to move, a wife may likewiſe 


54 APPEAL TO THE 


be permitted to economiſe; but the fruits of 


her economy are ſtill at the mercy of an impe- 
rious maſter, who thinks himſelf entitled to 
ſpend upon his unlawful pleaſures, what might 
have procured her, innocent enjoyment, and 
rational delight. And, I am ſorry to add, that 


the men in general are but too apt in theſe 
caſes, as well as upon moſt other occaſions, to 


take the part of their own ſex; and to conſider 
nothing as blameable in them to ſuch a degree, 


as to juſtify oppoſition from the women con- 
nected with them. 


: 


| 


; 


Acain, women of liberal ſentiments and ex- 
panded hearts, 


-and ſurely there are ſuch, 


in conſequence of good, or in ſpite of bad 


education, who would willingly employ 


fortune in acts of benevolence and ſchemes of 


beneficence; are connected with men, ſordid in 


principle, rapacious in acquiring riches, and 
contemptibly mean in reſtraining them from 


returning again into ſociety, through their 


proper channels. Woman here again is the 


ſport, of the vices and infirmities of her tyrant; 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. 55 


and however formed by nature to virtue and 
benevolence,—however trained by education,— 
here ſhe finds all this againſt her. Here ſhe 
finds that her time and endeavours would have a 
been much more happily employed, in ſtrength- 
ening the oppoſite habits of ſelfiſhneſs, and 
uncharitableneſs. Since, the higheſt pitch of 
| virtue, to which a woman can poſhbly aſpire 
on the preſent ſyſtem of things; is to pleaſe her 
Huſband, in whatever line of conduct pleaſing 
him conſiſts. And, to this great end, this one 
thing needful, men are impolitic enough to 
advance, and to expect, that every thing elſe | 
ſhould be ſacrificed. Reaſon, religion, —or at 
| leaſt many of the moſt® important maxims of 
religion, — private judgment, prejudices; all 
theſe, and much more than theſe muſt be 
ſwallowed up in the gulph of authority; which 
requiring every thing as a right, diſdains to 
return any thing but as a conceſſion. 


I wisk not however to be miſunderſtood, if 
even but for a moment; for though this is not 
the place to enlarge upon the ſubject, it muſt 


56 APPEAL ro THE 


be acknowledged, that to pleaſe a reaſonable 
and worthy huſband, —let me repeat my own 
words, —in whatever pleaſing him conſiſts, ts 
bne of the moſt heartfelt, and pureſt pleaſures, 
which a woman ſuch. as ſhe ought to be, can 
poſſibly enjoy. But for women to be obliged 
to humor the follies, the caprice, the vices of 
men of a very different ſtamp, and to be obliged 
to conſider this as their duty; is perhaps as 
unfortunate a ſyſtem of politics in morals, as 
ever was introduced for degrading the human 
| ſpecies, 
' TI coviy here enumerate numberleſs in- 
ſtances, of WHAT MEN WOULD HAVE WOMEN 
ro BE, under circumſtances the moſt trying and 
the moſt humiliating z but as I neither wiſh to 
tire out the reader nor myſelf with what may 
be well imagined without repetition, I ſhall 
only ſay ; that though they are allowed, and 
even expected, to aſſume upon proper occa- 
ſions, and when it happens to indulge the 
paſſions, or fall in with the humors of men, 
all that firmneſs of character, and greatneſs of 


j 


MEN OF GREAT, BRITAIN. : 57 


mind commonly eſteemed maſculine ; yet this/ 
is in ſo direct oppoſition, and ſo totally incon- 
ſiſtent with that univerſal weakneſs, which men 
firſt endeavour to affix upon women for their 
own convenience, and then for their own de- 
fence affect to admire; that really it requires 
more than female imbecility and credulity to 
ſuppoſe that ſuch extremes can unite with any 
degree of harmony, in ſuch imperfe& beings 
as we all of us, men and women, muſt acknow- 
ledge ourſelves to be. And therefore, except 
a woman has ſome ſchemes of her own to ac- 
compliſh by this ſort of management,—which 
neceſlity is moſt galling to an ingenuous mind ; 
or except ſhe is herſelf a mere nothing,—in 
which cafe her merit is next to nothing; theſe 
violent extremes,— theſe violent exertions of 
the mind,—are by no means natural or volun- 
tary ones; but are on the contrary at variance 


with nature, with reaſon, and with common 
ſenſe. 


INDEED by preparatory tortures any mode 
of conduct, however unnatural, may be forced 
upon individuals. 


\ 


38 APPEAL TO THE 


Even inferior animals are taught not only 


to dance, but to dance to appearance in time, 
and with alacrity, when their tyrant pipes. 
Bears and Turkeys for example. But we ought 
not to forget, that to produce theſe wonderful 
exertions; the firſt have had their eyes put out, 
fo render them more docile to the cruel caprice 
of man; and that nothing leſs than hot iron 
applied to the feet of the latter, had furniſhed 
that ſingular ſpectacle, with which many had 
the barbarity to be amuſed. 


80 alas! women oſten go through ſcenes 
with apparent cheerfulneſs, that did the moſt 
indifferent ſpectators, but conſider what ſuch 
appearances muſt have previouſly coſt them, 
they would execrate the mean and ſordid ſyſ- 
tem; and join in endeavouring to expel from 
Tociety thoſe errors in theory, which produce 
ſuch conſequences in practice. For, from ex- 
ertions made under ſuch circumſtances, 
againſt nature,—againſt reaſon, — and againſt 
common ſenſe ; — can good be expected ? 

Can ſuch mend the underſtanding, or purify 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. 59 
the heart? No, never! On the contrary they 
debaſe the one, and they corrupt the other. 
But it is a melancholy truth, that the whole 
ſyſtem raiſed and ſupported by the men, tends 


to, nay I muſt be honeſt enough to ſay hangs 
upon, degrading the underſtandings, and cor- 


rupting the hearts of women; and yet! they 


are unreaſonable enough to expect, diſcrimina- 
tion in the one, and purity in the other. 


Tuis may be deemed a harſh judgment, but 
I fear it is in the main a true one; yet it admits 
of ſoftening, which pleaſing taſk I ſhall take 
upon myſelf, in another diviſion of this ſketch. 


In the mean time may I be permitted to 
adviſe men to conſider, whether it would not 
be better for them to be more conſiſtent, and 
not quite ſo unreaſonable, with regard to their 
expectations as to the character and conduct of 
women ?. And may I be permitted to add, more 
guarded and exemplary in their own? For, 
rhough men declare themſelves ſuperior to 


women in degree, yet in kind they muſt ac- 


+” | 


——I 2 : 


2 


x — 3 Gr ; ye 2 wands FER” —— ͤ— — 


60 APPEAL TO THE 


knowledge themſelves ſo cloſely akin, that their 
example by the very ſuperiority they claim, 1s 
of the greater neceſſity, becauſe the more likely 
to be followed. Indeed, if carrying every thing 
agreed upon by the common ſenſe of mankind to 
be called good, to its utmoſt perfection on the 
one hand; and if on the other, ſuppreſſing every 
baſer paſſion, compoſe what we call virtue; and 
if that virtue is not to be reduced to a name, a 
mere political engine in the hands of the moſt 
powerful. Where is perfection to be ex- 


pected in it but in man? here but in him 
who declares himſelf to be — Lord paramount, 
of the creation? Why will not people conſider 
how much more difficult it is to ſupport, than 
to aſſume ſuperiority of character! 


NorwirHsTAN DING this declaration of their 
don ſuperiority however, it is a compliment 
which men are by no means backward in paying 
to women, that they are better formed by nature 
than themſelves, for the perfection of virtue; 
and eſpecially of thoſe virtues which are of moſt 
difficult attainment, and which occur moſt com- 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. 61 


monly in life. Perhaps this may be true; but 


if ſo, it is granting all and more than I wiſn; 


for the moment that this is admitted, you either 
degrade virtue and all good morals, by ſuppoſing 
chem capable of being beſt perfected by, and 
beſt ſuited for, beings of an inferior order 
upon which terms no order of rational beings 
can be ſuppoſed very anxious about the attain- 
ment of them—Or, leaving theſe, I mean virtue 


and good morals, in their proper places, and 


ſuppoſing them inherent in the ſoul of man, 
becauſe planted there by the hand of God ; and 
yet ſtill inſiſting on the neceſſity and propriety 
of women practiſing them, in a {ſtricter degree 
than men; you from that moment, I ſay, tacitly 


grant to women, that ſuneriority of mind, 


which you have not generoſity enough openly | 


to avow, 


Bur we relinquiſh willingly this kind of pre- 
Ference which you force upon us, and which 
we have no title to; and which indeed is an 
intolerable burthen in the way you contrive to 


adminiſter it ; and inſtead of this, we only en- 


62 APPEAL TO THE 


treat of you to be fair, to be candid, and to 
admit, that both ſexes are upon a footing of 
equality, when they are permitted to exert in 
their different ſpheres of action, the talents their 
Creator has been pleaſed to beſtow upon them. 


Do not therefore endeavour to degrade wo- 
men on the one hand, and in every material 
point in life, and then ſuppoſe you make it up 
to them, by a few idle ceremonies and unmean- 
ing words; which as Sir Henry Wotton ſays of 
the new behaviour and habits introduced by 
Willam the Conqueror among the Engliſh ; 
are under ſhew of civility, in effect but rudi- 
ments of ſubjection.“ Do not endeavour to 
Hatter them into the belief, that they ought to 
practiſe virtues which you almoſt confeſs to be 
above your reach, and which are indeed ſevere 
taſks upon humanity when not founded upon 
certain principles, and urged on by adequate 
motives; but which when they are ſo, good 
conſequences muſt as naturally follow, as phy- 


ſical effects enſue, in conſequence of their 
cauſes. 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. 63 


Do not then expect to join the extremes of 
active virtue, and paſſive obedience, in the 
characters and conduct of women, for they are 
incompatible. You may indeed ſay to women, 
as the Scripture I believe does to us all, © Be 


ye wiſe as ſerpents, and harmleſs as doves ; | 


for theſe qualities of the mind are by no means 
at variance. Wiſdom is never ſo ſure of our 
eſteem, nor ever appears ſo amiable, as when 
accompanied by innocence and ſimplicity of 
manners. But had the Bible itſelf ſaid, as you 
do to women in as many words, Be ye wiſe as 
ſerpents, and fooliſh as turkey pouts ; 


why 
J really don't know well how we ſhould have 


managed matters,. believe we muſt have 


remonſtrated a little but! am ſure it would 
have been impoſſible to have obeyed. 


Once for all then, for heaven's ſake! give 


you us good example as well as preaching, or 
I ſhould rather ſay inſtead of preaching, for 
really the one has a wonderful effect upon peo- 
ple, and the other very little. And ſurely for 


this very reaſon, that they go ſo ſeldom hand 
in hand, 


1 hr „% — 2 4 — 9 


7 A . 


2 


- * 
— oy —— ——d 2 . ůZ]—I m 2 


— — 
— — — 


% 22 


A 
* 
' - , 
22: ͤů — . ↄ U ˙ — << ee — 2 — 050 ve. » 


_ APPEAL TO THE 


I BEG leave to preſent to you the following 
well known Fable. And though I am very 
confident it has never before been applied, as 
it infallibly muſt upon the preſent occaſion ;— 
yet © if the cap fits,” it is juſt as . as if 
made on purpoſe. 


* LE LOUP MORALISTE. 


© FABLE, 


© Un loup a ce que dit Phiſtoire, 
© Voulut donner un jour des legons a ſon fils, 
Et lui graver dans la mémoire, 
Pour etre honnẽte loup, de beaux & bons avis. 
© Mon fills, lui diſoit-il, dans ce déſert ſauvage, 
A Pombre des forets vous paſſerez vos jours; 
© Vous pourrez cependant avec les petits ours, 
© Goliter les doux plaiſirs qu'on permet a votre age. 
« Contentez-vous du-peu que jamaſſe pour vous: 
Point de larcin z menez une innocente vie: 
Point de mauvaiſe compagnie: 
« Choiſiſſez pour amis les plus honnetes loups. 
Ne vous dEmentez point, ſoyez toujours le meme, 
Ne ſatisfaites point vos appẽtits gloutons ; 
Mon fils, jeunez plitdt l Avent & le Careme ; 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. 65 


© Que de ſucer le ſang des malheureux moutons; 
Car enfin, quelle barbarie ! 

Quels crimes ont commis ces innocens agneaux ? 

Au reſte vous ſgavez qu'il y va de la vie: 

P' enormes chiens d<fendent les troupeaux. 

C Helas je m'en ſouviens, un jour votre grandpere, 

Pour appaiſer ſa faim entra dans un Hameau : 

© Des qu'on s'en appergut: 6 bete carnaciere, 

Au loup, $&cria-t-on ? Pun 8'arme d'un hoyau, 

© L'/autre prend une fourche, & mon pere eut beau faire, 
© Helas ! il y laiſſa ſa peau: 

© De ſa témeritè ce fut la le ſalaire. 

* Sois ſage a ſes depens, ne ſuis que la vertu, 

Et ne ſois point battant de peur d'Ctre battu, 

Si tu m' aimes, deteſte un vice que jabhorre. 

Le petit vit alors, dans la gueule du loup, 4 

De la laine & du ſang qui dẽgoutoit encore, 
© Il ſe mit a rire a ce coup. 

Comment, petit Fripon, dit le loup en colore, 
Comment vous riez des avis | 
Que vous donne ict votre pere 

Tu ſeras un Veaurien, va, je te le predis: | 

© Quoi! ſe moquer d&ja d'un conſeil ſalutaire ! 


© L#autre répondit en riant, 


Mon pere, je ferai ce que je vous vois faire, 
© VOTRE EXEMPLE EST UN BON GARANT.“ | | 


D ——_— 


Reaſon we reſign ; 

Aga our ſenſes we adopt the plan | 
Which reverence, fear, and folly think divine. 
YEARSLEY- 


WHAT WOIEN ARE. 


To fay what women 200 are, would be 4 
very difficult taſk indeed; we muft therefore 
endeavour, to deſcribe them by negatives. As, 
perhaps, the only thing that can be advanced 
with certainty on the fubject, is. what they 
are nt.” For it is very clear, that they are 
not what they ought to be, that they are nbt 
what men would have them to be, and to 
finiſh the portrait, that they are not what 
they appear to be. Indeed, indeed, they cannot 
fay with honeſt” Hamlet, that they © know'not 
what feem is.“ I hope however that theſe ob- 
fervations will not be confidered as a libel upon 
the ſex; for as this inconſiſtency and uncer- 
tainty of character is a matter of neceſſity and 
not of choice, they are rather objects of pity 
than of blame. And as their defects are gente- 
K 


68 APPEAL TO THE 


rally ſpeaking, I preſume, thoſe of education, 
rather than of nature, the men have more ſub- 


je& for remorſe than triumph, 


THar I may endeavour to eſtabliſh in ſome 
degree what I have advanced, let us examine a 
little on what footing women are placed in 
this, or indeed in any other country; and if 
laying aſide prejudice, it is obvious to common 
ſenſe, that their ſituation is againſt them in 


more points than in their favour ; and if it is 


particularly againſt that candor and honeſt ſim- 
plicity of heart and manner, without which no 
character can be really and intrinſically valu- 


wle if upon examination all this appear 


to be true, I hope it will help to extenuate the 


imputed faults of the ſex. And it ought cer- 
tainly to induce men to give up ſome of thoſe 
high pretenſions, which are as little calculated 
to produce real happineſs in domeſtic life, to 
the one party as the other. Indeed I moſt 
firmly believe, and it cannot be too often 
repeated, that the greateſt difficulty is to 
bring men to conſider the ſubject with atten- 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. 59 


uon; which if they once did, there is every 
reaſon to hope, that they would of themſelves 
be inclined to do juſtice. 


In the firſt place then, I hold it as an infal- 
lible truth, and a truth that few will attempt 
to deny; that any race of people, or I ſhould 
rather ſay any claſs of rational beings, —— 
though by no means inferior originally in intel- 


lectual endowments,—may be held in a ſtate 

of ſubjection and dependence from generation 
to generation, by another party, who, by a 
variety of circumſtances, none of them depend- 
ing on actual, original ſuperiority of mind, may 
have eſtabliſhed an authority over them. And 
it muſt be acknowledged a truth equally infal- 
lible, that any claſs ſo held in a ſtate of ſub- 
jection and dependence, will degenerate both, 
in body and mind, 


We: have for examples of this, only to con- 
template the characters and conduct of the de- 
ſcendants of the Egyptians, the Greeks, the Ro- 
mans, and other nations, living under the ſame 


75 APPEAL TO THE 


climates, and upon the very-ſame ſoil, where theix 
renowned anceſtors flouriſhed in arts, and tri- 
umphed in arms; and to conſider to what a ſtate 
of degradation and humiliation they are now re- 
duced! On theſe reflections, however, it is un- 
neceſſary here to enlarge; we have only to 
bring home the application to the ſtate of women 
in general, who, degraded and humiliated in 
ſociety, and held in a conſtant ſtate of depend- 
ence, can it be wondered, that they have 
loſt even the idea of what they might have been, 
or what they {till might be ? For they are con- 
fined, not only within thoſe bounds, which 
nature and reaſon unite in preſcnbing for the 
real happineſs and good of mankind ;. and in 
which every virtuous and well informed mind 
acquieſces, as much from choice as neceſſity; 
but they are likewiſe bound by chains, of ſuch 
enormous weight and complicated form, that 
the more they are conſidered, the leſs hope 
remains of being able to unlooſe them by per- 
ſeverance, or break through them by force. 
Or if ſame impelled by an ardent love of liberty, 
by genius, or by deſpair, 5 burſt their bonds 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. 71 


aſunder, and caſt their cords away Alas! 
the conſequences too often are Ruin to the 
individual, without benefit to the whole. 


WomMEN therefore, generally ſpeaking, act a 
wiſer and a better part as individuals, to keep 
within that boundary preſcribed for them by 
their lawgivers, Within it they often contrive 
to do miſchief enoygh ; without it who can 
pretend to ſay where the miſchief might end? 
For, candidly ſpeaking, perhaps it would be 
dangerous to truſt women all at once, with 
liberty in that extent which is their due, 


Bur it is to be regretted, that the temperance 
and good ſenſe ſhewn by women, in ſubmitting 
with ſo good a grace to injuries, which though 
they cannot redreſs, they nevertheleſs feel very 
ſeverely; it is much to be regretted, that this 
temperance and good ſenſe, is not attended 
with better conſequences to themſelves, 


InpeeD their fate in this reſpect is extremely 
bard; for every method they can attempt, 


* T 
- ; — * r 
5 — - ; " << SV Kc X 2 = 
— * 1 F + 72 8 1 » mW. - *: > — 
m - wy 


Es 


— — 
* 1 
— 4K es os ed 


= TE 
— = 


- _ * 
A . "RN 
— + 


— .. —— —— 


_ proviſions to ſell. © Dear Jacky,” ſaid the ſiſter, 


72 APPEAL TO THE 


to improve their ſituation, is equally ineffi- 


cacious. Silence and ſubmiſſion are looked 


upon as proofs of acquieſcence and content; 
and men will hardly of themſelves, ſeek to im- 
prove a ſituation, with which many are appa- 
rently ſatisfied. On the,other hand any marks 


of ſpirit, or ſenſe of injury, or deſire to better 


their ſituation either as individuals or in ſociety ; 


is treated not only with contempt, but abhor- 


rence; and ſo far from gaining any thing by 
propoſing reaſonable and equitable terms for 


themſelves in either caſe, the generality of men 
are enraged at the attempt; and would upon 
theſe occaſions think it no crime to rob the 
poor culprits, of the wretched, ill underſtood, 
and worſe inforced rights that remain to them. 


Taz following little ſtory, illuſtrates well the 
progreſs of lawleſs authority ; and is applicable 
enough to our ſubject. 


A BroTHes and Siſter were one day going 
to market with ſome eggs, and other country 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN, 


after a good deal of conſideration, and not a 
little proud of her powers of calculation 


7 


Dear Jacky, you have ſomehow made a very 
unfair diviſion of our eggs, of which you know 
it was intended that we ſhould have equal 
ſhares; ſo pray give me two dozen of yours, 
and I ſhall then have as many as you have.” 
No,“ ſays John, John Bull as likely as 
any John, that would never do; but dear, 


ſweet, pretty ſiſter Peg, give me one dozen of 
yours, and then I ſhall have five times as many 
as you have; which you know will be quite 
the ſame as if you had them yourſelf, or indeed 
better ; as I ſhall ſave you the trouble of carry- 
ing them, ſhall protect you and the reſt of your 
property, and ſhall beſides give you many fine 
things when we get to the fair Bleſs me, 
Margaret! what is the matter with you? How 
frightful you always are when in a paſſion! 
And how horribly ugly you look whenever you 
contradict me! I wiſh poor Ralph the miller 
ſaw you juſt now, I'm ſure he'd never look at 
you again, Beſides, ſiſter of mine, ſince you 


force me to it, and provoke me beyond all 


74 : APPEAL TO THE 

bearing, I muſt tell you, that as I am ſtronger 
than you, I can take them whether you will or 
no.” The thing was no ſooner ſaid than done, 
and poor Peg, found herſelf obliged to ſubmit 
to ſomething much more convincing than her 
brother's logic. e 


Ox they jogged however together, Peg pout- 
ing all the way, and John not a bit the civiler 
for having got what he knew in his heart he 
had no title to; and when they got to the fair, 
poor Peg's property, of which he was to have 
been the faithful guardian, and careful ſteward; 
went with his own, to purehaſe baubles and gin 
for his worthleſs favorite. But then, had not 
Peg pretended to put herſelf upon a footing of 
equality with him; or had ſhe even after all, 
but calmly and quietly given up her own rights 
without murmuring,——nothing fo eaſy as that, 
till it comes home to a man's own eaſe he 
ſwore manfully that there ſhould not have been 
a word between them. 


Tnus goes the world! And a pretty farce it 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. T5 


is l——And ſuch are the weighty arguments 
uſed to deprive women of rights, of which, 
were they-on the contrary put in full poſſeſ- 
ſion, and taught the right uſe, would not only 
encreaſe their own ſtock. of happineſs ; but, 
however it might affect individuals, which can 
never be guarded againſt in any ſyſtem, or any 
plan of reformation whatever, would certainly 
meliorate the maſs of humanity upon the whole. 
And, affected as this phraſe may appear, it is 
the only idea I have, or definition I can give, 
of rational reformation, or poſlible perfection, 
in our preſent ſtate, 


Bur to return to our ſubject, let me aſk; is 
it wonderful ſince women cannot be in reality 


5 what men would have them to be, though they 


muſt often endeavour to appear ſo; ſince they 
dare not be what they really ought to be, be- 
cauſe it claſhes with the pretenſions and preju- 
dices of the ſtronger party; ſince they are 
compelled upon the one hand and reſtrained 
upon the other is it wonderful I ſay if 
they purſue a trifling, a diſſipated, and often a 
L 


76 APPEAL TO THE 


hypocritical and vicious conduct? Or in other 
words, is it wonderful if they are what they 
are? I believe I may readily anſwer the queſ- 
ton. It is not wonderful. It is perfectly in 
the courſe of nature. It is an effect, reſulting 
of neceſſity from a cauſe. © 


Fur ſeeds of pride and vanity, are originally 
planted in the breaſt of every human being, 
man and woman; for in fact they differ but 
little. Or ſhall we ſay the ſeeds of ambition; 
for the ſame things are often called by diffe- 
rent names; and men are aſhamed of even 
acknowledging under one, that which they 
boaſt of under another. By whatever name 
we chuſe however, to diſtinguiſh the paſſion 
to which we allude, it is a certain tendency, 
a certain inexplicable impulſe in the mind to 
riſe, which prompts us to excel by ſome means 
or other. The ſeeds of this, like thoſe of 
all the other paſſions, are planted by a wiſe 
and unerring hand; and reaſon and experience 


| = prove to us, that according to the manage- 
1 ment of theſe, the conſequences are, They 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. 77 


are evidently calculated to produce pleaſure 
and utility on the whole, when kept within 
due bounds, and directed to proper objects; 
but if theſe rules are neglected, they as evidently 
tend to deſtruction. Now this paſſion to dif- 
tinguiſh themſelves,——this rage to excel. 
women are admitted to poſſeſs in as great per- 
fection, if not perhaps in a ſtronger degree 
than men, With this difterence only, - that 
when applied to woman it commonly receives 
the denomination of vanity, or at beſt of pride; 
but I think ſeldom or never of ambition. No 
that high ſounding term, is too ſublime for 
woman ; and is reſerved to varniſh over the 
paſſions, and crimes of man; while thoſe of 
the other ſex, called by their proper names, 
and ſeen in their natural colours, impoſe not 
on mankind. | 


TRE different objects however on which the 
vanity, or the pride, or the ambition of the 
ſexes are employed, give a diſtinction and 
ſuperiority to the men, to which they are by 
no means entitled in reality; becauſe it is not 


78 ApPEAL TO THE 


yet clearly proven, that the choice of every 
thing that is moſt conſequential, decorous, 
pleaſant, and profitable for their own ſphere of 
action, is not an uſurpation; and for other power- 
ful reaſons, which would lead into too large a 
field of controverſy if here touched upon. I re- 
peat however, that men are by no means entitled 
to ſuperior reſpe& and conſideration upon ſuch 
grounds, when we reflect ; that women are com- 
pelled on the one hand to adopt a conduct they 
cannot approve of, nor feel eaſy and natural; 
and are reſtrained on the other, from the ex- 
erciſe of one more congenial to the rights of 
human nature; and therefore it is very difficult 
to ſay if they were not thus limited, how far it 
might not appear that they are equal to any 
ſphere of action however great or good. 


Bur taking women on the footing they now 
are, and on which they will probably remain 
for ſome time at leaſt, the tide of their paſſions 
muſt waſte itſelf upon ſomething; and thus 
being forced into wrong channels, there it 
flows ; but for the honour of the ſex I truſt. 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. 7h 


Still it murmurs as it flows, 


Panting for its native home.” 


Thus many a good head is ſtuffed with ribbons, 
gauze, fringes, flounces, and furbelows, that 
might have received and communicated, far 


other and more noble impreſſions. And many 


a fine imagination has been exhauſted upon 


theſe, which had they been turned to the ſtudy 
of nature, or initiated into the dignified embel- 
liſhments of the fine arts, might have adorned, 
delighted, and improved ſociety. For oh! what 
patience and induſtry, what time and trouble, 
what acute obſervation, what intenſe thought, 
what ceaſeleſs anxiety, what hopes and fears, 
alternately elate and depreſs thy trembling ſpirit, 
thou buſy prieſteſs of vanity! The half of the 
talents, the perſeverance, the reſolution and at- 
* tention, hadſt thou been but a man; might have 
| placed thee on the woolſack, or have put a mitre 
on thy head, or a long robe on thy back, or a 
truncheon in thy hand. Or, being even what 
thou art, the fiftieth part of thy miſemployed 
talents if turned into proper channels, might 
have made thee what is tantamount, to a Chan- 


I 


— — — mm 2 
— 


1 — — wa; — = 
em T nn OOO — — — — — 
. — — * 1 7 2 — w —_— wo 25 4 . 8 * 
* bs - pag * - 
* . * ol "s 
\ uy - 4 12 — =p wade — 
* as 1 _ - — —_— — — Us A py — bt * 
J py — 8 * of 
N , 4 : — — 
5 — — a — — ä — — . = * = —— - — 

2 


— — 
— wy 5 
— gg. 
—_— 


8 REY APPEAL TO THE 


cellor, a Biſhop, a Judge, or a General 
An uſeful, an amiable, and an intereſting 


Woman. 


Tux mind, as we have before ſaid, muſt be 
occupied one way or other, well or ill; and 
therefore after the firſt merely animal duties 
are performed, the remaining void muſt be 
filled up ; and indeed much time remains that 
cannot be occupied well, by people whoſe fitua- 


tion places them above the neceſſity of habits 


of induſtry. For, to be accompliſhed even in 
the elegant arts, requires habits of induſtry and 
attention, and to be accompliſhed in theſe is 


therefore not the lot of every one; and though 


moſt women of the middling and higher claſſes, 
aim at this in the courſe of their education, yet 
few in compariſon acquire them, or acquiring 
retain them in a ſufficient degree, to render 
them amuſing, or intereſting in after life. 


. * DowzsTic duties have ever been recom- 


mended 'to women, as the moſt uſeful and 
meritorious occupation in which they can paſs 


MEN Or GREAT BRITAIN. 81 


their time; and againſt them, who ſhall dare 
to lift their voice? for in the right exerciſe 
of theſe, are beſt laid the foundations of all 
the virtues and charities. In the ſweet circle 
of domeſtic life we may venture to affirm, that 
the ſeeds of every virtue publick and private, 
and in both ſexes, are planted and nouriſhed 
to beſt advantage. 


THERE are however reaſons, which I ſhall 
perhaps hereafter touch upon, that prevent 
theſe from being held in eſtimation among 
women of the higher claſſes; and falling into 
diſuſe among them, the middle ranks of courſe 
follow their example. Alas! what can women 
be expected to do? Driven and excluded from 
what are commonly eſteemed the conſequential 
offices of life denied, and perhaps with 
reaſon and propriety too, any political exiſt- 
ence ; | 


——and literary talents and acquire- 


ments, nay genius itſelf, being in them generally 


regarded rather with contempt or jealouſy, than 


meeting with encouragement and applauſe 


nothing in ſhort being left for them, but do- 


againſt them, baniſhes them from ſociety ; they 


82 APPEAL TO. THE 


' meſtic duties, and ſuperficial accompliſhments 


and vanities——ls it ſurpriſing, that inſtead of 
doing as men bid them, they in ſome degree, 
and as far as particular- circumſtances permit, 


do as men do; 


that laying aſide. dull pre- 
cept, they follow the more animating power of 
example; that fpoiled by proſperity and 
goaded on by temptation and the allurements 
of pleaſure, they give a looſe rein to their paſ- 
ſions, and plunge headlong into folly and 


diſſipation; regardleſs in an eminent degree of 


their family, their fame, and their fortune, if 
they can but indulge in the idle vagaries of the 
preſent moment; to the utter extinction of 


thought, moderation, or ſtrict morality? And, 


if they but ſhun that, which when fully proven 


think they ſacrifice ſufficiently to decency and 


duty. And indeed when compared with the 
conduct of the men, they do ſo. 


Ir this ſentence, which 1 preſume to pro- 
nounce on à conſiderable portion of my own 
ſex, be deemed ſevere; let me be permitted ts 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. 83 


appeal to the votaries of faſhion themſelves; 
and let their own hearts tell, whether or not I 
judge harſhly of their conduct. 


CerTAIinLY I mean not this as a cenſure 
adapted without exception to one particular 
claſs; for in no claſs, in no rank whatever, 
are there women of more exalted virtue, or 
more exemplary conduct than many in high 
life; and whoſe merit is magnified, and multi- 
plied ten thouſand fold, by the conſideration of 
their reſiſtance to bad example, to temptation, 
and to the moſt dangerous of all privileges 
that of committing folly with impunity. But 
ſtill I revert to my argument, and appeal again 
to their own hearts, for the general truth of my 
aſſertions. 


Is this to be aſcribed to their mode of edu- 
cation; or is it not? In part perhaps it is; and 
yet a great portion of their education is good. 
The theoretical part at leaſt is excellent; for 1 
believe there are few teachers public or private, 
who would not be aſhamed and afraid, inde- 
M 


84 | APPEAL TO THE 


pendent of conſcientious feelings, to inculcate 
any thing directly againſt religion or morality. 
The practical part too, as far as it goes, is 
much of it good; as it tends to the habits of 
order, diſcipline, and application; though that 
theſe are often miſplaced and miſemployed can- 
not well be denied, and eſpecially by one who 
of courſe reſts much of the neceſſity of a new 
ſyſtem of education, on the faults and blemiſhes 
of the preſent. 


Tux fact is that education properly ſpeak- 
ing, that is, the foundation of character, is begun 
and ended at home; before children go to, and 
after they leave ſchools; and to theſe periods 
perhaps, reformation ſhould be applied with 
moſt vigor and leaſt heſitation. But the con- 
ſideration of this part of our ſubject, belongs 
to another diviſion of this ſketch. In the mean 
time we may obſerve here that the general con- 
duct of the ſexes to each other, before any par- 
ticular or laſting engagements are made, is very 
unfavorable to the virtue and good conduct of 
both. Women do not find it their intereſt to 


. 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN, 85 


tell men the truth before marriage, and after- 
wards alas! they dare not. Men it is true 
compound the matter with them for a ſeaſon, 
and while youth and beauty is on their fide; 


by the groſſeſt, the moſt general, and unmean- 


ing flattery ; and this ſort of mutual impoſition, 
is reduced into a ſyſtem of licenſed hypoeriſy 
on both ſides, till the day of inquiſition arrives; 
and when men become huſbands and fathers, 
—— that day is near at hand. Then it is, 
that the 


a few ſolitary inſtances excepted, 
romance of life, the enchanted proſpect vaniſhes, 
as if by the touch of magic; and then it is ge- 
nerally ſpeaking that the reality of life com- 


mences. 


So far however all is fair and equal on both 
ſides; and reaſon muſt at times have anticipated, 


that the enthuſiaſm of love was of a nature too 


volatile to laſt for ever. No reaſonable woman, 


no woman with a ſpark of common ſenſe, dreams 


thar a huſband is to continue a lover, in the 


romantic ſenſe of the word; or if ſhe does ſo 
ſhe is ſoon undeceived, and very properly forced 


86 - APPEAL TO THE 


to ſubmit to reaſon. But what is infinitely ab- 
ſurd and unfair, though undeniably true; men 
coming under the ſame deſcription, men other- 
wiſe wiſe enough, and reaſonable enough, to 
outward appearance ; do feriouſly ſuppoſe that 
their wives are to turn out, the angels, their 
| imaginations had painted. Or if they do not 
ſeriouſly fuppoſe it, which after all is poſſible, 
they act preciſely as if they did. They either 
expect, or affect to expect, that the ſame ſweet- 
neſs of temper, the fame equality and flow of 
ſpirits, the fame eagerneſs to pleaſe, ſhall uni- 
formly prevail in the wife; when the amiable, 
the devoted lover, is metamorphoſed into the 
ſullen and tyrannical huſband. Such expecta- 
tions however, are above the reach of almoſt 
any human being to fulfil; and from ſuch un- 
reaſonable and unfair expectations may often 
therefore be traced, the many diſagreements 
and difappointments which but too frequently 
occur in that ſtate, which 1s certainly, however, 
of all others in this fublunary world; that moſt 
capable of promoting and preſerving, —pure, 
lafting, and intereſting attachments. 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. 87 


Alas! were men but half as anxious, to 
fulfil their own ſhare of the engagements entered 
into in the moſt important concern in life, as 
they are to preſs home matrimonial duties upon 


women, all might be well; but unfortunately *_ 


for themſelves, as well as thoſe connected with 
them, they place their happineſs, and what they 
ſeem to value more. their conſequence, —— 
in being indulged and humored beyond all rea- 
ſonable bounds, in whatever mode their fancy 
or paſſions ſuggeſt. 


In matters of great and important concern, 
women are generally ſoon taught to underſtand, 
that they ought to have, and can claim, no 
weight whatever. They then naturally think 
that the leſſer ones, mere family matters, thoſe 
of taſte, of ornament, or faſhion, may be left 
to them; but even here they are miſtaken and 
miſinformed ; for their ſhare in the management 
of home, and domeſtic concerns, lies entirely | 
at the mercy of the huſbands, who except they 
are more than human, will rather be guided by 
their own caprice, than by the exact rules of 


Sg.  - APPEAFP, TO THE 


equity. Except therefore, when the ſtation and 
fortune are fo great, that each can afford to live 
in their own way without the interference of 
the other; as is the caſe in high life, where 
men are in a manner compelled to ſhare with 
their wives in ſome degree that liberty which 
they ſo amply. take to themſelves; in every 
other caſe, the wife is acknowledged to be, 
even in domeſtic concerns, the upper ſervant 
of her huſband only; and he muſt be very 
good-natured indeed, if he does not make her 
ſenſible of it.. In every other caſe, the iron 
hand of authority lies deſperately heavy, on even 
the trifles of life. And if it were not that the 
men, are often addicted to vanity, to ſhew, and 
to all the fopperies of faſhion” as much as the 
other ſex; women would not be indulged even 


in theſe ſo much as they are. 


Trax authority then of the men, is far 
from being merely nominal, as they would 
ſometimes have it believed in their good-natured 
moments, and when they wiſh to be extremely 
condeſcending ; for women find to their coſt, | 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN, 89 


that it is poſitive, in the utmoſt extent of the 
word. And though it is often alleged, that the 
public influence of the men, is balanced by the 
private influence of the women; yet if there is 
truth in this remark at all, it is that kind of 
back ſtair influence, which is enjoyed rather by 
the unworthy, than the virtuous part of the ſex. 
For commonly ſpeaking this is ſo far from being 
the caſe, that it is in the private and domeſtic 
ſcenes of life, above all others, where women 
are ſuppoſed to be obliged to act with the 
greateſt humility and circumſpection; and 
where indeed it often happens, that if they are 
not willing to give up every feeling that inte- 
reſts humanity, they are accuſed of want of 
temper and prudence, and conſequently are 
conſidered as very indifferent wives. 


IN fine, it ſeems to be expected that women 
ſhould in a manner ceaſe to exiſt, in a rational 
and mental point of view, before they reſign 
life ; by giving up along with their name every 
title to judge or act for themſelves, but when 
their maſters chuſe to beſtow ſuch privileges 


90 APPEAL TO THE 


upon them. Were it poſſible however for 
women to fulfil ſuch implicit articles of ſlavery, 
it were, perhaps, wrong to oppoſe any thing, 
which not being of itſelf abſolutely immoral, 
might contribute to the peace of ſociety. But 
women being formed by the power of the Al- 
mighty, ſo nearly to reſemble man in their deſire 
| after happineſs, they muſt be ſuppoſed equally 
ſelfiſh in their purſuit of it; and having upon 
the ſame principles with men, wills and opi- 
nions of their own, they will of courſe ever be 
promoting the attainments of their own ends, 
either directly or indirectly. That the latter 
ſyſtem is the one that women find themſelves 
under the neceſſity of adopting, is but too evi- 
dent; but if men perſiſt in thinking it the only 
one ſuitable to their characters and ſituation, 
they have no right to expect that beings ſo 
unfortunately circumſtanced, and ſo unfairly 
treated, ſhould under ſuch diſadvantages act up 
to the perfection of their nature, nor do I pre- 
tend to allege that they do ſo. If they did, 
all attempts at reformation were vain and un- 
neceſſary. 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN, 91 


THz ſubſtance of what the writer has already 
and that 
which follows will be to the ſame purpoſe,. — 
is ſhortly this ; 


preſumed to recommend to men, 


generouſly, and in con- 
formity with ſound politicks to allow women 
ſuch privileges, ſuch degrees of liberty and 


equality as they will otherwiſe, as they ever 


have done, take in a worſe way, and in a greater 


degree. And if indeed, women do avail them- 


ſelves of the only weapons they are permitted 
to wield, can they be blamed? Undoubtedly 
not; ſince they are compelled to it by the 


injuſtice and impolicy of men. Petty treacheries 


mean ſubterfuge 


whining and flattery 


————-feigned ſubmiſſion and all the dirty 
little attendants, which compoſe the endleſs 
train of low cunning; if not commendable, 


cannot with juſtice be very ſeverely cenſured, 


* 


when practiſed by women. Since alas! 


THE WEAK HAVE NO OTHER ARMS AGAINST 


THE STRONG ! Since alas! 


NECESSITY 


ACKNOWLEDGES NO LAW, BUT HER OWN |! 


N 


—— — — — 


— — — — — ww —_wW ——— ro 


r 


* 4 * 
2 25 


V V E have now conſidered the characters of 
women, as men would have them to be, and 
as they really are; though I muſt confeſs in 


that flight, haſty, and unfiniſhed manner, of 


which in ſome degree every part of this little 
work muſt neceſſarily partake. By the arrange- 
ment of my ſubje& I ſhould next proceed to 
WHAT WOMEN OUGHT TO BE; but before 1 


take upon me to delineate that very important 


part of it, I ſhall make ſome reflections which 
may ſerve to connect what I have already ad- 
vanced, with that which I have ſtill further to 
ſay on the ſubject. | 


I Have heretofore, it is true, been pretty 


free in my obſervations upon the conduct of 


men, where I think it abſurd and capricious 
with regard to women; but I hope without 
acrimony, for I am ſure I feel none towards 
them. On the contrary I love them with all 


my heart as individuals. But even themſelves 


muſt own, that taken collectively, they are in- 


94 APPEAL TO THE 


clined to be a little too conſequential, ——a 
little too tyrannical, —— little too deſirous 
of aſſuming an excluſive right to all 
power, wiſdom, knowledge, and learning. 


In juſtice however to men, let us now en- 
quire, why in general they are fo averſe from 
women acquiring knowledge of almoſt any ſort? 
And why with regard to thoſe attainments in 


particular, which enlarge the underftanding, 


and ſtrengthen the judgment, they fay 
Thus far ſhalt thou go, and no further? 


E THINK then it muſt be the opinion of every 
ſenſible and impartial perſon, man and woman, 
who takes the trouble to conſider the ſubject 
coolly ; that it is from no bad motive, that in- 
deed it can be from no bad motive,——if we 
reflect how inſeparably their own happineſs is 
connected with that of women's, that men 
have in almoſt all nations, and in all ages, 
nearly agreed in this ſyſtem of intellectual pri- 
vation with regard to the other ſex. But I fear 


we muſt add, that they act upon a bad prin- 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN, 95 


ciple; or perhaps we ſhould rather ſay upon a 
wrong one. 


LzT me here explain myſelf clearly, 


WHILE then, we with to exhonor men, with 


reſpect to the motives, which prompt their con- 


duct towards women; While we cannot 
upon any fair principles of reaſoning, doubt, 
that they are deſirous, and even fatisfied, that 


good conſequences may follow from their ab- 


ſolute government of women ; we cannot 


with any degree of ſincerity profeſs, that we 
conſider as well eſtabliſhed, but on the con- 


trary,——as falſe; or at beſt but as un- 
certain: — that principle upon which they 
build theit whole ſyſtem, viz. THAT MEN ARE 
SUPERIOR BEINGS, WHEN COMPARED WITH 
WOMEN; AND THAT CONSEQUENTLY, NA- 
TURE AND REASON, INVEST THEM WITH 
AUTHORITY OVER THE WEAKER SEX. This, 
———diveſted of all ambiguity of language, and 
all attempts, to impoſe on the underſtandings, 


or compound with the vanity of women, 


96 APPEAL TO THE 


is beyond a doubt, not the opinion only, of the 
generality of men ;—but the leading principle 
upon which the laws by which we are governed, 
are founded,—the grand pivot upon which ſocial 
And the lan- 


guage of prejudice all over the world. For, 


and domeſtic politicks turn, 


alas for poor human nature! it yet remains to 
de proven, that it is the language of truth. 
What is it indeed after all, but an opinion 
taken up at random, and which perhaps if 
fairly examined, and croſs examined, may be 
found to be,——the eſſence, nay the very 


quinteſſence, of prepoſſeſſion, of arrogance, 
and of abſurdity! 


BuT it muſt be confeſſed, that even thofe 
who conſider the human ſpecies, in a more 


who do 


liberal and extenſive point of view, 


not ſee ſufficient grounds for thoſe claims ſo 


haughtily advanced on the part of the men, 
yet ſuppoſe the neceſſity of ſubordination on 

one ſide unavoidable. They therefore fear, 
| that women, were their eyes opened to their 


natural equality and conſequence, would not ſo 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN, 97 


tamely ſubmit to the cruel injuſtice with which 
they are treated, in many of the leading points 
in life. And they know that nothing would 
tend ſo much to this eclairciſſement, as an edu- 
cation, which by exerciſing their reaſon, and 
unfolding their talents, ſhould point out to 
themſelves, how they might exert them to the 
utmoſt. Such a developement of mind would 
undoubtedly enable them to ſee and reaſon upon 
what principles, all the other regulations of ſo- 


ciety were formed, 


which however they 


may deviate in execution, are evidently founded 


on juſtice and humanity, ——and would conſe- 
quently enable them to bring home and apply 
thoſe principles to the ſituation of their ſex in 
general. Thus awakened to a ſenſe of their 
injuries, they would behold with aſtoniſhment 
and indignation, the arts which had been em- 
ployed, to keep them in a ſtate of PERPETUAL 


BABYISM. 


I Know that many will be inclined to think, 
that to keep millions of reaſonable beings in 
ignorance of their own rights, merely that they 


98 „ APPEAL 70 THE 


may not have it in their power to claim them, 


is doing a bad thing from the worſt of motives. 
But let us conſider further, that men not only 
fear, that if women were permitted to be what 
they call too wile, and knowing, they would 
not ſo eaſily ſubmit to be governed; but they 


| likewiſe fear that this want of ſubmiſſion, might 


produce the moſt fatal conſequences in ſociety. 


For this truth cannot be denied, in every cafe 
Either that authority 
muſt be veſted in one fide, and that explicitly 


as well as the preſent- 


for the general good of mankind——Or for 


the ſame important purpoſe, authority muſt be 


ſo nicely balanced and arranged, alas! fo 


very nicely, ——that it is almoſt too much to 
expect from human integrity, that it ſhall vo- 
luntarily enter upon a taſk of ſuch trouble and 
difficulty; or that a party already in poſſeſſion 
of ſo flattering a diſtinction, no matter how or 
by what means obtained, ſhall ſet about to de- 


lapidate or garble it by participation. 
No! No! It is in vain to think, that any man, 
or ſet of men, or men in ſhort taken in the 
groſs, ſhall by frequent appeals to their beſt 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN, - 99 


feelings ſeek out for reaſons to portion it away, 
With a bad grace do men intruſted with power, 
devize it to each other, and ſtill they keep it 
within as narrow a circle as poſſible ; but when 
through neceſſity, and for the common purpoſes 
of life, they admit women to certain puny pri- 
vileges, and delegate to them a ſcanty portion 
of power, with what a niggardly and griping 
hand do they diſpenſe their favors! With ſo 
many uſeleſs and mortifying precautions indeed 
do they trammel their gifts, that they become 
by paſſing through ſuch hands, equivalent to 
prohibitions. | 


I MusT here for brevity's ſake, adopt the 
ſame mode of appeal as upon a former occaſion, 
and inſtead of bringing forward examples to 
prove what I have advanced, truſt to the candor 
of my readers, and aſk them; if every law, 
and maxim generally underſtood as in favor of 
women and maxims advanced at random 
by the men with regard to them, are nearly as 
rigorous as laws; does not confirm in the 

0 


100 APPEAL TO THE 


ſtrongeſt manner poſſible, every word I have 
ſaid? | 


Bur ſhall the time never come — Ah! 
ſurely it muſt 


when the myſterious veil 
formed by law, by prejudice, and by precedent, 
thall be rent aſunder, 


ſelf ſhall appear in all the beauty of ſimplicity, 


when juſtice her- 


—— when her fetters ſhall be unbound, — and 
when unawed by clamour ſhe ſhall ſay to the 
liſtening world —Before all theſe were, I 


was ? 


UnT1z however by the appointment or per- 
miſſion of Providence, that time come, men fore- 
ſee that to put matters on a fair and equitable 
footing between the ſexes, muſt be a ſubject of 

very ſerious conſideration, and moſt delicate 
arrangement. That it neceſſarily involves many 
public and political, as well as private and do- 
meſtic concerns. And, that in its progreſs new 
points of view muſt open, not only to the party 

immediately concerned, but to every party who 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. IOL 


ſind themſelves unreaſonably tettered, by laws 


of human invention. 


CoNsIDERING therefore theſe things, they 
look upon it as probably the wiſeſt, and as 
certainly the eaſieſt method for themſelves, to 


let remain as long as it can, a fabric; which 


though from the beginning not built of the beſt 


materials, and certainly upon the very worſt 


poſlible foundation; and which though propped 
up, and ſupported by traſh, and rubbiſh of 


every ſort, that beſt ſuited the conveniency of 


ſucceſſive undertakers; yet accommodates one 


way or other all parties; 


but particularly 
well, thoſe, who only have it in their power to 
make a change. 


Tnus, or nearly thus, muſt men reaſon, 


Who deign to allow; that women are perhaps 
- Injured, in the diſtribution of worldly concerns. 
But the truth I believe is, that men in general, 
think nothing at all about the matter except 
when their pride and reſentment are rouſed, by 
any little oppoſition on the part of the women, 


—ů— „%% „„ CS 4 


F 


f02 APPEAL TO THE 


= when they do think, they conſider the au- 


thority which has been aſſumed by their ſex, 
not only as an inheritance againſt which no 
claim can be of any avail ; but as a birthright 
given them from above, which it is their duty 
as much as their inclination to maintain. | 


In ſhort they are fully convinced, that they 
are much fitter to govern women, than women 


are to govern themſelves; and therefore waving 
all diſpute and examinatjon on the ſubje& they 
do ſo. | 


* 


Now this is preciſely what we may be per- 
mitted to fay, is proceeding upon a wrong 


principle. For if it is evidently unphiloſophical 


and ſophiſtical ; nay in plain terms, if it is un- 
fair; inſtead of eſtabliſhing a principle to take 
one for granted, and go on to build upon it;, 


though even certain of good conſequences en- 


. . : a. F . . þ 
ſuing from it; how much more ſo is it, when 


the very conſequences are proved to be uncer- 


tain, to which certainty of principle has been 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN, 103 


ſacrificed ? It then indeed becomes, an edifice 
of extreme folly. 


Ap this is preciſely a cafe in point. For, 
in the firſt place it cannot be proved, that men 
are fitter to govern women, than women are to 
govern themſelves, in the unlimited ſenſe that 
men aſpire to; except comparative experiment 
had been fairly and repeatedly made. Or, ex- 
cept ſuperivrity of mind had from the beginning, 
been ſo completely, fo diſtinctly, and ſo uni- 
formly marked ; that it could bear no more 
diſpute, that men ſhould take the whole com- 
mand into their own hands, than that mature 
age, ſhould care for helpleſs infangy. © _ 

Mx however, having taken for granted, 
and endeavoured to eſtabliſh without proof, 
that they have ſome degree of intellectual ſupe- 

, riority over women; have the conſequences of 
their government, been equal to their declara- 
tions of ſuperior wiſdom, or anfwerable to their 
wiſhes, or to their ideas, of the poſſible per- | 
fection of the female ſex, even in that ſecondary 


— — — A 


tte — 
_— — — 


104 APPEAL TO THE 


view in which they chuſe to conſider them? J 
apprehend they will not ſay ſo. Or if they do, 
the ſex will by no means join them. For chained 
and blindfolded as they moſt certainly are, with 
reſpect to their own rights; they know,—they 
feel conſcious—of capability of greater degrees 
of perfection, than they are permitted to arrive 
at. Yes they ſee, — there is not an individual 
among them, who does not at times ſee, and 
feel too with keeneſt anguiſh,—that mind, as 
has been finely ſaid, is of no ſex. 


"SHALL then this, © Vital ſpark of heavenly 
flame' be nearly extinguiſhed in them, through 
the capricious and unfeeling tyranay of man. 


& Shall the quick thought, 
That darts from world to world, and traverſes 
« The realms of ſpace, and time, all fancy free, 
Check'd in his rapid courſe, obey the call 
Of ſome barbarian ?” 


ALas! too often it muſt. Yet where con- 


ſcious ability is inherent, hope can never be 
entirely extinct, | 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. 105 


Pent in his cage 
The impriſoned eagle ſits, and beats his bars; 
His eye is raiſed to heaven · Though many a moon 
Has ſeen him pine in ſad captivity, 
Still to the thunderer's throne he longs to bear 
The bolt of vengeance ; ſtill he thirſts to dip 
His daring pinions in the fount of light.“ 


1s then the ſex in general, agree in thinking 
themſelves injured, and compelled to act a part 
in ſociety unequal to their abilities, and pre- 
. tenſions ; how honorable would it be for men, 
to turn ſome degree of their attention to a ſub- 
ject, which viewed in every light is of ſuch 
conſequence to mankind! And if after examin- 
ing it with the ſame impartiality, which they 
would expect and demand, in any caſe where 
their own intereſt were concerned; they ſhould 
find little to applaud in their old ſyſtem, and 
little to fear from a new one properly regulated; 
how honorable would it be to reſtore to wo- 
man that freedom, which the God of nature 
ſeems manifeſtly to have intended, for every 
living creature ! Liberty,—rational liberty,— 


ſuch as is conſiſtent with the good order of 


—  _ CIS K4ꝙ6zͤĩ＋ͤn n — 
— 


w w—— © —— — 
a>; 4 - 
ed 


106 AppPEAL TO THE 


every branch of ſociety, and in which ſenſe 


only I would be thought to uſe the term, never - 
yet injured, man, woman, or child, For though 
I cannot perhaps expreſs myſelf, with philoſo- 
phical preciſion and propnety yet J ſhall be 
underitood when I ſay, that I hold liberty to 
be in the moral world, what the very air which 


we breathe, is to animal and vegetable life. 


In each caſe exiſtence 1s poſſible with a ſmall, 


or a moderate degree. Without any, phyſical, 
and moral death muſt enſue. The air itſelf in- 
deed, on which our life depends, may be render- 


ed as noxious as ſalutary; and may be condenſed, 


or rarified, till unfit for the purpoſes of exiſt- 
ence—Or impelled by natural cauſes, engender 


ſtorms and tempeſts, which deform the face of 
creation. | | 


So Liberty, when ſhe *© overſteps the modeſty 
of nature,” changes her very eſſence, is tranſ- 
formed from our good to our evil genius, and 
inſtead of her who cheriſhes and renovates the 
heart of man, Aye and of woman too, and 
under whoſe auſpices every thing great and 


MEN OF. GREAT BRITAIN. 107 


good muſt flouriſh ; ſhe becomes a fiend ſpread- 
ing devaſtation and dtath around, and leaving 
her deluded followers, only a ſhadow and a 
name. 


THE deſirable point therefore in all caſes 
ſurely is that, where, as much freedom is en- 
joyed as is required, to bring forth every degree 
of poſſible perfection. And to this point in 
morals, ſhould all legiſlation tend, whatever 


obſtacles or prejudices may lie in the way. 


Now it is to this degree of liberty, as near 

as human imperfection can manage the matter, 
| that I wiſh to ſee a proſpect of women being 
advanced; for, as I have already ſaid, perhaps 
it might not be ſafe to entruſt them all at once 
with freedom in that extent which is their due. 


PossizLV it is better that the mind, as well | 
as the body, ſhould be-prepared by degrees to | { 
receive any great change, or laſting improve- - | [ 
ment. Perhaps this holds true even in the | 
grand political ſcale of life; perhaps even there, 

P 


108 APPEAL TO THE 


prudence and good politicks go hand in hand. 
But furely and without a doubt, moderation 
ought always to diftate the more private, yet 
not leſs intereſting appeals, of the one ſex to 
the other. 


IT is indeed abſurd to ſuppoſe, from the 
reafons already advanced, and from a thouſand 
others, that men will ſee the propriety or the 
juſtice of laying aſide all at once, claims which 
they have been accuſtomed to conſider as found- 
cd in nature, and ſupported by reaſon ;—but it 
is neither abſurd nor chimerical to ſuppoſe, that 
men may by degrees, and by calm repreſenta- 
tion, be brought to conſider the ſubject as they 
ought, and are bound m juſtice and honour to 
do. And this once done there is no reaſon to 
fear, but that retribution will naturally follow. 


In oppoſition to this hope, that the ſituation 
of women may by degrees be bettered, it may 

be anſwered; that fince ages have elapſed with- 
out women having been in any country put 
upon the footing which I contend is their due; 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN, To9 
it amounts almoſt to a deciſive proof, that 
they will, and ought to remain, pretty nearly 
on the footing they have been and are; allowing 
for little alterations, in compliance with times 


Now this reaſoning I apprehend to be fully 
more in favor of women than againſt them ; 
and it brings one of my ſtrongeſt arguments 
home. Since, except the experiment had been 


fairly made, and they been allowed the ſame 


advantages of education as men, and permitted 
to exert in their fulleſt extent thoſe talents with 
which their Creator may have endowed them 
who is entitled to ſay, what might have been 


the conſequences to the world? For my part 1 


am ſanguine enough to think, that from ſuch 
an attention to improving the minds, and form- 
ing the characters of women, as I propoſe; 
conſequences of the higheſt importance would 
enſue. Perhaps it is not too bold to fay, that 
to the erroneous ideas with regard to women 
which have been allowed from indulgence and 


want of oppoſition, to take ſo deep root among 


: 
, 
- 
1 
* 
1 
1 
* 


116 APPEAL TO THE 


mankind, it may be partly imputed, that ſociety 
has never been upon fo perfect a plan as it 
might have been. And perhaps it is not too 
daring to propheſy, that till theſe prejudices 
are exterminated and done away as if they had 
never been; ſociety can never arrive at that 
ſtate of perfection, of which it is really capable. 


IxDEED when we conſider, that men have 


always had it in their power to exerciſe with- 


dodut controul, thoſe talents, abilities, and virtues, 


which they found moſt ſuitable to their genius; 
it is not very unreaſonable to ſuppoſe, that at 


ſome periods they may have been nearly as per- 


fect, as their nature admits of. Or, that they 


may at this very moment be ſo, in all civilized 


nations. For balancing what they may have 


loſt by luxury and over refinement, with what 
they muſt have gained by the experience of 


paſt ages; they are probably as near to perfec- 


tion, as any who have gone before them. 


Now with the other ſex the caſe is totally 


different. From the firſt dawnings of reaſon 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. 111 


they ſind a part in life already preſcribed for 


them, which they nearly as early find out to be 


unequal to their powers and capacities. They 
find themſelves encloſed in a kind of magic 
circle, out of which they cannot move, but to 


contempt or deſtruction. And however con- 


fined and mortifying to their feelings this priſon 


of the ſoul may be, they can never hope for 
emancipation, but from ſuperior power. In 
this circle, in this priſon therefore, during the 
reign of youth and beauty they gambol and 
friſk away life as they beſt can; happily blind 
and thoughtleſs as to futurity. But what comes 
then? Untaught, alas! by education or habit 


to refle&t in that manner, which by exerciſing 


the reaſon, cultivates the mind, and opens up 
every day new and latent powers; reflection is 
to them a ſource of vexation only. They in- 
deed ſee clearly enough that they are injured ; 
but. as they cannot ſee a way for redreſs, they 


often in deſpair turn to vanities and follies of 


moſt pernicious tendency in the higher circles; 


in middling life they degenerate more commonly 
into inſipidity ; and in the lower claſſes, eſpe- 


$ 
1 
4 
1 
x 
JF 
: 
'Y 
"7 
| 
: 
| 


— 2 — ee EE ON IIS 1 


L223 APPEAL TO THE 


cially in great and populous cities, into vulgar 
debauchery. 


Tris no doubt ſounds ſomewhat like decla- 
mation; but what has been advanced may be 
defended. I do not ſurely ſay that all, nor per- 
haps that moſt of the women of the paſt ages 
and the preſent, have been, and are, either 
vain and fooliſh, or inſipid, or vicious. The 
ſhades of our anceſtors would riſe in myriads, 
to confute ſuch unfounded afſertions; and a 
{till greater proportion of the women of the 
preſent day, would compel me to retract ſuch 
malignant ſatire. I even own that if women 
were all educated philoſophers and pedants,— 
which God forbid !—Nay what is more to the 
point, if they were all educated, and allowed 
to be, on the reaſonable and reſpectable footing 
I contend for; ſtill ! ſtill ! folly, inſipidity, and 
vice, would have their reign, and ſweep away 
millions in their train. To expect that it ſhould 


be otherwiſe in the preſent imperfect ſtate of 


exiſtence were vain. All I contend for is this; 
that as far as is practicable, or poſſible, every 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN, I13 


prejudice ought to be laid aſide in a purſuit fo 
important, as that of perfecting the human 
ſpecies; every ſtumbling block removed out of 
the way; and no attempt that human ſagacity 
can ſuggeſt left untried, through a blind at- 
tachment to certain favorite notions which 
men find convenient to entertain, and which 
women are forced to indulge them in; though 
at the expence of that ſingleneſs of heart and 
openneſs of character, for which they make a 
bad exchange, by obtaining any preſent and 
trifling advantages. 


INDEED I mult be permitted to ſay, that men 
upon this ſubject, are deplorably weak and 
childiſh; for thoſe who are aſhamed in this 
enlightened age, to hold forth paſſive obedi- 
ence, and unlimited authority, in all their 
horrors, even to women; have fallen upon an- 
other method. They upon every occaſion call 
out like ſpoilt children, for that indulgence 
which they dare not as reaſonable beings claim. ; 
And as they well know that women as reaſon- 
able beings, cannot be blind to their moral 


= — 2 — — — e — — — 
— — — | - - NG GE "<< 6 a 4 


114 ApPEAL TO THE 


conduct, and overbearing tempers, they only 
entreat of them to appear ſo; and ſhe who can 


beſt affect and carry on this kind of impoſition, 


they repreſent as the moſt amiable woman and 


| moſt deſirable companion, whether in the cha- 


racter of wife, mother, daughter, or ſiſter. 


Trey likewiſe repreſent, and a very powerful 
argument it is, that this is the only method by 
which they may hope to arrive at any indulgence 
they aim at; for that they have nothing to ex- 
pe& when claimed as rights, to which claims 
they conſtantly give, the name of maſculine, 
and unſufferable from women ; but that they 
have every thing to hope for when entreated as 
favors. This is a way indeed of cutting ſhort 
every propoſal for bettering 'the ſituation of 
women, and of quaſhing every hope or defire 
of a general improvement. It is however but 
a barbarous kind of policy, unworthy of man 
to advance, and of women to acknowledge; 


and which however long it may have taken 


place, or even ſucceeded with regard to one 


party, can never bear examination when con- 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN, 115 


ſidered as a mutual benefit ; becauſe viewed in 
that light it is founded upon no one principle 
of juſtice or common ſenſe. | 


| NoTwriTHsTANDING then that men have 
planned every thing their own way, I muſt re- 
| peat, that the conſequences are not equal to 
their hopes or expectations; for they complain 
bitterly both in public and private, of the folly, 
the inconſiſtency, the extravagance, and the 
general relaxation of manners amongſt women. 
And they would be extremely well ſatisfied, if, 
without changing an iota of their own ſyſtem 
and ſelf indulgence; they could transform wo- 
men in general into domeſtic wives, tender 
' mothers, and dutiful and affeQionate daugh- 
ters; characters upon which they expatiate 


with enthuſiaſm and delight, and no wonder. 


But when it is at any time argued and proved 
that to bring about reformation, the firſt ſtep 
ought to be, the reformation of the moral con- 
duct of the men themſelves ; and the next that 
of educating women on a more liberal and un- 


prejudiced plan, and putting them on a more 


Q 


Sw 3 "Y — ——ů — — — 
— 2 — — 2 5 4 a — X q — 0 0 4 
A K © op Br Oe „% SHALD ww ere” - ow -w — — — — _ — — 2 — — / ee — — —— = - 
— — _ * — _ — N * v 1 „292 - - _ = " — * * 
5 — — — — a - N * 1 — won ot — 22 Son as 
hs a : = — —— a — — * — = FR - $ _ * — — i — — — * » 


” 
* 


116 ApPPEAL TO THE 


reſpectable footing in ſociety; then it is that the 


_ generality of men fly off, and are not aſhamed 
to declare, that they would rather a thouſand 


times take women as they are ;—weak, frail, 
dependent creatures. In compariſon of the 
frightful certainty of having women declared 
their equals, and as ſuch their companions and 
friends, inſtead of their amuſement, their de- 
pendents; and in plain and unvarniſhed terms 


. . . N 
their ſlaves; folly, vice, impertinence of every 


kind is delightful. 


THEN it is that we hear of the heavenly ſoft- 


neſs of the ſex, that with a glance can diſarm 


authority and diſpel rage. Then it is that we 
hear them tell, with as much earneſtneſs and 
gravity as if it were true, or even poſlible, con- 


ſiſtently with human nature; that in woman's 


weakneſs conſiſts her ſtrength, and in her de- 
peadence her power. That though for wiſe 


and political purpoſes, men are veſted with au- 


thority over women, yet that is only for their 
mutual good that it is deſigned, or ever ought 
to be exerciſed=—(And it is well known that 


MEN OP GREAT BRITAIN. 117 


men never do, but what they ought to do.) 
That it is indeed rather a nominal authority 
taken up for conveniency's ſake ; for that upon 
the whole, what women loſe of power in an 
acknowledged way, and in name, they make 
up for in the private ſcenes of life, &c, &c. &c. 


Now every one of theſe unmeaning, impoſ- 
ing, romantic ravings, might be eaſily confuted 
and overturned ; for the truth is that they have 
not a leg to ſtand upon, when examined upon 
the principles of reaſon and common ſenſe, 
backed by the woful experience of women. 
But waving all diſcuſſion of what is but too 
obvious, I ſhall content myſelf with aſking two 
very ſimple queſtions; and I think I know ex- 
actly how every honeſt man will anſwer them. 


ARE not the ideas, which men have in- 
dulged themſelves in with regard to the other 
ſex, rather the work of imagination, than 
the operations of reaſon and common ſenſe ; 
and are they not therefore more calculated 
to amuſe a youthful fancy, and encourage ro- 


4 


————— u O 
. 


118 APPEAL TO THE 


mantic expectations, than for the purpoſes of 
common life ? And to bring this home to 
men's buſineſs and boſoms,” let me aſk them 
the ſecond queſtion. Whether when they ex- 
patiate upon the immenſe powers of the female 
ſex, over the hearts and conduct of men, they 
do not always attach the ideas of youth and 


beauty to the picture? I believe it will be pretty 


generally acknowledged, that theſe two queries, 
muſt be anſwered in the affirmative. 


Now having theſe pleaſing images before 


their minds eye, which work them up to a 


temporary ſentiment of love and tenderneſs for 


the whole ſex; no wonder if men ſuppoſe that 


ſuch objects have no need of law or right on 
their ſide, and have only to be ſeen to be obeyed. 
No wonder if they ſuppoſe the only danger here 
to be, that every indulgence ſhall be granted 
even beyond what reaſon would approve. For, 
they very juſtly repreſent the empire of beauty 
as requiring no formal or written law in its 
favor, its law being engraved on the heart of 
man, and more powerful than all others. But 


— 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. 119 


men and brethren, , awake out of your illuſive 
dreams! and in order to do juſtice to the ſex 
in general, quit the fields of romance, where 
& Love and life are always young, 
And truth on every ſhepherd's tongue.“ 

And deſcending to real life and what is con- 
ſtantly before your eyes, recollect, that all wo- 
men are not handſome, that all women, alas! 
are young but for a very ſhort period indeed, 
and that conſequently you are not always in - 
love. It is therefore equally abſurd, and cruel, . 
to eſtabliſh rules and principles, and even fixed 
laws, which could only anſwer if the reverſe of 
all this were true, 


Ir indeed this were the caſe, if the women 
were always handſome, and always young, and 
the men perpetually in love; the laws and opi- 
nions adopted concerning women would fit ex- 
actly; and the whole buſineſs of life on both 
ſides would be to pleaſe. But I ſhall and muſt 
tell you,—though the very name of them will 
freeze the blood in your veins,—that ugly wo- 
men, and old women, and indeed every de- 


A — 3 = 8 — 
ay oor oo _ r 
: 


120 | APPEAL TO THY 


ſcription of women, after the charm of novelty 
and the firſt frenzy of love are over with the 
other ſex, find, that thoſe ſoft and heavenly 
graces, &e. upon which the men flouriſh ſo 
much,—taking care however not to come to 
particulars,—are not only quite inſufficient © to 
difarm authority, and diſpel rage; but are 
even quite inſufficient to procure them common 


juſtice, upon the moſt common occaſions, 


No!—If emanations of the divinity itſelf, 


Ai all the virtues, graces, and charities, were 
ſent upon earth, through the medium of ugly 


women, or old women, or I believe, God for- 
give me, in the ſhape of almoſt any man's own 
wife,—they would rarely meet with any thing 
but neglect, and often with contempt and de- 
riſion. Whilſt vice, under the protection of 
beauty, novelty, and faſhion, —would roll tri- 


umphantly along, and trample them in the 
duſt. | 


Fa be it from me however to advance, that 
becauſe ſoftneſs or gentleneſs of manners do not 


MEN OF GREAT. BRITAIN. 121 


always ſucceed; that an oppoſite conduct is 
proper, or natural, or would be attended with 
good effects. It would be much like the other, 
imperfect and uncertain, would ſometimes an- 
ſwer and ſometimes fail, according to circum- 
ſtances, and the ſubjects ated upon. Befides, 
if a bold and overbearing manner and temper, 
are unbecoming and diſagreeable even in men, 
—which I ſhall always be Chriſtian enough to 
maintain, — I muſt likewiſe be honeſt enough to 
confeſs, that they are if poſlible, ſtill more un- 
becoming, {till more diſagreeable in women. 
But this is nothing to the purpoſe ; for however 
diſagreeable, human nature, which is much the 
ſame in both ſexes, will maintain its rights if 
trampled upon; except where nature is extin- 
guiſhed by that hypocritical attention to appear- 
ances, which tyranny always produces, at the 
expence of ſincerity. 


Fox this very reaſon amongſt many others, 
the female ſex ought to be protected by explicit 
and indiſputable laws, from inſult and oppreſ- 
ſion ; that they may not, however unavailingly, 


| 
| 
| 
| 


122 APPEAL TO THE 


be tempted to aſſume a character, unpleaſing to 


themſelves and to others. And eſpecially as 


men are pleaſed to allege, that it is out of cha- 


racer, and out of nature, for women to attempt 


any defence of themſelves; however. injured. 


Yet in ſpite of early and often repeated leſſons, 
nature will riſe, againſt inſult and oppreſſion. 
And in ſpite of human rules, human paſſions 
will upon trying occaſions, ſwell at the hearts, 


and appear in the ceuntenance of even the beſt 


of women. But perhaps, to be angry and fin 


is a privilege granted to them, as well as 


not, 
to men. Perhaps the Almighty can forgive the 
frailties, whatever they may be, of the one ſex 
as well as the other; at leaſt he has not been 
pleaſed to declare the diſtinction, either by rea- 


ſon or revelation. 


Bur man! tyrant man! ye cannot forgive 
that the lips ſhould utter, what riſes warm from 
the heart, if it does not chime in with your 
preſent feelings. Ve cannot even forgive, that 
the face which ye conſider as formed only to 


ſuggeſt ideas of pleaſure, delight, or ſubmiſſion 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN, 123 


to you; ſhould be defended by the expreſſion 
of thoſe natural feelings, which the lips dare 


not utter, 


An! ye abetters of hypocriſy ! ye ſelf. im- 
poſers! ye ſlaves to ſurface! Ye ſacrifice your 
trueſt happineſs, and your deareſt intereſts, by 
denying to women,—to the only helpmates 
whom God has granted you,—the noble privi- 
lege of telling you truth, with that honeſt free. 
dom, which 1s, and ought to be, equally diſtant 
from ill-nature and fury, as from flattery and 
hypocriſy. I could on this ſubject make re- 
flections without end, but it is now time in 


conformity with my plan, to proceed to WHAT 
WOMEN OUGHT TO Bx. 


* 
» — — — äͤ— . ·˙ — — 4 


. 
s 
* 
— 
” : . 
* 
. — 
— * 2 — — 6— * — Alien ta — 
5 - 
— * — — o_ — — 5 th — 
- 
— — 


— — oo _ r 
” ,... gp — -—— I. 


. : 2 — - — — — - — LO 1 —— — 
— —— . 7˖⏑;— nero — — — So ao. - — oo 


Chi mi dara la voce e le parole 
Convenienti a fi nobil ſoggetto ? 


WHAT WOMEN OUGHT TO BE. 


'T noven L have not certainly, the vanity | 
to believe myſelf equal to the taſk of fulfilling 
the title of this chapter, to the entire ſatisfac- 
tion of my readers ; nor what is perhaps in the 
firſt inſtance ſtill more diſcouraging, even to 
that of my own; yet having once adopted I 
ſhall retain it, as it expreſſes exactly what I wiſh 
to accompliſh, however I may fail in the exe- 
cution. This I do however hope at all events; 
that the honeſt and well-meant endeavour may 
turn out, if not a regular ſyſtem,—which was 
never pretended to, nor aimed at,—yet a bold, 
a free, and not an incorrect outline, of what 
female conduct and character might be, under 
proper tuition; and which may be filled up to 
advantage by any perſon of tolerable judgment, 
according to different circumſtances and ſitua- 


„„ 


— ran, — — >_> 


6 APPEAL TO THE 


I Do not mean by this to inſinuate, that the 
evidently great and leading lines of life, are 
only to be attended to with care; as a very 
little knowledge of human nature ſhews, that 
generally ſpeaking,—for one can ſeldom ſpeak 
without reſtriftions,—great matters depend 
upon ſeemingly ſmall and trivial ones ; and that 
therefore, theſe, muſt by no means be neglected. 
But I believe I may fay without much danger 


of contradiction, that though the great and in- 
diſpenſable rules of conduct, can, and ought 


to be planned in theory, and laid down as prin- 
ciples never to be deviated from in practice; 
yet that the more minute: more frequent, 
though the ſcarcely leſs eſſential duties, cannot 
be reduced to ſtrict and unexceptionable rules; 
but muſt depend in a great degree, as I ſaid be- 
fore, upon circumſtances and ſituations, which 
vary infinitely in human life; and muſt conſe- 


quently be left very much to the judgment of 


the immediate inſtructors of youth. 


Uro this principle, I reſt one of my ſtrongeſt 
arguments, in favor of the neceſſity and pro- 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN, 127 


priety of improving the underſtandings, extend- 
ing the views, and ſtrengthening the judgments 
of women ; that they may in their turn, com- 
municate knowledge and inſtruction to their 
offspring,—if not always in a manner, ſtrialy 
ſcientific and philoſophical,—at leaſt by methods 
rational and intereſting. For if to that vivacity 
and tenderneſs, ſo agreeably blended by nature 
in the female character, were added a reaſonable 
portion of cultivation of mind, by ſuitable edu - 
cation; it would without a doubt eminently 
qualify many of the ſex, for the inſtruction of 
youth for a certain period at all, events; and 
for that of their own children, till * the moſt 
dangerous n of life. 


WouxN then, I muſt take it upon me to ſay, 
ought to be conſidered as the companions and 
equals, not as the inferiors, - much leſs as they 
virtually are, —as the ſlaves of men. In every 
ſtation they are entitled to eſteem, as well as 
love, when deſerving, and virtuous, in the dif- 
ferent connections of life, — They were originally 
intended, to be the helpmates of the other ſex, 


128 APPEAL TO THE 


as the Scripture moſt emphatically and explicitly 
calls them; and not their drudges in the com- 
mon ranks, and the tools of their paſſions and 
prejudices in the higher. 


Bur the world ever has been, and ſtill is, 


more guided by cuſtom and prejudice, than by 


principle. Indeed every thing is guided by 


theſe, a few ſacred, immutable, and indelible 


truths excepted, which ſtamped upon the human 


mind, leave traces never to be entirely effaced, 
however differently modified. But are we not 
much to blame if we confound, and hold as 
equally undeniable with theſe, other habitual 


ideas or opinions, which have nothing elſe to 


recommend them, but cuſtom and prejudice ; 
and that they are unfortunately attempted to be 
| impoſed, by the hand of authority? 


I ayerEHEND for example, that juſtice, — 


_pity,—gratitude,—and other virtues, are inhe- 
rent in the human mind. Or in other words, 


that they are the neceſſary offspring of our 


. Feaſon,” our paſſions, and our ſenſes ; and that 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. . 129 


conſequently no thinking or rational being can 
deviate from them, without violating the laws 
of his nature, and thus wounding his conſcience 
in ſome degree more or leſs, let his country, 
his religion, his ſituation or circumſtances, be 


what they may. 


THe love of liberty, the deſire of diſtinguiſh- 
ing ourſelves by ſuperior abilities of mind and 
body, the paſhons themſelves are entailed upon 
us, and no doubt for the beſt of purpoſes, when 
kept within due bounds. But ſhall we preſume 
to ſay, that numberleſs ideas, or opinions, or 
principles, call them what we pleaſe, which we 
have taken up at random, and adopted upon 
truſt, merely becauſe they are ready made and 
handed down to us from our forefathers, Wo 
formed them to ſuit their own purpoſes, or 
becauſe men ſtill find that they flatter their 
reigning vices, or prejudices, — ſhall we pre- 
ſume to ſay that ſuch, are as obviouſly natural 


to the human character, as thoſe I have 


named ? F 


130 APPEAL TO THE 


To take one example which ſhall be directly 
to the point, but which is applicable to a thou- 
ſand others. Is it equally obvious, is it as 
clearly pointed out by God and nature, that to 
man excluſively belongs all power and autho- 
rity, public and private? that to him alone 
belongs all the higher purſuits, of knowledge, 
learning, and ſcience? that to him it conſe- 
quently belongs to give laws to women, and 
that there is nothing left for them but the 
humbler duties, or in plain terms the drudgeries 
of life; except ſuch indulgences as their maſters 
ſhall from time to time, either as legiſlators, or 
individuals, be diſpoſed to grant them, —that 
obedience is not only a tribute due by women 
to men, but a willing and thankful obedience, 
and ſuch an one as ſhould be natural and reaſon- 
able from a race of beings, conſcious of that in- 
feriority and dependence which their Creator has 
ſtamped upon them?—ls all this gallimatia which 
men hold forth in their own behalf, equally felt 
and acknowledged; does it take the ſame ſtrong 
hold of the underſtanding ; is it equally con- 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN, 131 


genial to the natural tenderneſs of the human 
heart; does it carry home a conviction as 
powerful and univerſal, to all parties concern- 
ed; as thoſe I have before named out, or al- 
luded to? I do ſuppoſe that no one who has 
rightly examined his own mind will fay ſo. I 
do ſuppoſe that all thoſe high-ſounding claims 
of the men, which they hold to be ſo natural, 
ſo reaſonable, and ſo edifying for the other ſex; 
muſt when impartially conſidered, be eſteemed as 
but the faſhion of this world, which paſſeth away. 
Ido ſuppoſe that the ſubje& has only to be exa- 
mined by minds not prejudged to be convinced; 
that all opinions degrading to women, are 
grounded on the rude ideas of ſavage nations, 
where ſtrength of body is the only diſtinguiſhing 
feature, and ſuppoſed to carry every other de- 
gree of ſuperiority along with it. And that of 
conſequence, all opinions degrading to women 
are founded in ignorance, ſupported by the 
force of habit, by an authority once eſtabliſhed, 


and by the tacit acquieſcence of the injured 


party. 


8 


9 
Fe — — —e— — —— ot n 2 3". e 2 


— 
— CF OT _— NN 


«K ——U— !: —ñr˙——Bxůp ů—— —— 


. 2 3 — — 3 — 
—r————— We 4 
—— nn An A tt PI A AA I A AA — — I A — — — <= 
. 5 
— — — — — — 
— — , jt — 
* by * — 


—— 


ꝓ— 


== 


— 


. —— — 


——ä—d — 


— —— 


132 APPEAL TO THE 


Tus laſt circumſtance has by ſuperficial rea- 
ſoners on the ſubject, been deemed as nearly 
concluſive, againſt the natural equality of the 
ſexes; and conſequently as a proof of the im- 
becility and inferiority of women. For ſurely, 
ſay they, had Providence, had nature, ever in- 
tended that women ſhould be on a footing of 
perfect equality, they had furniſhed them with 
powers and abilities to make good their preten- 
ſions; which powers and abilities would never 
have allowed them to languiſh in captivity of 
foul age after age, without attempting to re- 
cover their original dignity. 


Such reaſoners indeed, do generally by way 
of comfort and conciliation, add, that though 
the patient acquieſcence of women evinces their 
weakneſs and inferiority ; that theſe deſignedly 
make them only the more amiable, and the 


more acceptable to the other ſex. 


I xc leave however to diſpute, both the ar- 
gument and the concluſion. 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. 133 


IN the firſt place then, I hold the argument 
to be weak, and inconcluſive, that had Provi- 
dence intended women to be on a footing of 
perfect equality, it had furniſhed them with 
powers and abilities to make good their preten- 


ſions. For upon the very ſame principle as well 


might it be argued, that had Providence in- 


tended virtue, and talents, to form the happi- 
neſs, and to be the ornaments of human nature, 
he would have ordered every circumſtance ſo, 
as that theſe ſhould conſtantly preponderate in 
ſociety ; which we know is not the caſe, Yet 
who is he who is bold enough to aſſert upon 
this account, that virtue and talents, are not 
intrinſically, and eſſentially, ſuperior to vice 


and imbecility ? 


NUMBERLEsSs parallels might be drawn to 
prove, that things in this world do not always 


go as they ought, nor even as they might, 


if every individual and every ſociety exerted ' 


their utmoſt. Do not the myriads who groan 
under deſpotic, nay tyrannical governments, 


from generation to generation, and from age to 


7 
r * 7 » * 
r EIT by 


cd PPP F 


1 


— 


= — 
—— — 
— — Vꝛm! p ö 
Py \ ——_— 2 —— 


4 . 
. 
1 
9 hu 
* 
1 
[ ' 
1 j : 
4 i 
_ 7 ; 
e {4 i 
4 = 
s , 
5 
? * 
[ | 
: 
* 4 ö 
1 
) : 
1 l o 
. . 
' [i 
: : 
' l . 
F x 
s 
\ 
* 
: £ 
. 1 
I 2 
1 
' 
it 
: 
. It 
: 
t 
it 


134 APPEAL TO THE 


age, afford undeniable and unequivocal proots, 
of the almoſt unlimited power, which authority 


once aſſumed, gains over the human mind, and 


_ eſpecially over uncultivated ones? We muſt 


ſuppoſe, that all thoſe people alluded to, in 


ſome degree feel their chains; for the mind 
however degraded, unwillingly wears fetters of 
any kind.“ Yet what between the reaſonable 
terrors of the conſequences of civil wars, always 
dreadful in the mean time, and always uncer- 
tain in their iſſue; the imbecility of minds 
unaccuſtomed to reaſon and think for them- 
ſelves, and totally incompetent to judge among 


probable conſequences, which is the moſt pro- 


bable; and that inactivity of mind and body 


in which a great part of the ſubjects of deſ- 
potic governments muſt neceſſarily be plunged, 
and which is the moſt fatal and univerſal enemy 
to all great and good actions, though the leaſt 
teared and guarded againſt—Theſe, I ſay, and 


numberleſs other circumſtances, combine to 


keep the multitude in ſubjection to reputed 
ſuperiors; who cannot, nor dare not, claim 


any actual, any inherent ſuperiority, other than 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. 73 5 


— 


ſuch as is caſual among the individuals of any 
_ claſs of men. 


Ir theſe reaſons then hold good, as I think 
they do, againſt the degrading idea, that the 
multitude ought to be accounted as the beaſts 
of burthen, compared with the more fortunate 
and diſtinguiſhed members of ſociety ; do they 
not afford ſtill ſtronger arguments to prove, 
that women influenced by ſome of theſe reaſons, 
and by a thouſand others,—by a thouſand 

| wb te tender ties 

Cloſe twiſted with the fibres of the heart, 

Which broke, breaks them, and makes it pain to live ;?? 


that women may acquieſce in ſuffering the moſt 
manifeſt injuſtice, from prudence and neceflity, 
rather than from conſcious inability, and de- 
cided inferiority ? 


_ Havins endeavoured to refute the argument 


that the acquieſcence of women proves their 
inferiority, I muſt in the ſame degree as I have 
ſucceeded in this attempt, have overturned the 


. concluſion ; viz. that they are upon this ac- 


: 
1 


136 APPEAL TO THE 


count, the more agreeable and defirable part- 
ners for men; which though ſpecious is a mere 
ſophiſm, a mere fiction in the commerce of the 


ſexes. It is indeed, one fiction, raiſed on the 


foundation of another; though if the principle 


were true, the concluſion js probable, and fairly 
drawn alſo; and ſuch as we may be allowed to 
preſume, would have been the natural conſe- 


quence, had Eternal Wiſdom really ſtamped 


this inferiority on women. For ſurely then he 


| had given them ſome ſtriking advantages, to 


make up for fuch a mortifying diſtinction; ſince, 
we ſee this benevolent attention extended even 
to the brute creation. But none ſuch that I 


can perceive, attends upon the ſtate of women, 


Ir then the intellectual ſuperiority of the 
men, 1s any thing but well proven, let us not 


draw a certain and conſtant concluſion, from an 


uncertaim and fluctuating cauſe ; let us not ſay, 


that the weakneſs and dependence of women, 
make them the more amiable, the fitter, and 
the better companions for men. No, let us 


not ſay ſo !—But I will tell you what we may 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. 137 


ſafely ſay ; that theſe would if true, make wo- 
men much more convenient Companions, 
much fitter tools, - much more ſubmiſſive and 
hypocritical ſlaves to the authority of a ſet of 
beings, —bent upon following the devices and 
deſires of their own hearts; yet unjuſtly deny- 
ing the ſame privileges to their tellow-labourers: 
through life. And at all events obſtinately de- 
termined, that no interruption to their deſigns 
of ambition or of pleaſure; or in ſhort and plain 
language, that no oppoſition to their wills muſt 
be attempted, by creatures whom they compel 
to ſubmiſſion, from motives, which themſelves 
are aſhamed to give the true names to, or ſearch 
to the foundation of. 


WHILST men indeed are determined to act 
upon ſuch principles, —while they are refolved 
not to liſten to the voice of impartial reaſon, 
while they exert force and fraud to remove 
every check that might reſtrain, every obſtacle | 
that might obſtruct them, in their deſtined 
courſe of aſſumed authority, —ſurely while theſe 


are their determined purpoſes, and ſince they 


138 APPEAL TO THE 


have power to put them in execution, no won- 
der if they ſay, that women reduced to a ſtate 
of ſubmiſſion and dependence, are the fitter 


and better companions for them. 


Bor let me alk, if theſe determinations are 
the determinations of reaſon; or whether they 
are not on the contrary, in direct oppoſition to 
all reformation, to the poſitive and undeniable 
precepts of Chriſtianity, which expreſsly com- 
mand humility of heart and conduct to all 
men? Whether they are not in direct oppoſition 
to juſtice and humanity, and to that voice 
within, which though ſeldom heard amid the 
tumult of worldly cares and pleaſures, fails not 
if liſtened to, — to ſpeak with energy to the ſoul 
of man? 


A LITTLE degree of reflection I think muſt 
make men acknowledge, that their claims of 
Juperiority, and of courſe authority, are found- 
ed—as all unreaſonable claims of ſuperiority 
and authority are—on preſumption, pride of 


heart, and the love of unreſtrained dominion 


* 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. 139 


and pleaſure ; to all of which it muſt be con- 
feſſed, that women would give ſome little check, 
if allowed to occupy that place in ſociety, to 
which perhaps, it may at laſt be found they are 
juſtly entitled. And is not this check preciſely 
what-is ſo much wanted, though not permitted 


nor withed for? 


LET us ſuppoſe for a moment, that the ſexes 
are agreed to take a calm and impartial view of 
their different pretenſions; and that men find 
theirs not ſo very clearly proven,—not fo uncon- 
trovertably juſt, —as long habit, old prejudices, 
and falſe, or at leaſt overſtrained notions of their 


own conſequence and dignity, may have former- 


ly led them to believe. Let us likewiſe ſuppoſe 
that the other party, far from being convinced 


that the pretenſions of the men are well found- 
ed, bring forward their own ; which balancing 
againſt theirs, put them-as they conceive, upon 
a footing of perfect equality. 


1 THINK this is ſtating the caſe, not in a 
53 


* 
” 

_— DM... A, — 

as 


— — — — —— — 
— — 


140 APPEAL TO THE . 


very extravagant point of view, but in ſuch 
an one as reaſonable men will allow to be nearly 
the truth, | 


Now is it poſſible to conceive, —is it not do- 
ing men injuſtice to imagine,—that they would 
eſteem or love women the leſs, for being con- 
ſcious of the advantages which Providence has 
aſſigned them ; for knowing and feeling them- 
ſelves injured, when they are denied theſe ad- 
vantages? 'So far from eſteeming or loving 
them the leſs, men would eſteem and love them 
the more,—lI appeal to their own hearts and 
conſciences if they would not,—if they were 
impartial obſervers and judges. If blinded, 
perverted, and miſled, by ſtrong paſſions and 


ſtill ſtronger prejudices, they were not at all 


riſques purſuing a ſyſtem, where they are de- 


termined to beat down all oppoſition, and pre- 


tenſions to interference, 


Having laboured hard to convince men, 


that if they would but think as rational beings, 


they would not like women the worſe for know- 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. 141 


ing their own conſequence, and maintaining it, 


in all juſt and reaſonable points; Iwill next go a 


ſtep further, and ſay, that even unreaſonable and 


tyrannical beings as men are, they do not upon 
the whole like women the worſe for this ratio- 
nal, and natural exertion of the underſtanding, 


but only as it may happen to ſuit their purpoſes; 


ſo that upon the whole women gain nothing, 


and loſe much, by an unreaſonable and general 
humiliation. And I ſhall at laſt venture to ad- 
vance, that even if it were proven, that women 
were the more amiable in the eyes of men, by 

reducing themſelves to a ſtate of perfect ſub- 
miſſion and dependence, yet ſtill that even this 
would be no ſufficient reaſon for reducing them- 
ſelves to that ſtate, 


AnD firſt then let me repeat, that unreaſon- 
able and tyrannical as men in general molt cer- 
tainly are, with regard to women ; they do not 
upon the whole like them the better, or at leaſt 
they do not treat them the better—which is the 


only true teſt of love—for their forced humility 


and ſubmiſſion ; though they may like to take 


T 


— 2 


r i. 


-— —— 
— — 


— — — 


— — — — 
K Ct 


—— oe — 4 
— —e— —— 


— 


* 
* —— — 


— 
* „r dñ— é TP F — 
* a " ay » — 
— 2 1 


— 
—— — — - 
prog - — b my 
— — — - 
— — 


— 
— 


- — — 
— AA Re re — 
ov 


142 APPEAL TO THE 


advantage of it, to ſuit their own purpoſes. 
Nor do they upon the whole eſteem them the 
leſs, for knowing and maintaining their conſe- 


- quence, in a reaſonable and temperate manner. 


. THAT there are a few inſtances in the know- 
ledge of every one, of women ſingularly ami- 
able, who by their patient ſuffering have re- 


claimed men, and led them back to duty and 


the paths of virtue, when an oppoſite, or even 
leſs gentle conduct might have been ineffectual, 
or produced bad conſequences, I cannot doubt 
and therefore will not attempt to deny,—for 
the hearts of all men are not made of marble. 
But few are the inſtances; in proportion to the 
bulk of ſociety. That there are numbers of 
artful women, who taking the advantage of the 
weakneſs of the men they have to deal with, 
and who by flattering their vices and foibles, 


gain their purpoſes, and perhaps in the end a 


complete command over them, is certainly true 


| likewiſe. But the inſtances in either caſe, are 


not numerous enough to preponderate, in the 
great ſcale of human life. 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. 143 


Tur fact is, that every impartial and critical 
obſerver muſt ſee, that the generality of women 
ſuffer in ſilence and ſubmiſſion a great degree 
of miſery, from their ſenſibility to a thouſand 
mortifications to which they are ſubject through 
life ; and from their inability to do themſelves 
juſtice. And though men not only bind them 
down, but talk them down, to this ſtate of ſub- 
miſſion ; women in general feel the mortifica- 
tions only,—without the promiſed and boaſted 
benefits of this conduct. 


1 vo not here ſpeak of women, who have 
the good fortune to be connected with men, 
who are juſt and reaſonable in an uncommon 
degree; becauſe though ſuch men know that 
they have law and cuſtom on their ſide, for any 
authority they pleaſe to aſſume; yet they con- 

ſider and feel that there are rights, which ſu- 
percede all human laws. But men of weak 
underſtandings, or bad hearts, or bad habits,. 
or indeed men generally ſpeaking, will not 
argue ſo; for ſuch without reflection or remorſe, 
naturally enough, avail themſelves, of every 


SIE th „c — ee 


- — 
—_— 
— — 


© — 


-4 — 


+ — — N oe” \ * 
— . * — 
w— he Irs wr —Oo—_ Sor Oe 
" py - Fe — 4s 1 n oY 
a = — — — 2 — — 
um 2 * — « 


a — 
——— —„— 
— 


— —  — — 

— — 

6 F ··=mꝶ. — 
_— — 


1 
1 
. 

I. 

{ 


1 . 
— 7 . 
—— B —— ———ů —3ꝓ½r᷑æ ED 
— 


— — 
<4. — - - 
9 —— — 


a 7 
— 2 . 


ah 

— FE —— oy 

—— a tott- —— — — 
— 1 CONIIEES 


144 APPEAL TO THE 


advantage of that uſurped authority beſtowed | 
upon them. And with ſuch it cannot be ſup- 
poſed, nor does it indeed happen, that however 
women may demean themſelves, they gain any 
advantages. which deſerve to be conſidered as 
an adequate return, for the many ſacrifices 
that they are expected, and in fact, forced to 
make. 


I MEAN from all I have ſaid to infer, that 
extreme and abject ſubmiſſion, is not neceſſary 
to the natural lovelineſs of the female character; 
nor to the real happineſs of the ſexes; ſince, 
the beſt of men neither expect nor claim it; and 
ſince men of an oppoſite character are neither 
mended by it in their own conduct, nor do 


they give the women thus degraded, the merit 


they expect, or perhaps deſerve. 


I am now going to advance, that even if that 
were proved, which I have been laboring hard 
to diſprove ;—that women really would be uni- 


verſally the more agreeable and amiable in the 


eyes of the men, by reducing themſelves to a 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. 145 


ſtate of perfect ſubmiſſion and obedience that 
even this if true, would neither be a ſufficient 
motive, nor excuſe, for reducing themſelves to 


that ſtate. 


Tux pride of man will I know revolt at this 
aſſertion, and he will ſay unto woman Who 
is there in heaven or in earth, that thou ſhouldeſt | 
deſire beſides me?“ But ſtop, preſumptuous 
being! and conſider, that though all of us, | i, 
old, and young, love you well enough, and | 
often too well for our own peace; yet that | 
there are two things, the firſt of which we | 
ought, and the laſt of which we do, prefer 3 
even to you; becauſe it is in the very nature 
of things that we muſt do ſo— And theſe are 
Our duty to God, —And the conſideration of | 


our own happineſs. | | 


Our duty to God teaches us as I believe, 
not only to practiſe virtue ourſelves, but to re- 
vere, to diſtinguiſh, and as much as is in our 
power, to reward it in others; and of conſe- 


quence, not to encourage vice, be it found in 


* 


r - __ — = 1 


8 


— - 
CC at ond Helo Js _— — 
— 2 — — — — — * » 
1 2 „ l 
- 3 S ==> 
ae 


— 
—— ä——ä —— — — 


146 APPEAL TO THE 


whom it may, by a mean and, cowardly ſub- 
millivn to its dictates. This I take to be the 
pure and perfe& law of God, and the language 
of reaſon ; and equally applying to both ſexes ; 
for as I have before ſaid, the Almighty hath not 
been pleaſed to make any diſtinction between 
the moral perfections, or religious duties, of 
the one ſex and the other. 


Tus being the caſe, how much are women 
of ſenſibility and of reflection to be pitied, in 
many of the moſt intereſting ſituations in life! 
ſuch having ſenſe enough to ſee through, 
and deſpiſe, the little ſhuffling, temporiſing 
manners taught the ſex, under the diſguiſe of 
worldly wiſdom and ſelf. intereſt; and being 
inſtructed by reaſon and religion to look upon 
things as they really are, and not through the 
falſe medium held before their eyes on purpoſe 
to miſlead them. But indeed almoſt every wo- 
man muſt behold with ſome degree of indigna- 
tion, man, the counterpart of herſelf, ſet up as 
an idol, to be interpoſed between her and her 
God. A ſecondary kind of deity, whom it is 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN, 147 


attempted to make her believe ſhe muſt propt- 
tiate, before ſhe dares hope for the favor of the 
firſt, Though like all falſe deities, he, muſt 
often be propitiated, by ſuch ſacrifices as are 
an abomination to the Lord. 


In fat, whoever, man or woman, worſhips 
at the ſhrine of mere humanity ;—whoever is 
under the galling neceſſity of bowing too obſe- 
quiouſly to his fellow-creature ;— muſt often 
ſacrifice at that fane, every thing worthy of 
being retained by a reaſonable being. And 
what is abſurd beyond endurance; opinion, 
belief,—nay that ſpecies of opinion or belief 
pre-eminently called faith, —muſt lie proſtrate, 
at leaſt in appearance, at the requiſition of man 
to man; leaving the mind thus humiliated little 
better,—if things immaterial, may be aſſimilated 
to things material,—than a caput mortuum. 
By which I mean a ſomething, equivalent to a 
nothing. 


It then, even men, ſometimes feel the hard 
hand of human authority preſs ſo heavily upon 
- 


a _ — — — 
«vw mer — — 4 a 
- — 
— — 


- — 
EA” — L — 25 s 
1 25 £ 3 a... 1 te To 
rr 
a ”_ - — 
0 — — — — _— 


at 


* 


1 


2 r 2 — # 8 * = © = 
2 — ** a = : Z 
— * 4 ry 2 = — 4 6 * - - . — 22 
* - — * — 
7 — Re > 
— * N =_ a 
— — 4 n — — —— 
— — — n 2 —— - — —ͤ n — — 9 
82 9 —— : : 
— — — — — = 
— — — — =" prog 2 IE” "©. PR - "AE * * 
——— — = — 2 2 — — => —— 
—_ P * 
2544 ere ns oe aw” Vt WI 
= 


148 „ APPEAL TO THE 


themſelves, let them again lay it ſomewhat 
lighter on thoſe, who have perhaps as much 
reaſon, and ſurely more ſenſibility than they ; 
and to whom it muſt ever be a ſubject of bitter 
regret and mortification, to be arbitrarily re- 


{tricted by beings, whom they cannot conſider 


as differing very materially from themſelves. 


It is conſequently, but fair and natural for them 
to wiſh,—and they do accordingly ardently wiſh, 
—to be guided by God and their own con- 


ſciences, in the ſame degree that men are. 


Wr are now come to the conſideration of 
our own individual happineſs. That this muſt 
be our firſt concern, is a ſelf-evident and uni- 
verſal truth,—an inſtin&t ſtamped. upon every 
living creature, and conſequently a thing not left 


to our own deciſion. That this ſelfiſh principle 


aſſumes, however, different appearances, ac- 


cording to the bent originally given to the 
mind, or according to the bent it may have for- 
tuitouſly acquired, will not be denied ; but ſtill 
however it remains in its full force, and is 


continually purſuing its own end—the happineſs 


| MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. 149 


of that portion of animated matter, to which it 
is excluſively attached. 


Tarts univerſal principle, being of courſe then 
engrafted, and interwoven, in the compoſition 
of woman; how is it, Oh man! that you vainly 
and arrogantly preſume to dictate to her, and 
to point out the road to happineſs and perfec- 
tion, as lying only through the medium of 
ſubmiſſion and obedience to you? By what 
means are you to lay dormant this active in- 
ſtint, which, judging for itſelf, pleads with 
unceaſing energy, for its original and unalie- 
nated rights ? 


Tuus, you may talk to woman to eternity, 
of the ſupreme felicity of pleaſing you, though 
at her own expence, at the expence of her 

liberty, her property, her natural equality; at 
. the expence of almoſt every gift with which 
God may have endowed her, and which you 
pretend to prune, to garble, or to extirpate at 
will; I ſay, you may preach thus to eternity, 
but you will never convince, while that never- 


T50 APPEAL TO THE 


dying principle of which we have been ſpeaking, 
—while the voice of Nature pleads within us, 
and clearly intimates,—that a greater degree, a 
greater proportion of happineſs might be the 
lot of women, it they were allowed as men are, 
ſome vote, ſome right of judgment in a matter 
which concerns them ſo nearly, as that of the 
laws and opinions by which they are to be go- 
verned. And of which it is but reaſonable to 
ſuppoſe that they themſelves muſt be very com- 
petent judges, under proper reſtrictions. 


-  HavinGs here, as well as in the former parts 

of this work, endeavoured to convince men of 
the fallacy of their reaſoning, and the raſhneſs 
of their judgment, with reſpect to women; I 
now proceed to ſay what I think women might 
be, in ſtrict conformity with their duty to God, 
to themſelves, and to men, Theſe happily do | 
not jar with each other ; but when combined— 
as may well be ſuppoſed from the wiſdom of 
the Creator and Father of all—form the neareſt 
thing to perfection, which can be expected in 
woman! 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. 151 


A GREEK author, whoſe very name carries 
weight with it, though unluckily it is too learned 
and wiſe-looking for a woman even to tran- 
ſcribe, without running the riſque of bringing 
an old houſe about her ears; I ſay this old gen- 
tleman, who was upon every occaſion * a ſturdy 
moraliſt,' was of opinion, that the greater part 
of the happineſs i. ſociety, depended 
upon the right gove b ent of women. If this 
be true,—and it carries ſomething very like 
conviction along with it, —it will be readily al- 
lowed, that when endeavouring to eſtabliſh a 
point of ſuch importance, it is evidently neceſ- 
fary to ſet aſide as far as is poſſible, all preju- 
dices however cheriſhed by men, or however 
ſubmitted to by women; however ſanctified by 
antiquity, or however fortified by habit; for 
what reſpect is due to theſe, when entering on 
a ſearch after Truth, in her original and undiſ- 
guiſed ſtate ? It is, I repeat it, abſolutely neceſ- 
ſary to clear our ground of all incumbrances, 
before we begin our operations; or we ſhall be 
interrupted at every ſtep by impediments, not 
planted there by the unerring hand of Nature, 


152 APPEAL ro THE 


—not the native produce of the ſoil;—but ſtum- 
bling blocks placed in our way, by the folly or 
treachery of men. 


As however reformation cannot commence 
Vith efficacy after habits are formed, and preju- 
dices imbibed—for that mind muſt have energy 
indeed which can expel ſuch ſtrong poiſons— 
we of courſe muſt introduce this part of our 
work, with an enquiry into the proper mode of 
education for women. 


Ap here a queſtion naturally occurs which 
is ſometimes diſputed, but generally negatived. 
Whether women ſhould receive nearly the ſame 
education as men, with exceptions which are 

obvious to common ſenſe; and which the deli- 
cacy of the female frame, and the ſtill greater 
delicacy of the female character, prove to be 
undeniably founded in nature? Even after theſe 
exceptions are granted, I allow that the queſtion 
has been generally negatived. But by whom, 
and who were the judges? Why men to be 
ſure, and men only ; for the party moſt deeply 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN, 153 


concerned are never conſulted ; but conſidered, 
upon I know not what principle, as totally in- 
competent to judge. 


I Have endeavoured in different parts of this 
{ſketch to prove, that neither nature, nor reaſon, 
nor revelation, juſtify ſuch an arbitrary exclu- 
ſion, —ſuch a mortifying diſtinction ;—as that 
which the men have eſtabliſhed between the 
ſexes, by governing the women without con- 
trol, without repreſentation, and without limi- 
tation ; and by leaving them in almoſt every 
circumſtance of life, expoſed to every ſpecies 
of injury, without a poſlibility of redreſs. Yet 
why ſhould the opinions of men preponderate 
ſo heavily in the ſcale of human affairs? Finite, 
imperfect, fallible, and mortal beings! where 
—or in what—lies that mighty ſuperiority, 
which they ſo proudly arrogate to themſelves ? 
Strength of body excepted, there has been no 
other that we know of, or acknowledge, ever 
clearly proven. Their pains, their pleaſures, 
their ſenſes and their paſſions, their virtues and 
their vices, are all of the fame ſtamp ; ; when 


154 APPEAL TO THE _ 


nature gets fair play. And, when the orga- 
niſed matter which for a few moments is ani- 

mated by the breath of life, is required of us 
by the common mother of mankind, to crown 
the reſemblance death comes at laſt, and cloſes 


the ſcene upon both without diſtinction. 


SINCE then the beneficent Creator of all, has 
dealt out to his children of this world his por - 
tions of intelligence, and all his benefits, with 
fo impartial an hand, that we are not only en- 
titled, but irreſiſtibly impelled to claim equality 
in his paternal inheritance ; why ſhould women 
be excluded from having, and giving their opi- 
nions, upon matters of importance to them- 
ſelves? And why again J repeat it, ſhould the 


opinions of men carry all before them ? 


THERE 1s manifeſt injuſtice in the caſe, and 


it well deſerves to be examined to the bottom. 


I Have already obſerved, that the motives 
of men, for keeping women in a greater degree 
of ſubjection than reaſon or religion warrant ; 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN, 155 


are at leaſt plauſible, if not convincing; ſince 
beſides the ſuperiority which they affect to ſee 
in their own ſex, they urge home the neceſſity 
of this ſubjection on the part of women, as a 
ſacrifice due to the peace of ſociety; which 
amid jarring intereſts and paſſions, would often 
be diſturbed, if authority were not explicitly 
ſettled in the hands of one of the ſexes; or ſo 
juſtly appropriated to each, that no cauſe of 
diſpute ſhould commonly occur. 


Muc indeed it is true is due, to the peace 
of ſociety, nor ſhall we attempt to deny it ; and 
many and mortifying are the ſubmiſſions which 
prudent women would be inclined to make, to 
eſtabliſh and confirm perfect harmony and good 
will between the ſexes. But ſtill, generous 
minds turn indignant from a ſyſtem where it 1s 
expected, that women only, ſhall heap the 
© altar of ſacrifices'—while man, — the high 
prieſt of authority,—the ſelfiſh egotiſt,. —ſtands 
ſeverely by, and ſtamps by his approbation, 
what Re has inſtituted by his power. 


X 


156 Arzl. TO THE 


Sven a ſyſtem however, we may be permit- 
ted to ſay, is not, founded on natural juſtice, 
and of courſe can never be ſupported by reaſon 
or by Chriſtianity, . Unſtable therefore in its 
very nature, it is always tottering to its baſe ; 
and perhaps we would not riſque much by pre- 
dicting its complete and final overthrow. 


Tu caſe then between the ſexes, ſeems to 
ſtand thus—that though it is undeniably rea- 
ſonable, that men ſhould wiſh by every means 
conſiſtent with juſtice, to preſerve the harmony 
of ſocial life, of which the right government of 
the women forms ſo eſſential a part; yet that it 
is equally undeniable, that men ſhould volunta- 
rily contribute their mite, by ſacrificing ſome 
of their ſelf-formed, ſelt-claimed privileges, to 
the ſame important purpoſe, to which women 
are forced to contribute ſo large a ſhare. Or, 
if this is too much at once 'to expect, —as per- 
haps it is, —let men at leaſt in the firſt place 
conſider the ſubject impartially; for good is 
always to be expected from impartial conſide- 
ration. And indeed without it, to found, or 


— 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN, 157 


eſtabliſh, or even to ſupport any ſyſtem what- 
ever, is unjuſt and unprincipled, let the end 
propoſed, be what it may. For it muſt be al- 
lowed, that even a juſt and virtuous purpoſe, 
ought not to be brought about, by means 'un- 
worthy of the end, ' And it would be impious 
to ſuppoſe,—it is even againſt reaſon and daily 
experience to imagine,—that every purpoſe or 
end, juſt and virtuous in itſelf, is not to be 
effected, by means equally ſo. If the reverſe 
of this were true, —how imperfe&t, and how 
unworthy of the great Author of all good and 
all perfection, were the moral government of 
this ſublunary world! If the reverſe of this 
were true, though we could not eaſily bring 
ourſelves to believe that the work of creation 
was formed by chance, we might well be jul. 
tified in ſuppofing it governed, by that blind 


principle. * 


Bur, the moral government of Providence, 
being a truth ſo evident, a truth ſo well eſta- 
bliſhed, that few it is believed attempt to deny 


1t,—even in this age, branded, perhaps too 


158 APPEAL TO THE 


haſtily, as favoring atheiſm and infidelity,—as 
every thing that we can perceive, and are able 
to comprehend, exhibits or implies, juſtice in 
the means, as well as in the end; I mean to 
infer, that men ſhould be guided by, and act 
Upon, the fame principles, in governing the 
female ſex, as in the other tranſactions of life. 
And I believe I may fately add, that by not at- 
tending 40 the rules of common juſtice in this 
delicate point, it is, that they ſplit upon the 
rocks, molt fatal to the happineſs of domeſtic 
and ſocial life. 


To throw fome light upon this part of the 
ſubject, let me here aſk a queſtion, which ſhall 
be again repeated, and ſtand foremoſt, in a 
ſhort chapter appropriated to queries. 


In forming the laws by which women are 
governed, and in the arbitrary opinions which 
have been taken up and encouraged with regard 
to them, and which have nailed the fetters of 
the law down, or ſupplied their place where 
they have been entirely filent ; have not men 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. 159 


in forming theſe and in continuing them, con- 
fulted more their own conveniency, comfort, 
and dignity, as far as their judgment and fore- 
fight ſerved them, than that of women; though 
they are as nearly concerned, and much more 
likely to be ſufferers, as having no hand in 


forming them ? 


Ir men have in all ages done ſo,—which I 
believe will hardly be denied by a ſingle indi- 
vidual amongſt them, —what dependence can 
be had for juſtice in any caſe where women are 
concerned, upon judges ſo partial, ſo criminally 


ſelfiſh ? 


To apply then this nearly general cenſure to 
the queſtion in hand, let us only conſider upon 


what grounds it is, that men deny to women 


the privilege, of an education equally rational 
in itſelf, equally improving to the mind, and 
equally conſequential to the happineſs of the 


individual, as that which they think proper to 
beſtow upon themſelves ? 


N= - 

2 

— — = 
; 

OO 


— 


160 APPEAL TO THE 


THE general and governing reaſon for this 
excluſion J have given at large, and with the 


reader's leave ſhall now enter ſomewhat more 


into detail, 


, 


I APPREHEND, that independent of their ma- 
ternal character ;—I mean as mothers of the 


human race, which cannot be taken from them, 


though it is reduced to as low a pitch in point 


of conſequence as poſlible ;—that independent 
of this, women are conſidered in two ways only. 
In the lower claſſes as neceſſary drudges—In 
the higher as the ornaments of ſociety, the 
pleaſing triflers, who flutte? through life for 


the amuſement of men, rather than for any 


ſettled purpoſe with regard to themſelves ; and 


are accordingly as it ſuits the caprice of their 
maſters, the objects of adoration, or of tor- 
ment, or of a paſſion unworthy of a name, or 
a place, in civilized ſociety. In plain language, 
women are in all ſituations rendered merely the 
humble companions of men, — the tools of their 
neceſſities, —or the ſport of their authority, of 
their prejudices, and of their paſſions. Women 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. 161 


viewed 1n this degrading light, are perhaps as 
well off with the trifling and corruptive mode 
of education generally allowed them ; as with 
one which would rouſe thoſe talents, and in- 
creaſe that deſire after knowledge, with which 
God and nature has from the beginning, ſo 
liberally endowed them. 


Bur, the queſtion here 1s,—Are men war- 
ranted in forming upon light grounds, fuch 
opinions with regard to women; and in com- 
pelling them in every eſſential point in life, to 
act according to theſe pre-conceived, and as we 
think erroneous opinions? The anſwer from 
the men, is but too ready, but too perſuaſive; 
for ſay they Our judgment diſclaims your 


pretenſions ;—we hold our judgment as ſuperior 


to yours ;—and we are inveſted with powers to 


compel, if we cannot perſuade. 


From ſuch a tribunal then, is there no ap- 


cal ?—Alas! none. C 7 
p ai as Au Nee op. 


Wurd men however deign to argue more to 


| 


>7 
Ms 


* 
—— 
ur ur — pv 4 "> 
« % 8 8 * 


162 APPEAL ro THE 


the point, they allege, that when women are 
educated too much upon an equality with them, 
it renders them preſuming and conceited ;— 
unleſs in their families; —-maſculine, and con- 


ſequently diſguſting in their manners. 


TIE SE are very heavy charges indeed; but 


women do not allow them to be well founded, 


nor unanſwerable. 


Trs firſt objection advanced, is, that know- 
ledge and learning render women preſuming 
and conceited. I beg leave to fay that both 
reaſon and experience contradict this aſſertion; 
for it has never been proven, that knowledge 
in a general yiew, favoured or produced pre- 
ſumption, though in particular inſtances it may 
no doubt be found to have done ſo. Much it | 
muſt be confeſſed depends on the ſubject ated 
upon, and knowledge may be compared with 
reſpect to its effects on the mind, to wholeſome 
food upon the body; for a diſeaſed habit will 
turn the pureſt aliments to corruption, inſtead 
of nouriſhment. But this only confirms what 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. 163 


has been ſo often and ſo well ſaid, that there is 


no rule without exception. 


_ Tnvs I will not pretend to deny, but that 
ſome women who have a great deal of know- 


ledge, are neither ſo amiable, nor ſo uſeful 


members of ſociety, as others who have little, 


or none, above what is neceſſary in the moſt 
common occurrences in life. But does not this 
likewiſe apply to men of the ſame deſcription? 
And what does it after all prove? Nothing 
but that the moſt valuable acquiſitions may in 
particular inſtances, be perverted and miſap- 
plied. If this, however, were allowed to be a 
ſufficient objection, we ſcarcely know any thing 
which could ſtand ſo ſevere a teſt. For all ſub- 
lunary good is liable to be perverted to evil. 
We may then be permitted to ſay that upon the 


whole, knowledge has a direct and natural ten- | 


dency to promote the love, and the conſequent 


practice of virtue, - to improve the mind,. 


to exerciſe and ſtrengthen the judgment, —and 


to correct the heart. In ſhort, under the guid- 


ance of reaſon and religion, to conduct man- 
5 


164 APPEAL TO THE 


kind to every poſſible perfection. At leaſt if 
this is not acknowledged, we can give no good 
reaſon, why men ſhould adopt the acquiſition 
of it as neceſſary and ornamental to themſelves. 


SINCE then this doctrine will not, nor indeed 
cannot be denied with regard to men; reaſoning 
from analogy, I do not conceive that it can be 
denied when applied to women. For even al- 
lowing · what cannot be very eaſily proven, that 
there is a difference in degree, they are ſo 
cloſely, ſo very cloſely akin, that whatever ap- 
plies to the one, . does to the other, with very 


flight deviations. 


INDEED knowledge, learning, and all ſolid 
acquirements, are as yet ſo very rare among 
the female ſex, that it is by no means ſurpriſing 
if ſome who really poſſeſs thoſe advantages, 


know it, and feel it. Nor is it ſurpriſing, nor 


perhaps altogether out of nature, though by no 


means commendable or pleaſing, if they at times 
endeavour to let others know it, and feel it 


too. Yet to the honor of both ſexes be it ſaid, 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. 165 


- 


—to the honor of human nature and learning 
be it ſpoken,—inſtances of proud and | pre- 
ſumptuous perſons of real abilities and ſolid 
acquirements, are but rare, in compariſon 
of the numbers; who are the delight of 
- their friends, the ornaments” of ſociety, and 
the benefactors of mankind. It were poſ- 
ſible to enumerate names well known to the 
world, and dear to their own circle, who are 
equally admired in an amiable, as in a literary 
point of view. Suffice it to ſay, that the expe- 
rience of the preſent times as well as of paſt 
ages fully juſtify us in maintaining, that a few 
exceptions granted, which prove nothing, know- 
ledge does improve every one, man or woman, 
who is bleſſed with common ſenſe for a foun- 
dation—that preſumption and conceit are rather 
the offspring of ignorance than knowledge— 
and that knowledge of almoſt any deſcription 
is better than ignorance. Always without a 
doubt however preferring, that kind moſt ſuited - 
to ſituation and circumſtances ; and which as 
far as human foreſight can judge, is moſt likely 
to be uſeful and ornamental through lite. 


"I —— — — — ' ̃— 


166 APPEAL TO THE 


Taz charge which we ſhall next endeavour 
to prove erroneous, is, that the purſuit and poſ- 


ſeſſion of knowledge, occaſion in women, a 


neglect of their families and domeſtic duties, 


Perhaps this is the charge of all others the worſt 
founded; the conſequence the leaſt likely to 
happen were we to truſt to theory, and the 
moſt decidedly contradicted when we appeal to 


facts and experience. Surely knowledge, learn- 


ing, and ſcience, give a ſolidity to the mind, a 
turn for reflection, which muſt be highly favor- 
able to the beſt feelings of humanity, and conſe- 
quently to the moſt amiable of all the affections, 
the parental. Not that I mean to ſay that wo- 
men are wanting in this virtue, who have no 
pretenſions to thoſe ; though to ſay the truth, 
the parental fondneſs of many mothers, often 
more reſembles animal inſtinct, blind partiality, 


and perſonal vanity, than that rational affection 


which leads to the improvement, as well as to 


| the preſervation of the human ſpecies. And 
when added to that ignorance of the powers of 


the mind, to which moſt part of the female ſex 


are condemned, we take into conſideration, the 


MEN OP GREAT BRITAIN, 167 


flimſy, inconſequent education generally be- 
ſtowed upon them ; we cannot. be ſurpriſed if 
inſtead of training, it unfits them for the im- 
portant taſk,—the ſerious attention—requiſite 
to form the minds, as well as to care for the 


bodies of their children, 


InDEED women who upon the one hand, are 
placed by their circumſtances above the neceſ- 
ſity of this ſerious attention, and on the other 
have not what is only to be acquired by a con- 
ſtant exerciſe of their reaſon ;—ſolidity of judg- 
ment to conſider what a ſacred depoſit has been 
entruſted them by Providence in bringing to 
life and rearing to maturity the human race 


fuch women I ſay can hardly be ſuppoſed, to 


look upon this truſt but as a burthenſome taſk, 


when compared to pleaſures which require nei- 
ther trouble nor attention; and which as they 
are commonly termed innocent, they accord- 
ingly enjoy in their fulleſt extent without re- 
morſe. Though even theſe innocent as they 
really are in themſelves, never fail in the end 


to corrupt, and debaſe human nature to a cer- 


168 APPEAL TO THE 


tain degree, when enjoyed beyond the bounds 
of moderation and reaſon, 


THaT eternal round of giddy intercourſe 
with the world, in which it is the faſhionable 
mode for faſhionable females to paſs their time, 
| —and indeed the rabbia has reached almoſt all 
ranks but the induſtrious poor ;—thoſe frivo- 
lous, yet expenſive amuſements, in which they 
place their chief delight, and in which to ſay 
the truth they are but too well kept in counte- 
nance by the men; are totally inconſiſtent with 
attention to domeſtic concerns. They muſt 
therefore of courſe in a great degree neglect 
their offspring and families, and commit to 
others theſe, which they are diſpoſed to ſacrifice 
to thoſe wretched ſubſtitutes for duty, com- 
monly called pleaſures; and thoſe indeed to- 
tally engage their time, and their thoughts. For, 
it is too true that minds occupied by trifles, are 
as completely engroſſed by them; as minds of a 


| ſuperior caſt, by the moſt momentous concerns. 


In ſhort it is almoſt undeniably true, that 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. 169 


every ſingle circumſtance in the routine of fa- 
ſhionable life, —and I muſt again repeat, that 
in it, of in vulgar imitations: of it, all ranks 
are included but the induſtrious poor,—that 
every circumſtance 1s evidently againſt that at- 
tehtion to children and family, which ought to 
be the prominent feature in the character and 
employment of every woman who has children 


and families to attend to. 


I nor I am already too well known to my 
readers, for them to ſuppoſe, that I mean by 
this, that all women ſhould be mere nurſes and 
houſehold drudges. This is neither to be ex- 
pected nor wiſhed for in the preſent advanced 
ſtate of ſociety; for ſome degree of level muſt 
always be preſerved, in the purſuits, the habits, 
and the manners of the ſexes, or diſguſts in 
domeſtic life, muſt infallibly enſue. I wiſh on 
the contrary to prove, that it is from women 
who cannot eaſily confent to be merely ſuch,— 
except their ſituations and circumſtances render 
it neceſſary for them to be ſo,—that it is from 
women of ſenſe and education moſt aſſuredly, 


170 APPEAL TO THE 


that the greateſt attention to children and do- 
meſtic concerns may be expected, upon ſolid 
principles, and from proper motives. And it 
is from women of this ſtamp only, that thoſe 
firſt and greateſt concerns can be expected to 
be combined, with elegance of mind and man- 
ners, and graceful accompliſhments in a ſuffi- 
cient degree. For though it cannot be denied, 
that mere women of the world generally excel 
in theſe latter. — for what is there that man or 
woman may not excel in, which they not only 
make their conſtant ſtudy and practice, but in 
which they place their chief delight and pride, 
—yet even elegant manners, and graceful and 
faſhionable accompliſhments, however faſcinat- 
ing, may be bought too dear; and moſt cer- 
tainly are ſo, if to them is ſacrificed any one 
of the neceſſary duties of life, or any one of 
the moral virtues; which muſt too often be 
allowed to be the caſe with thoſe, who ſtudy 
ſuperficial graces only. | 


WIIILE then on the one hand, we ſee, that 
women who are not educated with ſome degree 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. 151 


of attention to mental and uſeful attainments, 
are too much oecupied with faſhionable gaieties, 
or other equally frivolous amuſements, to make 
domeſtic virtues and duties their concern; and 
while it is evident that their habits and purſuits 
are at eternal variance with theſe ; it will hardly 
be denied upon the other hand, that the habits 
and purſuits of women of reading and reflection, 
are highly favorable, and affimilate, if I may fo 
expreſs myſelf, with every home enjoyment and 
focial delight. Home indeed is to them the 
ſcene of their happineſs, their refuge from noiſe 
and folly ; the ceriter of their wiſhes, to which 
all their deſtres and actions ultimately tend; 
the magnet whoſe attraction counterbalanees 
that of the world, and keeps them in a ſteady 
and uniform courſe. Not ſhunning with faſti- 
dious nicety, nor ill; founded ſeruples, the in- 
nocent pleaſures, and elegant amuſements of 
the times; but ever conſidering theſe as the 
relaxations only, not as the ſerious buſineſs of 
life. And being well convinced that true hap- 
pineſs, like true virtue, ſhuns all extremes; 
they will endeavour to attain it, by that mixture 
Z. 


172 APPEAL TO THE 


of home joys and ſocial intercourſe with the 
world; which, as moſt congenial to buman 
nature, is not only moſt conducive to preſent 
enjoyment ;z but to future and progreſſive im- 
provement. : 

TRE reader may think I have drawn theſe 
two characters that of a mere woman of the 
world—and that of a woman of an improved 
underſtanding— with a partial hand. It is im- 
poſſible perhaps. that any reaſonable perſon, 
contemplating both, ſhould do otherwiſe. Yet 
with all due allowance for this, the portraits are 
drawn from nature, and conſequently conſiſtent 
with trench. For as to exceptions they affect 
not any ſyſtem, 


_ Having ſaid as much on the two firſt 
charges, as the limited nature of this ſketch 
will admit; I ſhall now conſider the laſt—That 
knowledge renders women maſculine, and con- 
ſequently diſguſting in their manners.—In doing 
this I think my argument will prove a two-edged 
ſword. I think it muſt prove, that neither has 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. 173 


learning a direct, and inevitable tendency to 
render women maſculine; nor if it did ſo, 
would it render them conſequently, and infal- 
libly diſagreeable to the men. 


PRERHA Ps to define the terms uſed, is one of 
the firſt duties of writers; and if they always 
underſtood themſelves, and made their readers 
clearly comprehend the preciſe meaning of 
them, much labored reaſoning, and many falſe 
and preſumptuous concluſions might be ſpared. 
For example when we ſpeak of a maſculine 
woman, it is conſidered as a term of reproach; 
yet we do not conſider whether it deſerves to 
be ſo or not. We allow ourſelves to be run 
away with by a vague idea,—an undefined 
term,—of which we do not take the trouble 
to know the preciſe. meaning, or the exact 
bounds. 


Ir therefore we are to underſtand by a maſ- 
culine woman, one who emulates thoſe virtues 
and accompliſhments, which as common to 


human nature, arg common to both ſexes ; the 


obs — — — — = = - 
— RI — 
12» —— — * — 2 


174 APPEAL TO THE 


attempt is natural, amiable, and highly ho. 
norable to that woman, under whatever name 
her conduct may be diſguiſed or cenſured. For 
even virtue and truth, may be miſnamed, dif. 
guiſed, and cenſured ; but they cannot change 
their natures, in compliance with the tyranny 
of faſhion and prejudice, Theſe may indeed 
for a time throw a ſhade over them; but this 
once removed we find them till the ſame,— 
IMMUTABLE, and ETERNAL, It is in vain per- 
haps therefore, honeſtly ſpeaking and impar- 


| tially, to attempt to make any very ſerious. 


diſtinctions, between the virtues and accom- 
pliſhments of the ſexes. We may indeed dreſs 
out theſe ſomewhat differently, to ſuit a reigning 
taſte, or through. love of variety, and we may 
call this manners; by which if women can 
pleaſe the other ſex, without materially injuring. 
themſelves, they ought moſt certainly to do ſo, 
But ſuch vain diſtinctions vaniſh before the ſu- 
perior light of reaſon and religion; and women 
in all the different ſtations in life, find ſcope 
for the exerciſe of every virtue, of which human 
nature is capable. And under the paſſive cha. 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN, © 175 


racers of humility, reſignation, and abſolute 
ſubmiſſion to their authority—under theſe do 
men expect to ſee exerciſed and exerted—every 
thing which they in their proud moments arro- 
gate to themſelves, and fondly claim as ſole 


proprietors, 


IT may appear ſomewhat ſingular to advance, 
yet a little reflection will prove it to be true; 
that women in general poſſeſs even fortitude, 
that firſt of maſculine virtues, in a much greater 
degree, and of a much ſuperior kind, to that 
poſſeſſed by the men. I do not here ſpeak of 
perſonal courage, or proweſs, which is a mere 
conſtitutional affair -a matter of nerves of 
ſinews—and as it is much oftener applied to 
bad, nay to barbarous purpoſes, than any other, 
it can by no perverſion of language or ideas be 
conſtituted a virtue. 


I sPEAK of that fortitude, which has enemies 
to encounter, againſt which mere animal cou- 
rage can be of no avail; and this virtue, I again 
repeat it, women happily for themſelves poſſeſs 


176 APPEAL TO THE © 


in an eminent degree. For notwithſtanding the 
natural delicacy of their frame, they are ſubject 
to bodily pains, that, to uſe a figure of the 
ſublime Dante, Tanto è amara, che poco più 
& morte.“ And with the ſame feelings and pro- 
penſities, do they not refrain from pleaſures, 
and often from ſolicited pleaſures, to which 
man with all his boaſted ſuperiority falls alas ! 
a willing and ſelf-devoted ſacrifice ? Here indeed 
lies the teſt of true fortitude,—the touchſtone 
of virtue. And here it is that with all her diſ- 


advantages, woman ſhines pre-eminent, 


Bor as if a greater proportion of bodily pain 
—as if abſtinence from pleaſure—were not 
ſufficient for women to encounter ; all that 
the mind of man is doomed to endure,— 
all © that fleſh is heir to,'—all the * mournful 
miſeries of life,” are theirs likewiſe in an ex- 


quiſite degree. 


MERCIr UL Father! thou who haſt in thy 
wiſdom formed the ſexes with ſouls ſo nearly 


alike,—can it diſpleaſe thee, that they ſhould 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. 177 


by nearly equal means, ſtrive to emulate thy 
attributes, and arrive at the perfection of virtue? 
Since it hath pleaſed thee to leave open the 
paths of knowledge, and ſcience, for the recre- 
ation and delight, as much as for the improve- 
ment of the human ſpecies,—can it diſpleaſe 


thee that woman ſhould enter in and gather her 


ſhare of thy general bounty? If it cannot, —of 


whom then, or of what—ſhould ſhe be afraid ? 


Not ſurely of the wilful prejudices of men— 


Not ſurely of popular abſurdities— which being 


but the breath of inconſtant people, daily va- 
rieth, and ever ſpeaketh of extremes. One 


day it crieth Hoſanna, another Crucifige.“ 


Ir then women find, that the acquiſition of 


knowledge ſmooths the rugged paths of life, 
improves and promotes in them the love of 
virtue, and enables them to bear up under the 
unavoidable evils their ſex 1s liable to, with a 
greater, degree of ſelf approbation and comfort; 
let them not by an over anxiety to gain the 


favor and admiration of men, loſe ſight of ſuch 


valuable privileges. And let them keep this 


* 


— 


— —— 


- = 1 == = = — _ - 
5 — ' _ — — — — — 
3 — ä —— — — * — 
— tO" — CEE EET eo __——_—_— 
- 
- 


178 APPEAL To THE 

ever in view, that whilſt they are young and 
handſome, the generality of the other ſex will 
admire them, whether they are ignorant or 
fooliſh, or wiſe and learned. Nor will, they 
probably ſtop to enquire whether their know- 


ledge and acquirements have rendered them 


maſculine. 


Ex here then, in the hour of youth and 
beauty, we find that a woman poſſeſſed of 
mental accompliſhments, is at leaſt upon an 
equality with the mere butterfly of the moment 
—the miſguided victim of faſhion and folly— 
and this without making any allowance for the 
numberleſs opportunities which a woman of 
improved talents, has, of ſetting off even youth 
and beauty to the higheſt advantage. And this 


| ſhort ſeaſon once over, though ſhe may find that 


no virtues, nor talents, nor accompliſhments, 


are ſufficient to fix the affections of profligate 


and unprincipled men; yet at all events ſhe 
will find that ſhe poſſeſſes, all that ſhe can rea- 
ſonably expe&,—the friendſhip and approbation 


of the worthy of both ſexes. And the will enjoy 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. 179 


a comfort if poſſible above theſe, the heartfelt 
conſciouſneſs of having improved in ſome de- 
gree, thoſe talents committed to her charge by 
her Creator; to whom ſhe may look forward 
accordingly for her final reward. 


Ir then my reaſoning is well founded it ap- 
pears, that if we uſe the term maſculine wo- 
man, for characters ſuch as I have been de- 
ſcribing, it is undeniably true, that knowledge 
does naturally produce ſuch. But I will not fo 
far inſult the common ſenſe' of men,—to whoſe 
common ſenſe indeed and humanity, the whole 
of this Appeal is addreſſed, -I will not I fay fo 


far inſult it, as to ſuppoſe, even for a moment; 


that becauſe a wpman 1s rational, though per- 
haps in a ſuperior degree than is abſolutely 
neceſſary, that ſhe muſt of courſe be diſagree- 
able to them. | 


Bur if on the other hand we mean by a maſ- 
culine woman, one who apes the exerciſes, the 
attributes, the unreſtrained paſſions, and the 
numberlefs improprieties, which men fondly 

Aa 


180 | APPEAL TO THF 


chuſe to think ſuitable enough for their own 
ſex—and which exceſſes to ſay the truth after 
all, chiefly diſtinguiſh their moral characters 


from thoſe of women—I muſt ſay that know- 


ledge has no tendency whatever to produce 


ſuch aukward imitations; and I muſt confeſs, 
that ſuch are maſculine in the worſt ſenſe of the 


word, and as we ſhould imagine conſequently 


diſagreeable. This however as we hinted be- 
Fore would be a haſty and ill-grounded conclu- 
fon, though apparently founded in reaſon, for 
the fact is otherwiſe; and the preſent age fur- 
niſhes examples enough, that women may be 
truly maſculine in their conduct and demeanor, 
without wounding the delicacy of the men. 
Nay that thus adorned, ſuch women meet their 
full approbation, it at the moment the fluctuat- 
ing tide of faſhion be in their favor. 


LE us to prove this, examine a little, ſome 
of the faſhionable female accompliſhments of 


the preſent, and of former ages. 


In the firſt place preſents itſelf horſemanſhup, 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. 18x 


or rather horſewomanſhip, to which as an ex- 
erciſe, and as a graceful and convenient accom- 
pliſhment nothing can be objected. But when 
made fubſervient, as in hunting, to the torture, 
to the death, to the murder of innocent ani- 
mals, it no longer deſerves to be viewed in that 
light; but be it man or woman who indulges 
in it, can only be regarded as the ſport of 
ſavages, who have ſcarcely reflection enough 
to conſider, that the inferior animals have per- 
haps ſenſations of pain, and deſire of ſelf. pre- 
ſervation, and for aught we can prove to the 
contrary—fear of death, equal to our own; 
though they have not like Balaam's aſs the gift 
of language to turn upon their tormentors, and 
reproach them to their face. Does not however 
this ancient ſtory, from the greateſt and beſt of 
all authority, clearly prove, in what deteſtation 
the Creator of all, holds cruelty to any of his 


creatures ? 


LET women then leave to the other ſex, ſuch 


barbarous amuſements, as that of hunting poor 
innocent creatures to death! let them in the 


- 
4. AL 


5 * 
10 . 


„ YI 


i a 


— — * 3 
— — —— LH —— — —— m — 9 ̃ ² V PT ——— 


182 APPEAL TO THE 


name of humanity leave ſuch, to the other ſex, 
whoſe misfortune perhaps it is, in the preſent 
imperfe ſtate of ſociety, to be obliged to afliſt 
in the deſtruction of their own ſpecies. And 
who perhaps find it neceſſary to harden them- 
ſelves againſt that, — at which the human heart 
naturally recoils with horror ;—the ſight of 
blood,—and the extinction of life. 


On! merciful Father! haſten that promiſed, 
that happy day, when war and bloodſhed thall 


_ ceaſe to deſolate, and deform the face of this 
globe; and when peace, and innocence, and 


virtue, ſhall reſume' their reign. For though 
we of theſe times, only ſee it in diſtant proſpect, 


and with the eye of faith and hope; yet may 


we not believe that as ſure as the oracles of 
God have heretofore been fulfilled, that day 
ſhall come with peace and healing on its wings, 
not only to the human race, but to all that 
breathe the breath of life! 


AGAIN then, let women have the merit of 


anticipating thoſe happy times, and as far as in 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. © 183 


their power, diſcourage war and bloodſhed 
among mankind ; inſtead of goading them on 
like furies, as too many of the ſex have in all 
ages been known to do; and even claimed, 
and found approbation by ſo doing. Let them 
abſtain from every the ſlighteſt degree of cruelty 
to animals; and let them not think that that 
infamous refinement upon cruelty, that of ex- 
tracting amuſement from their torments, exte- 
nuates the fault, but adds to it an hundred 
fold; nay perhaps implies the whole of the 
imputed guilt. Oh heavens! that a woman 
ſhould mangle even a poor worm, FOR HER 
AMUSEMENT | and that too that ſhe may by its 
means more ſurely entice the finny tribes, into 
her mercileſs hands, there to meet an agonizing 
death, when ſeeking by inſtin& their appro- 
priate food,—and this too FOR HER AMUSE- 
MENT II have ſeen youth and beauty ſo en- 
gaged, but this employment like Circe's cup, 
transformed even theſe to objects of diſguſt, 


and made them appear ſcarcely of the human 
ſpecies ! 


— - * 
— OEoa.," AO As _— — — * 
9 v 


184  APPEAL' TO THE 


Bur let us take leave of a ſubject, which one 
mould think, would only need to be touched 
upon to ſhew its enormity ; leſt we ſhould be 
ſuſpected of what is worſe than every thing 
except cruelty—an affectation of over-ſenfibility. | 
And let us only apply it to -our preſent argu- 


ment, and ſay, what cannot well be denied; 


that though we may be permitted to call ſuch 
amuſements maſculine, in the moſt exception- 
able ſenſe of the word, and as we ſhould very 
naturally ſuppoſe, conſequently diſguſting— 
more diſguſting in a woman than all the Greek 
and Latin in the two Univerſities ;—yet that 
men do not generally ſpeaking diſcourage, but 
on the contrary countenance ſuch. And that 
one who ſhould ſay much againſt them would 


have a great deal of ill-placed raillery to en- 


counter—not only from faſhionable females— 
but from'their faſhionable male abettors. 


A $KILL in archery, in which our fore- 


_ fathers, and ſome of our fore-mothers likewiſe, 


were ſo diſtinguiſhed, is at this moment an 


admired accompliſhment ; and therefore comes 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. 185 


naturally enough under our review. And 
though our modern Boadiceas do not probably 
handle the bow and arrow with ſo much ſkill, 
and ſurely not to ſuch ſerious purpoſes, as the 
ancient heroine of that name; yet the inoffen- 
ſiveneſs of the purſuit, more than compenſates 
for the want of addreſs. Some rail at this 
amuſement as ſingularly maſculine, and totally 
improper for women. I confeſs however that 
I cannot view it in this light, but rather as an 
innocent variety—a little trial of ſkill—in a not 
ungraceful, and in a very animating and pleaſ- 
ing exerciſe. Merely as Britons, perhaps the 
Britiſh fair, may have a natural fondneſs for 
archery, gathered and acquired from 'the ro- 
mantic tales of their anceſtors. And as thoſe 
who affect this amuſement, are all of the upper 
ranks of life, and have at leaſt a ſufficient 
tincture of polite learning, through the me- 
dium of tranſlation, to underſtand and admire 
the claſſical deſcriptions —of Diana and her 

nymphs,— Calypſo and hers, &c. &c.—it is 
no wonder if joining altogether, they ima- 


gine, the management of the bow and arrow 


186 | APPEAL 'TO THE 


an elcgant, and conſequently not an improper 
exerciſe for them. Add to this too, —that 
which never was, nor never will be, of ſmall 
conſequence in the eyes of females—that in all 
thoſe beautiful fictions to which we allude, and 
even fiction, to intereſt, muſt borrow the ſem- 
blance of truth; there is not a hint given, that 
theſe ladies were not ſufficiently captivating to 


the other ſex, however averſe the coy nymphs 
affected to be from them. 


Thus truth, to which we willingly facrifice 
every other conſideration, obliges us to own, 
that we think no amuſement, which contri- 
butes to health of body and cheerfulneſs of 
mind—without diſturbing the peace of any 
living - thing, in the air above, or on the 
earth beneath, or m the waters under the 
 earth—can poſſibly have any moral turpi- 
tude whatever; and therefore ought not to be 
too ſeverely, nor too minutely criticiſed. But 
the ſame regard to truth, likewiſe induces us 
to ſay, that even the amuſement and exer- 
ciſe of which we have been ſpeaking, is more 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. 187 


calculated to produce that-ſort of manner, and 
thoſe attitudes, which thoſe who are extremely 
delicate on this ſubje& would diſtinguiſh by the 
name of maſculine; than all the knowledge, 
'nay than all the learning and ſcience in the 
world. For mind, as has before been fondly 
quoted, is of no ſex; therefore it is not in the 
power of education or art to unſex it. But 
manners may, and we apprehend, to render 
the two ſexes more completely pleafing to each 
other, muſt, be ſomewhat differently modified, 
—according to the different paths they have to 
purſue,—according to the different parts they 
have to act in ſociety. And did it appear that 
men uniformly were of this opinion, it is ſin- 
cerely hoped that it would never enter into the 
head of any reaſonable woman to diſpute this 
point with them; for it is not to trifles that the 
peace of ſociety ſhould be ſacrificed. We only 
mean to infer from all that has been ſaid on 
this ſubject, that men are much more guided 
by their fancies, and by the complexion of the 
times, in their ideas about women; than by 
reaſon, or any other ſettled ſtandard whatever. 
B b 


188 APPEAL TO THE 


And it is for the ſake of exemplifying, and il- 
luſtrating, that we have dwelt longer upon this 
article, than the ſubject in itſelf deſerves, either 


from its univerſality, or intrinſic conſequence. 


Last in the liſt of maſculine accompliſh- 
ments—for the allotted ſpace admits of no more 


enumerations—we ſhall take a little notice of a 


certain portion of military education, which is 


not denied to women in this hberal age. A 


drill ſerjeant is a man of no ſmall conſequence 


in many families; and is looked up to, even by 


the fathers, as to him who is to give the laſt, 
fineſt poliſh, to their darlings ;—if by a kind of 


inſulting prudence and foreſight, highly diſho- 


nourable to the ſex, they do not give them this 


ſtriking advantage at an earlier period. 


Bur though I have too good an opinion of 


women, to be very uneaſy about their conduct, 


in conſequence of this ſtrange mode of com- 
mencing, or finiſhing »their education ;—and 


though it may not injure their morals, and 


may very much improve their paces ;—and 


MEN OP GREAT BRITAIN. 189 


though it may make them look fierce enough 
to frighten the French in caſe of an invaſion ; 
— I fay though all may happen, or not hap- 
pen, which is allowed to be probable in this 
long-winded period ; yet after all, who can deny 
this we have been ſpeaking of, to be a maſcu- 
line attainment, and likely to produce,—maſ- 
culine ideas,—maſculine attitudes, and upon 
the whole maſculine boldneſs of manner? If 
any one doubts, he has only to walk the 
ſtreets of our great cities, where, if he has 
courage to face the amazons of the preſent 
day, he will ſee enough to ſatisfy his doubts. 
There will he meet ſome, with helmets of firm 
and compact texture, ſurmounted with military 
plume. Here others with leather caps edged 
with furs. Lo! yonder comes one with head- 
piece altogether of hairy materials, moſt likely 
the ſpoils of ſome grimalkin, the diſeaſed idol, 
of ſome diſeaſed old lady of quality, who killed 
it with Kindneſs and french cookery; and 
which nevertheleſs our heroine wears with as 
much dignity and ſeeming conſequence, as ever 
did Hercules the ſkin of the Nemean lion, as its 


= — oe 4 
— mÄu” EET 
—— 


190 APPEAL TO THE 


ſhaggy main flowed down his manly ſhoulders ; 
but which when contraſted with the ſoft down 
of a female face, one hardly knows, whether 
it is meant to burleſque Robinſon Cruſoe, or 
the light infantry ;—the gallant fellows who 
are perhaps ſacrificing their lives abroad, at the 
moment, when, they are thus cruelly lampooned 
in catſkin at home. | 


THE ſtriking features however produced by 
this mode of education, are not the modes of 
dreſs merely ; but are ſuch as do not quit wo- 
men even when etiquette, —or decorum, a much 
better guide than etiquette,—obliges them to 
wear a more feminine attire. And theſe are, 
the firm ſtep, — the ſquare poſition, — the 
pendulum arm,—the head erect, — the diſ- 
dainful ſmile— but above all the determined 


ſtare, which like the devil in Milton, carries 


©'ftern defiance on its front.” Such are the 


fruits, and indeed the expected and wiſhed- 


for fruits, of female military education. Per- 
haps it does not reach the heart, nor influence 


the mind or conduct to any great degree; but 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. 191 


it certainly does the manners, and that exactly 
in a way which to hear the men talk, would 
make us believe they moſt deteſted. But no 
ſuch thing They have no objection to ſuch, if 
the accompaniments of youth, beauty, and fa- 
ſhion; to all of which the common run of men 
are mere ſlaves. And accordingly, as I have 
often hinted before, if a woman is in poſſeſſion 
of theſe ſhe may do—exaQtly as ſhe pleaſes— 
and be morally certain of the admiration of the 


generality of the men. 


Trvs we ſee that from various accompliſh- 
ments which do really render women maſculine, 
in the only objectionable points of view, men 
ſeem by no means averſe, but much otherwiſe. 
We therefore fairly deduce from this, what we 
have before advanced; that women may be, 
and often, are, maſculine, and yet are not con- 
ſequently diſagreeable to the men. 


Ir then I have been able to prove, that thoſe 
acquirements, the propriety, or at leaſt the ad- 
miſſion of which, I have been ſo ardently con- 


| 
| 
| 
| 


% 


192 APPEAL TO THE 


tending for, can have no unavoidable tendency 


to render women maſculine in any diſagreeable 


ſenſe of the term, but much otherwiſe ; and if 
I have been likewiſe able to prove that even if 
they had ſo, that this does not always, nay - 


does not generally ſpeaking, render them hate- 


ful in the eyes of the men; I think if I haye 


proved all this, that the laſt objection that I 
have undertaken to examine, againſt women 
being educated with a view to the enlargement 
of their underſtandings, and the acquiſition of 
knowledge in a ſuperior degree—viz. that it 
renders them maſculine, and conſequently diſ- 
guſting in their manner — falls with double force 


to the ground. 


WirHour preſumption then I hope I may 


be permitted to repeat ; that neither knowledge, 
nor learning, nor ſcience—with exceptions dic- 
tated by nature, by common ſenſe, by delicacy 
and by peculiar circumſtances, or by all united; 
—can reaſonably, or generally ſpeaking, be ſaid 
to render women leſs amiable, than comparative 


ignorance, or ſuperficial accompliſhments. It 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. 193 


may indeed be alleged, that the exceptions al- 
luded to, may include the whole of the objec- 
tions advanced by the men. But that I muſt 
| beg leave to diſpute, which I ſhall, however, in 
as few words as poſſible; for I have always in 
view to keep this little work within narrow 
limits. Yet though it aſſumes as has been al- 
ready ſaid, no higher merit than that of a ſlight 
ſketch of an important plan, I know that even 
an outline to claim any merit at all ſhould be 
correct. Every thing connected with the ſub- 
ject ought to be included and clearly pointed 
out, though none of the parts can be expected, 
to be minutely or highly finiſhed. Far am 1 
from inſinuating that the preſent ſketch is what 
it ought to be. It is however as nearly ſo as the 
writer could make it, under circumſtances, with 
which ſhe is neither entitled, nor inclined, to 


trouble the public. 
To our exceptions then. 


NaTvuRE dictates with a force not to be miſ- 


underſtood, that women are not formed for 


— — — — * 
——— ͤRQ— — —  — — 


194 APPEAL TO THE 
warlike enterpriſes. Nature has decidedly like- 
wiſe denied to women the bodily ſtrength, the 


abilities, and the inclination for being maſons, 


carpenters, blackſmiths, farriers, and a thou- 
ſand other occupations which ſo readily occur, 
that they need not be enumerated; and to which 
nothing but neceſlity, or caprice, or folly,—the _ 
mothers of many ſtrange and unnatural chil- 
dren,—ever gave birth in a female ſhape. Ne- 

ceſſity has indeed upon preſſing occaſions, lent 
ſtrength to women, and boldneſs, for any given 
purpoſe. Caprice has in a few inſtances, in- 
duced women to make horſes ſhoes, and to nail 
them on; and folly has in a few inſtances copied 
her. But every one is aware of the abſurdity 
of adducing particular caſes, to eſtabliſh general 


rules. 


Ad alx, common ſenſe, in which propriety 
of conduct and character are neceſſarily includ- 
ed, certainly excludes women from the profeſ- 
ſions of law and divinity. Nature has not, 


however, here denied them the neceſſary talents; 
for there cannot be a doubt but that many, nay 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. 195 


that the generality of them, might make excel- 
lent and exemplary divines, and {till better 
lawyers. The natural flow of eloquence, and 
command of language,—the glow and warmth 
of imagination,—the- nice diſcrimination with 
which they are ſo generally gifted, —leave 
little room for doubting of their capacity for 
reaſoning and diſputation, ſuppoſing their un- 
derſtandings informed, and their judgment 
ſtrengthened; which like every other faculty 
of the mind and body, are only to be ſtrength- 


ened and improved by exerciſe. 


THne1R greater purity of morals, would like- 
wiſe be favorable in thoſe profeſſions of which 
we have been ſpeaking. But notwithſtanding 
all theſe advantages, delicacy as well as common 
ſenſe, points out objections ſo very ſtriking, to 
_. women taking any active part in popular aſſem- 
blies—with ſome very ſingular exceptions in- 
deed—that we cannot in conſcience, rank among 
the prejudices, or the injuſtices of men, the 
ſeemingly arbitrary excluſion. An excluſion, 
which women have no cauſe to regret, —for 

Cc | 


196 APPEAL TO THE 


nature, who does nothing in vain, has not pro- 
vided them with talents equal to ſuch attain- 
ments, without a view to their exhibition—1 
mean by their exhibition their uſefulneſs—upon 


more pleaſing and appropriate occaſions. 


AGAIN, it is perhaps delicacy, or perhaps it 


is falſe prejudices only, which prevent women 
from practiſing phyſic and ſurgery ; for that 


they have both abilities and inclination in a very 
peculiar degree for theſe profeſſions, cannot 


well be denied. And before modern delicacy, 


was inſtituted in the place of real modeſty— 


which protects its poſſeſſors in any circumſtances 
whatever—women practiſed them, in many dif- 
ferent parts of the world, much to the benefit 


of mankind. But even conſidering theſe pro- 


| feſſions in their preſent and more ſcientific point 


of view, they are not perhaps above the capa- 


city, nor beyond the reach of women. For to 


the honor of modern phyſicians be it ſpoken, 


they have thrown off, if I may ſo expreſs my- 
ſelf, the barbariſms of learning and ſcience, by 


which the profeſſion was clogged, and rendered 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. 197 


myſterious and even ludicrous; and have only 
retained the pure ſubſtances. To learning and 
ſcience indeed properly ſo called, they are no 
doubt indebted for the many noble diſcoveries 
they have made; the greateſt perhaps after all, 
and the moſt valuable of which, is, the know- 
ledge of this ſublime and awful truth, which 
they all as if with one voice declare.— That the 
ſecrets of Nature in her firſt principles, lie far 
beyond the feeble reſearches of man. They are 
almoſt tempted to acknowledge of all diſeaſes, 
what Aritaeus did long ago of one of them; 
that, the true and undoubted cauſe, is only 
known to the Gods.” 


Inpxed ſuch is now in general, the candor 
and ability, of the profeſſors of this ſcience ; 
that tro many of them may be applied, the 
beautiful and engaging character of Voltaire's 
phyſician— 

Malade & dans un lit, de douleurs accabls, 

Par P&4oquent Silva vous étes conſole : + - 
II fait Part de guerir, autant que Part de plaire. 
Demandez a Silva par quel ſecret myſtere 


Ce pain, cet aliment dans mon corps diger6 


198 APPEAL TO THE 


Se transforme cn un lait doucement prepare ? 

Comment toujours filtre dans ſes routes certaines, 

En longs ruiſſcaux de pourpre il court enfler mes veines, 
A mon corps languiſſant rend un pouvoir nouveau, 

Fait palpiter mon cœur, & penſer mon cerveau ? 5 

II leve au ciel les yeux, il incline, il s'ëcrie: 


Demandez-le a ce Dixu qui nous donna la vie, 


Men ſuch as theſe charming lines deſcribe, 
for they are evidently drawn from the life,— 
will moſt readily and candidly acknowledge, 
that when they do catch a glimpſe at Nature, 
they find her to be a deity who will not bear to 
be tampered with, nor counteracted with im- 
punity ;—that ſhe may condeſcend to lead, but 
can never deign to follow, or be ſeduced out 
of her own track ;—that they are only then 
ſure of being right, when they purſue the paths 
which ſhe points out ;—and that after the ſtudy 


of nature, caution and experience are the phy- 


ſician's beſt guides. 


\ 


Bur though theſe truths rather enhance, 


than degrade, the conſequence of the profeſ- 


ſion ; ſurely women properly educated, are 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. 199 


equal to all that is here required. Yet we muſt 
confeſs, that modern delicacy and propriety of 
manners, are, 1n this reſpect ſo decidedly againſt 
them, that no arguments that can be uſed, are 


ſuflicient to counterbalance them. 


Dz11cacy and propriety however do not 
forbid, that women ſhould be phyſicians to their 
own ſex; they on the contrary point out, that 
they ought to be ſo. Here again however, pre- 
judice is ſo inveterate, that things will never 
be as they ſhould be. I judge by myſelf, for 1 
would do any thing but die, rather than have 
a woman phyſician, I never knew but one, 
and the very fight of her acted upon me like 
an emetic ; and ſhe had nearly the ſame effect, 
upon moſt of her female acquaintance. I fancy 
her patients were moſtly. men, as ſhe was tole- 
rably handſome ; though I really don't know. 
Be this as it may, we muſt confeſs, that the 
diſlike ſhewn by her own ſex, was to be attri- 
buted altogether to falſe prejudices; or to ſuch 
a ſhocking partiality to the other ſex, as none 


but an anonymous female would dare to avow. 


20 APPEAL TO THE 


Burr for the ſame kind of delicacy—but for 
the ſame prejudices—women of the inferior 
claſſes might be taylors, hair-dreſſers, &c. &c. 
By the way 1t 18 an unaccountable peculiarity, 
that women of thoſe ranks, ſhould from motives 
of delicacy—tor we know of none other that 
can reſtrain them—abſtain from making clothes 
to men, dreſſing their hair, and doing other 
offices for them, by which they might gain 
their living without hard labour ; yet that wo- 
men of the higher ranks, over whom one ſhould 
ſuppoſe delicacy and refinement, if not real mo- 
deſty, would have more influence; admit with- 
out ſcruple—men hair-dreſſers men milliners 
men mantua- makers. Nay worſe than all 


theſe, -I bluſh to write it, - men ſtay-makers.* 


* THaxxs for once to Faſhion—who has for the preſent 
aboliſhed altogether an ungraceful and pernicious ſtile of 
dreſs—the above reproach is no longer in point. In vain 
phyſicians remonſtrated againſt the confinement of ſtays, as 
inimical to digeſtion and growth. In vain anatomiſts de- 
_ clared them the probable cauſes of the more frequent diſtor- 
tion of ſhape, in the one ſex than in the other—and as 
hurtful, if not ſometimes fatal, to innocents unborn. In 
yain the men in general expreſſed their diſlike and diſappro- 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN, 201 


This is an abuſe of privileges indeed. Why 
do not huſbands come boldly forward, againſt 
uſages ſuch as theſe; and employ their ill- 
gotten authority, for once in a good cauſe ?— 
Why does not the legiſlature tax ſuch ſhe-he 
gentry to the teeth: Why are not men made 
aſhamed of monopolizing trades, in which if 
the more helpleſs ſex were early inſtructed, and 
made thereby to taſte the ſweets of honeſt in- 
duſtry ; might fave millions of valuable ſubjects 


to the commonwealth of virtue, who alas! flock 


—— — J—_s — — — — — = 
—— OS __ _— WM —— — — ——— —— - — - 4 -— c—_ — — — — 


bation of ſo vile and unnatural a mode of dreſs. Reaſon- 
ing was loſt upon thoſe—and who can blame them—who 
do'not chuſe to be guided by that to which they are not 
permitted to appeal upon every occaſion z but only when it 
does not interfere with the intereſts of their rulers. "They 
waited till Faſhion ſhould hoiſt her ſigual; who, after look- 
ing malignantly on for near a century, has at laſt proved her 
power over the ſex, ſuperior to every other power. With 
one touch of her magic wand, ſhe has transformed our de- 


mure looking, ſugar loaf ſpinfters, into nymphs— 
80 buxom, blithe, and debonair.” 


May good ſenfe, and good taſte, continue what Faſhion 
has fo happily begun! And may they teach women—what 
Faſhion never can, or never will do—that whatever mode 
they adopt, it is neceſſary, if they wiſh to retain grace and 
elegance, to avoid all diſguſting extremes. 


f 
I 
| 
ö 
\ 


202 . APPEAL TO THE 


to the ſtandard of vice, often more from neceſ- 


ſity than inclination? 


AND now for the laſt exception. 


IT is undeniably true, that all rational beings, 
ought to be much directed by circumſtances ; 
or in other words, by the ſituation in which 
Providence has placed them. Thus if a woman 
is ſo circumſtanced, as ſometimes unfortunately 
happens, that the purſuit of knowledge, or ac- 


compliſhments of whatever kind, interferes with 


her duty in any of the leading characters of the 


ſex, as daughter, ſiſter, wife, or mother; a 
woman of ſenſe and virtue will not for a mo- 
ment balance between theſe. Shall ſhe to ac- 
quire, of cultivate ſuch—however genius may 
impel, or intereſt bribe, or vanity allure her 
from her poſt—ſhall ſhe neglect the aged parent, 
who truſts to her alone for comfort and ſup- 


poft? Shall ſhe who in infancy drank of his 


cup when it was full, and pleaſant to the taſte; 
leave him in his old age, to drink the bitter 
dregs alone? Shall ſhe who lay in his boſom 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN, = 203 
and was fondly cheriſhed there; return his foſ- 
tering care and tender love, with partial atten- 
tion, and forced ſervices! Forbid it gratitude! . _ 
— forbid it tenderneſs and every female cha- 
rity forbid it! Were a woman to gain all the 
riches of the Indias, and all the talents and 
accompliſhments which men adore and women 
envy,—ſhe would gain a portion of miſery 
along with them, ſufficient to daſh the cup of 
| happineſs from her lips, and deſtroy her peace 


for ever. 


Tirus I have preſumed to advance, that there 
are no attainments at which human nature can 1 
arrive, to which women are not equal, and | 
may not be benefited by, as individuals, or in 
the maſs; with thoſe exceptions only, which 
nature, which common ſenſe, which female 
delicacy, and which peculiar circumſtances 
point out. And were theſe the only chains 
impoſed upon the ſex, every reaſonable wo- 
man would wear them, not only with docility 
but pleaſure. But when men try to ſtamp a 
marked inferiority on the whole ſex,—when 

D d 


7 
* 
— 5 - — (hl - - - = Cas 
— ror. 7 = 2 
, . r — « * : a 
1 ²˙ lj ¼—'ů̃ —² w ̃²«—v.. ⁴t mp ent ene er. p ̃ - ² — —ͤ—üw — g mee 88 . 


thing really beautiful can be raiſed. 


204 APPEAL TO THE 


they inſinuate that they are made of baſer 


materials, or mixed with more alloy,—it is 


time, perhaps, to endeavour at leaſt, to ſtop - 
the progrels of a ſpecies of folly, which has 
already taken too deep root among mankind ; 
much to the injury of the beſt intereſts of ſo- 
ciety. And which in the end, is equally per- 


nicious to thoſe who inflict the injury, as to 


thoſe upon whom it is firſt inflicted. 


IT is ſufficiently obvious from all that has 
been ſaid, that the cultivation of the minds and 
morals of women, is conſidered as the one thing 
needful—the firſt object in their education 
the foundation, upon which any ſolid hopes of 


future improvement may be placed; —or any 


To point out a finiſhed plan of education for 


the ſex in general, is a taſk far beyond my 


moderate abilities; and a taſk indeed in itſelf 


difficult and intricate from a thouſand cauſes. 


But let me repeat, that the great outlines which 


| ſhould be ever had in view, and never deviated 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN, 205 


from; are ſimple, few, and obvious; and they 
are ſuch as may very early be inculcated with 


ſucceſs, 


THE love of truth, and a ſtri& adherence to 
it, 1s the baſis of every moral virtue. If it were 
poſhble that a mind depraved in this reſpect, 
could poſſeſs all the others; the abſence of this 
alone would render them deſpicable, perhaps 
even hurtful, to the poſſeſſor, and to ſociety. 
Such is the intrinſic value of this amiable 
virtue! Beſides that it includes as a neceſſary 

conſequence, a deteſtation of falſehood ; it is 
the declared enemy of all hypocriſy ; in every 
ſhape, under whatever diſguiſes, or productiye 
of whatever preſent conveniency. 


NaTuRE is ſo ſimple, ſo uniform; and ſo 
decided, in her moral as well as phyſical ope- 
rations, that ſhe never countera&s herſelf. 
Thus if the practice of truth alone, in all its 
different branches, were faithfully and univer- 
ſally followed out; it would of itſelf bring 
about every other reformation, It wauld of 


206 APPEAL TO THE 


itſelf in a great degree, effe& the regeneration 
of the human race, fo ardently wiſhed for by 
all good men; if only encouraged to go on in 
its progreſſive ſtate, and produce its wholeſome 
and natural fruits—the exerciſe of univerſal 
and impartial juſtice. And let it not be alleged, 
that however deſirable ſuch a conſummation as 


that of univerſal and impartial juſtice may be, 


that it is impoſſible, or improbable. Did there 
ever come from the lips of the Divine Author 
of our religion, an impoſſible, or an impracti- 
cable command? No, never! Yet is not all, 
and more than all, for which we have been juſt 


now contending, included in that God-like and 
philoſophic precept of his—Love thy neighbour 


as thyſelf, and do unto all men as you- would 
they ſhould do unto you? 


How different, alas! from theſe, are the 
ſentiments, and principles, by which the edu- 
cation and conduct of women are regulated! 
From the firſt dawn of reaſon from the cradle 
to the grave—1s one continued tiſſue of hypo- 
criſy and diſguiſe. They are indeed, in early 


MEN OP GREAT BRITAIN. 207 


youth, prohibited from telling lies; but they 
are at the ſame time virtually encouraged in 
falſchood. The ſex at all times, lively, acute, 
and penetrating, ſoon ſee how matters are; and 
after nature and reaſon, have, even at a very 
early age, made a few {truggles for their joint 
and inſeparable rights; they yield to preſent con- 
veniency and hard neceſſity, as they are but too 
often forced to do, upon too many occaſions, on 
the preſent ſyſtem of things. The conſequences 
of ſuch a ſyſtem we ſhall not here repeat, as they 
have already been pointed out; but it is earneſtly 
to be wiſhed, that not only a ſtrict adherence 
to truth, but a thorough diſdain of every ſpecies 
of hypocriſy, were ſubſtituted in the place of 
art and diſguiſe, in the firſt rudiments of the 
education of women; and that every other 
good effect will of courſe follow, is among the 
moſt ſimple and obvious of all truths. I mean 
not however to inſinuate that the ſecondary— 
© cold hearted virtue, Prudence, ſhould be 
turned off entirely. She is too uſeful in the 
commerce of the world, to be altogether thrown 


aſide; and her abſence, has coſt many an ami- 


- - 
e — 


* 
— — — 
n = 


if 
—--=" 
= 


Ez 


_ * — E 
4 *.* 8 N. oy 2 
=—— nee Ret... -» nM > 
OY - = = x * o 


* 2 
— 


208 APPEAL TO THE 


able woman, many a bitter tear. Let her there. 
fore ſtand cloſe by the ſex, as the guard and 
handmaid of Virtue; but let her not preſume 
to uſurp her place. 


Tir neceſſity of a check upon the paſſions, 
is likewiſe a leſſon that cannot be too early 
inculcated on youth ; and perhaps particularly 
on females. Yet I grant this diſtinction grudg- 
ingly, and rather from complacency than con- 
viction; for the thing is ſo abſolutely neceſſary, 
to the well being of the whole of the human 
race, that it is. very difficult to ſay to whom it 
moſt belongs to employ it. However it is only 


the women we have to do with at preſent, 


THrarT the paſſions, under proper regulation, 
form the whole of our enjoyment through lite ; 
cannot for one moment be doubted. They mix 
with every thing; nor is there an action, an 
idea, or wiſh, from which they can be excluded. 
Religion itſelf, were but a cold and ſelfiſh prin- 
ciple, if not influenced and animated in ſome 


degree, by the heart,—the ſeat of the paſſions. 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN, 209 


They all therefore tend to good, though they 
may all be perverted, or made ſubject to evil. 
They are all not only innocent in themſelves ; 
but neceſſary to our happineſs. But for them 
life would be one dead calm, without ebb or 
flow, without hopes or fears. It is only then, 
in their miſapplication or exceſs, that the tur- 
pitude lies. For I believe I may boldly aſk,— 
where is the man or woman who would with to 
be entirely devoid of them? Where is there a 
mind of ſenſibility that will not confeſs, that in 
the moderate enjoyment of them lies, all the 
happineſs of which as mortals, we are permitted 
to taſta? And where is he who has indulged 
in them to exceſs, and over-ſ{tepped the bounds, 
preſcribed by reaſon and virtue; but muſt with 
ſhame and anguiſh acknowledge that thus in- 
dulged, they lead to infamy—to miſery—and 
deſpair ? 


Tur univerſality and power of the paſſions, 
and their indifferent application to good or evil, 


and their conſequent influence on the happineſs 


or miſery of mankind being undeniable; I have 


210 APPEAL TO THE 


only one word more to ſay in their behalf. 
That when the whole plan of Providence with 
regard to us, is well confidered—at leaſt as 
well as it can be conſidered by us, ſhort-ſighted 
and imperfe& mortals as we are !—that this 
twofold property of the paſſions, fo far from 
being inconſiſtent with it, appears a conſtituent 
part of that whole; and acts preciſely upon the 
fame principles. For excels in every thing 1s 
deſtruction ; it kills the ſoul as well as the 
body. And this is fo true, that there is not a 
virtue which when carried to excels, does not 
border upon a vice—nay that does not actu- 
ally degenerate into one. An awful leſſon of 
moderation this to the human race ! 


TIE examples are too obvious to require 
pointing out, ſuffice it to ſay, that the young 
and ingenuous mind, muſt not be diſcouraged 
by ſuch refleQions ; for he who hath ſent the 
temptation, hath ſent a means whereby to 
eſcape. The moſt amiable of all authors, beau- 
tifully and juſtly fays—L'<quilibre n&ceflaire à 
Pempire de la vertu fubſiſte, & il n'eſt rompu 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN, 211 


dans ceux chez leſquelles il a été detruit, par 
les habitudes de la ſoci&te, & plus ſouvent en- 
core, par celles de PEducation. Alors, la paſſion 


dominante, n'ayant plus de contrepoids, ſe rend 


la maitrefſe de toutes nos facultes ; mais c'eſt 
la faute de la ſociẽtẽ qui en porte la punition, 


& non pas celle de la nature. 


Tnus we fee, that though it were vain to 
attempt.to extinguiſh the paſſions in the human 
heart; and that even if we could ſucceed, it 
were not devoutly to be wiſhed for; yet that it 
is obviouſly, and abſolutely neceflary to our 
happineſs, to keep them within the due bounds 
of moderation; which is only to be effected, 
by an early attention to this great duty, in thoſe 
concerned in the education of youth. 


AnD here I muſt with regret, throw a great 
portion of blame on. parents of all ranks and 
denominations, who generally ſpeaking pay but 


too little attention at an early. and important 


period, to. this timely, and then eafily impoſed 


reſtraint, upon the deſires of their children. 
E e 


212 . APPEAL TO THE 


This duty is often either neglected altogether, 
or very improperly adminiſtered, or left entirely 
to the diſcretion of a claſs, of whom I am happy 
to take this opportunity, to ſay a few words 
a a claſs, who, notwithſtanding the illiberal abuſe 
thrown out againſt them, generally do more 
juſtice than could be reaſonably expected, to 
. the little innocents committed to their charge. 
And here the hand of Providence is evidently 
to be traced, in giving to childhood thoſe faſ- 
cinating charms, which irreſiſtibly attract the 
affections, of all thoſe who are about them; 
and in this way only is to be accounted for, 
the care the anxiety and the tenderneſs 
—with which they are commonly treated, by 
the domeſtics to whom they are given in truſt. 
For ſuch could not be bought, by the poor 
rewards beſtowed upon them, for charges ſo 
infinitely dear to us. Poor indeed! ill-judged, 
and inadequate, do ſuch rewards appear, when 
put in competition with what is waſted in moſt 

families, upon fooleries and trifles; not to 
ſpeak of what is often 55 upon vices of a 
_—_ dye. | 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. 213 


IT is frequently ſhocking too, to an unpre- 
| judiced obſeryer, to ſee the thoughtleſſneſs of 
parents 1 do not wiſh to give it a harſher name 
L in their treatment of their children's ſervants; 
their ſurpriſe and indignation. at the {lighteſt 
negle& upon their parts; and all this too from 
mothers, who themſelves, never in the courſe 
of their lives, took as much real trouble, or 
fatigue, with their children, in health or in fick- 
neſs ; as theſe poor affectionate creatures, have 
in one night patiently and willingly endured. 


Mosr undoubtedly, however, marks of neg- 
le& and inattention, on the part of ſervants to 
whoſe. charge children are committed, ought 
never to be paſſed over without notice and re- 
proof; but ſuch ſhould be urged with earneſt- 
neſs, and gentleneſs only, and not reproach- 
fully; and thoſe on which this method of 
reproof has no effect, are not fit to be entruſted | 7 


with ſuch precious charges, without the ever 'Y 


watchful eye of the mother over them. 1 


Bur this ſuperintendance indeed, is at all 8 


- 214 APPEAL TO THE 


times ſo neceſſary, ſo natural, and ſo delightful 
a taſk, for mothers of all ranks; that it is 
not eaſy to conceive, how any bearing that 
ſacred name, can account to their conſciences 
for the omiſſion of ſuch a duty; or how they 
can deny to their own hearts, and maternal 
feelings, the indulgence of ſuch an exquiſite, 


rational, and innocent pleaſure. 


I HoPE I ſhall be pardoned this digreſſion, in | 
favor of a very important and meritorious claſs 
of females; in whoſe cauſe, nevertheleſs, few 
deign to hazard even a digreſſion. I cannot 
however think that it is at all miſplaced, in a 


work dedicated to the ſervice of women. 


LET us now reſume the train of our ſubject. 
I have already ſaid, that an early attention to 
forming the tempers and diſpoſitions of chil- 
dren, is often neglected altogether, or very 
improperly adminiſtered, or left entirely to the 
diſcretion of a claſs, who cannot always be ſup- 
poſed to correct with judgment, however good 


their intentions may commonly be, And who 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. 215 


muſt rather be ſuppoſed, to employ the means 
that firſt occur, and have the moſt decided in- 
fluence for the moment; than ſuch as would 


have gradual and permanent effects on the mo- 


ral character through life, 


INDEED it is wonderful to conſider, and 
ſcarcely to be believed, except by thoſe who 
have made the developement of the human 
mind their particular ſtudy, how ſoon—how 
very ſoon—the moral character is fixed! Or 
in other words the temper and diſpoſition 
formed. The conſciouſneſs of this truth, has 
compelled me to confeſs in a former part of 
this ſketch ; that it is at home in the ſtages of 
infancy, before children are ſent to ſchools, 
that the foundation of character is laid; and at 
home after they return from ſchool that it 1s 
finiſhed. Much therefore of the blame, which 
is illiberally thrown out againſt the teachers of 
the ſeminaries of education, for both ſexes, 
might be ſpared, if we would look homeward. 
Not perhaps that they can be completely ac- 
quitted of blame; for much vice, and many 


216 APPEAL TO THE 


bad habits are diſſeminated by their means, 
which undoubtedly by ſtrict attention, might 
in a great degree be prevented. But much 
allowance ſhould be made, upon account of 
the great difficulty of the taſæ; for perhaps 
- that of conſtant attention, is of all that can be 
conceived, the moſt difficult ; except the heart 
is deeply engaged indeed, Parents are, there- 
fore, thoſe, from whom it can be moſt reaſon- 
ably expected; and from them it will be 
required, as ſurely as there is a Power above, 
Why then wall not they in the firſt place do 
their own-duty, by rooting the young mind in 
virtue? which when once done, it is not ſo 
eaſily ſhaken, as profligate men would have us 
believe, even when aſſailed by vicious advice 
and example. And when trained and ſupported 
by after good culture, muſt generally ſpeaking 
produce permanent good effects. | 
- Ir parents would act thus, and take their 
duty to heart; they might with infinite plea- 
ſure to themſelves, and infinite benefit to their 
young ones, keep them at home till a more 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. 217 


advanced period than they generally do. For 
thoſe accompliſhments which render it neceſſary 
to ſend young people to great ſchools, are at- 
tainable in a ſufficient degree, long after the 
period commonly aſſigned for their commence- 


ment, 


ALL then pretty nearly agree, as to the ne- 
ceflity of reſtraining the paſſions, and an early 
attention to regulating the diſpoſitions and 
tempers of women; but the means uſed, the 
motives urged to attain theſe neceſſary ends, 
are the points upon which opinions differ. 
Theſe indeed are too often ſuch, as a generous 
ſpirit, or a liberal mind, of either ſex, can 
never ſeriouſly approve. I own I have fat 
trembling with indignation, at the leſſons of 
art, and low cunning, recommended to women 
under the diſguiſe of prudence. It were tedious 
to exemplify theſe; it were beſides an humbling 
exhibition of human nature, to enumerate the 
miſerable ſhifts that women are reduced to, and 
the pitiful arts which are ſuppoſed, and even 
found to ſucceed with men, when an open and 


218 APPEAL TO THE 


firicere conduct would be of no avail; or per- 
haps be oppoſed with deep reſentment. We 
ſhall therefore only remark, that they all tend 
to this one great object - the attainment of 
huſbands, and the management of them, when 
attained. Women even in this reſpect, are 
more to be pitied than blamed; but how men 
of any delicacy | how men in general, can wiſh 
to ſee women thus reduced ! is what I can 


never comprehend. 


Bu this as it may, an appearance of ſubmiſ- 
ſion and gentleneſs is much enforced on the 
ſex; and as men admire gentleneſs, more upon 
account of its inability to reſent their injuſtice, 
than for its truly chriſtian ſpirit and intrinſic 
worth—great and undeniable as theſe really are 
—ſo women by a kind of myſterious retribu- 
tion, cultivate the appearance of this virtue, 
rather than the reality; and accordingly too 
many of them when it ſuits, and when their 
main point is gained, throw off the maſk. But 
indeed this muſt ever be the caſe, as I have 


more than once remarked, where people act 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN, 219 


without certain principles, and are not urged 
on by adequate motives; for in ſuch caſes 
though neceſſity may, and does often force ap- 
pearances ; yet in the end, paſſions not ſubdued 
or regulated, but only ſtifled for a time, and 
to ſerve a purpoſe ; will break out and ſhew 
themſelves in the moſt odious colours. 


IT is eternally then, I fay, enforced upon 
women, that whatever their feelings or natural 
diſpoſitions may be, that they muſt appear ſoft 
and gentle, if they wiſh to captivate the other 
ſex. This is not fair dealing, however, towards 
the men; and whatever is not fair, is not right, 
nay is abſolutely wrong. This is no other 
than the art of inſnaring and entrapping, where 


the attractions of nature are wanting. 


TroucH there is a general ſimilarity, yet 
there is an endleſs variety in the human race, 
whether from phyſical or moral cauſes is not 
eaſy to decide; or—which is molt probable 
fram both united, Of this variety the charac- 


ters of women muſt of courſe partake. Some 


1 


220 APPEAL TO THE 


are ſoft and gentle and even ſad ; ſome are full 


of vivacity and ſpirit; ſome impetuous and 


even imperious and overbearing. Yet perhaps 


theſe laſt, and leaſt amiable diſpoſitions, might 
produce valuable characters, if corrected with 
judgment—for corrected they muſt be—though 
they can ſcarcely ever be brought to the right 
ſtandard. Even the ſpirited, — the gay,—the 
thinking and reaſoning ;—or—the ſoft, — the 
gentle, and ſubmiſſive—are extremely different 
from each other, in point of mere animal 
ſpirits ; but as to head, heart, or conduct, each 
character may be equally good and amiable, 
and may be eſteemed ſo, without any reflection 
on the other, | 


Wu then ſhould one eternal varniſh be 
paſted over the whole ſex, to make them appear 
—what they really are not—all alike? If Nature 
did not delight in variety it would not exiſt, — 
and if it were not for our good, and did not 


contribute to our felicity, ſhe would not delight 
in it. We therefore do violence to nature, to 
reaſon, and to common ſenſe— for they never 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. 221 


contradict each other—and we then encourage 
hypocriſy; when we wiſh to file down the 
whole ſex to an equality. 


IxpEED deceit of every kind, and in every 
degree, is always dangerous in its tendency, 
and commonly pernicious in its conſequences z 
and in no caſe more ſo, as might well be fore- 
ſeen, than in the moſt ſerious concern in life, 


For one example. 


A MAN marries a woman, who has every 
appearance of gentleneſs and ſweetneſs of dif- 
poſition ; if it turns out that ſhe is not in reality 
poſſeſſed of theſe, can there be a more cruel 
fate than the poor man's ? Deceived in this one 
point, diſappointed in his juſt expeQation, it is 
not perhaps all the reſt of the virtues, that can 
compenſate to him for the want of this one. 
For ſo capricious and wilful are the ſex in ge- 
neral, that even if a man could make himſelf 
happy under fuch circumſtances, by a little 
management—a little ſoothing—a little well- 


222 APPEAL TO THE 


timed complacency ; he would not allow him. 
ſelf to be happy—he would think it below his 
dignity to be happy — except preciſely upon his 
own terms. Such is the pride and abſurdity, 
of © Imperial Man !” | 8 


Lr us now ſuppoſe, that the fame man, had 
married the ſame woman, ſeeing her before 
marriage preciſely ſuch as ſhe really was—By 
the way this is ſuppoſing a thing, that never did, 
nor never will I believe happen — Perhaps in 
this caſe his affection for her, and the conſide- 
ration of her other virtues; might help to 
balance in his eyes, the want of that ſweetneſs 
of diſpoſition, which is in general, and not 
without reaſon, eſteemed ſo deſirable, At all 
events where there is no deceit practiſed, no 
diſappointment in the caſe, the mind not taken 
by ſurpriſe, is left more open to favorable im- 
preſſions; for it is reaſonable to ſuppoſe, that 
one knowing what he had to expect, and enter- 
ing wilfully and with his eyes open into an en- 
gagement ; would þehave with more prudence | 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. 22% 


and temper, than one entangled in the ſnares 


of an artful woman, 


IT is needleſs in ſhort to enumerate particu- 
lars; for all the virtues, however amiable in 
themſelves, have been the occaſion of ſo many 
baſe counterfeits, that it is enough to bring the 
originals into diſrepute; and indeed their ap- 
pearances ſhould be well examined, before they 


are believed genuine. y 


Bur, from what motives then, it may be 

aſked, do I propoſe; that women ſhould be 
induced to regulate and ſubdue their paſſions, 
and cultivate every virtue? My anſwer is ready. 
From the beſt and pureſt of motives—the moſt 
natural, and powerful of all That of obeying 
the will of God, and conducing to their own 
individual happineſs, here, and hereafter. Theſe 
are ſuch motives, and carry ſuch weight, as can- 
not well be reſiſted by any human being; for 
ſelf, either in a bad or a good ſenſe muſt ever 
predominate, ever in the end prevail. Even 
as we have before preſumed to advance, the 


224 | APPEAL TO THE 


pareſt religion eyer imagined by the mind of 
man, or urged by the commands of God, is 
abſolutely and undeniably founded upon that 
predominating principle of our nature ; which 
principle, like all the other operations of an 
all- wiſe Providence, tends to univerſal good, 
though it may be perverted to partial, or tem- 
porary evil. It may be reduced to a very nar- 
row, or extended to a very comprehenſive circle. 
It may be indeed ſelfiſh, in the worſt ſenſe of 

the term; or it may be trained to find its hap- 
| pineſs in communicating happineſs to all around 
it, by channels, which will return it an hundred 
fold, in its own boſom. But even here it is 
obvious and undeniable, that our own gratifi- 
cation is at the bottom—is the main ſpring 
which moves the whole—though it muſt be 
confeſſed upon the moſt liberal and benevolent 
ſcheme, of which our apparently imperfect na- 
ture is capable. | | | 
Ir is therefore the duty of thoſe who have 
the care of females in their youth, to convince 
them; that truth, ſincerity, gentleneſs, that 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. 225 


the practice in ſhort of every virtue, will not 
only entitle them to the approbation of' their 
Creator, and to future happineſs —for theſe, 
alas! great as they are, are not ſufficient mo- 
tives to frail, and ſhort-ſighted, and impatient 
mortals—but muſt likewiſe convince them, that 
ſuch conduct only, can ſecure to them real and 
ſolid comfort, and ſuch degrees of happineſs as 
are attainable in this mortal ſtate. Here are in- 
deed adequate motives; and by ſuch alone, 
ought rational beings, in reality to be actuated. 
Here nothing but realities will do. We cannot 
impoſe upon God, nor very eaſily upon our own 
conſciences, which tell us if we will but liſten, 
that in virtue alone lies true happineſs. Whereas 
if women are taught to place their chief de- 
pendence on the approbation and admiration of 
men, they ſoon find out that falſe appearances 
will often anſwer their purpoſes perfectly well; 
and with a certain degree of management and 
cunning, often better, than the realities of thoſe 
virtues they aſſume. 


Ir men, however, would be prevailed upon 


226 APPEAL TO THE © 


to conſider women in a more reſpectable point 
of view, and were they placed on a more re- 


ſpeQable footing in ſociety, -this would not be 


the caſe. They would ſtill indeed depend upon 
the other ſex for moſt of their comfort and 


happineſs, as the other ſex would ſtill depend 
much upon them ; but they would not be drove 
to thoſe wretched ſhifts, nor obliged to act upon 


thoſe flaviſh principles, which at preſent are the 
bane of all improvement. 


THERE is at all events no cauſe to feur, but 
that women will be deſirous enough to pleaſe, 
whatever mode of education is purſued ; for 
ſuch is the natural deſire of the ſexes to capti- 
vate each other, that no education is neceſſary 
for this end. God and nature have here left 
nothing to do. The attachment of the ſexes, 
does not depend upon ſpeculative opinions, 


nor ſage advices, nor prudential motives, nor 


even upon the commands of God by a revealed 


religion. This point ſeems to have been ſettled 
from the beginning quite to the ſatisfaction, 
and quite ſufficiently for the happineſs of both 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN, 227 


parties; and this defire to pleaſe appears fo 
early, that perhaps it is rather the duty of thoſe 
who have the care of youth, to keep it like 
every other paſſion within bounds, and to ſet 
higher motives in view; than to encourage it 
to the degree, that it moſt commonly is. Per- 
haps it would be better for thoſe who have the 
charge of young women to truſt to chance, and 
to the charms of native ſimplicity, for their fu- 
ture eſtabliſhment; and to virtue and well- 
founded principles for their conduct afterwards; 
inſtead of teaching them to throw out falſe co- 
lours before marriage, and preaching up to them 
the propriety of cunning, and hypocriſy, and 
mean ſubmiſſion to every ſpecies of vice—it it 


can only ſerve their purpoſes—after it. 


INDEED there is ſomething ſo very degrading 
in the idea of breeding up women, if allowed 
to be rational beings at all, merely with the 
view of catching at a huſband; it is indeed ſo 
very humbling to both ſexes, and to Nature 


herſelf, that it cannot be too often, nor too 


ſeverely reprobated. 
Gs 


228  * APPEAL TO THY 


Having pointed out truth and ſincerity, as | | 
indiſpenſable in every character, and gentleneſs 
as a moſt uſeful and amiable, as well as chrif- 
tian diſpoſition ; and having recommended theſe 
to be inculcated upon the beſt and ſureſt prin- 
ciples—Having likewiſe condemned an over- 
anxiety to captivate the other ſex, as being as 
it is now practiſed, rather an artful habit than 
any thing elſe ; and particularly, as it ſeems to 
have thrown love and nature into the back 


ground, and brought forward intereſt and am- 


© bition in their place; I now proceed to ſpeak 


of a virtue which has by long preſcription been 


granted excluſively to women. 


AND here modeſty, umverſally conſidered, 
and not without reaſon, as the pride and orna- 
ment of the ſex, naturally preſents itſelf to our 
view. Indeed it may be ſuppoſed unneceſſary 
to ſay much in commendation of that, which 
all agree to be ſo indiſpenſable, in the compo- 
fition of either a good, or an amiable woman. 
Would to God, that it were viewed in the ſame 
light with regard to men! the happy conſe- 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN, 229 


quences would ſoon appear in ſociety. But 
leaving them to account for their conduct and 
opinions in this reſpect; let us hope, that wo- 
men may never by the force of bad example, 
or from any other motive whatever, be tempted 
to hold this engaging virtue in leſs eſteem than 
it ever has been, in all well- regulated ſocieties. 
And may that pre-eminence which has been 
aſſigned to the ſex in this particular, be ever 
conſidered by them, as the higheſt compliment 
that can be paid them! Not but that truth ob- 
liges me to add, that, here as uſual, it is for 
their own ſakes chiefly that men recommend it 
ſo very earneſtly to the practice of women; and 
that it is their own dignity, comfort, and eaſe, 
which they conſult principally upon this occa- 
ſion, as well as upon almoſt every other. For 
I believe the fact is, that judging by themſelves, 
and by their own miſguided and indulged paſ- 
ſions, they believe that adherence to virtue in 
this ſenſe of the word, is very meritorious; but 
ſtill they conſider women as bound to practiſe 
it, as well as every other, when it ſuits the in- 
tereſt of their lordly companions. And ſurely 


f 3 2 2 
+ - 
— . 


— — . Lens 
_ * W * 5 
- — 


— 


— - 
* 
. 2 


„ APPEAL TO THE 


It ſuits every man, that his wife, his daughter, 
and all his neareſt, and deareſt female relations, 


ſhould be virtuous. 


Narunk, however, is leſs tyrannical than 


man; ſhe ſeldom diſdains to ſhew good cauſe 


for her conduct; and here, as in every other 


caſe, we find that ſhe goes hand in hand with 


reaſon. 


NaTuRE has clearly given to women, in a 


moſt important concern to ſociety, a moſt de- 


cided conſequence—1I believe without preſump- 


tion it might be called, a moſt decided ſuperio- 
rity. Why ſhe has done ſo, is not for us to 
know; it were diving too far into her myſteries, 
to pretend to account for this. For, when I 


fay that Nature does not diſdain to ſhew good 


cauſe, for her conduct, I do not certainly mean 


to advance, that we can give any good reaſon, 
why ſhe has adopted this or that plan, in pre- 
ference to any other, which we might ſuppoſe 
more conducive to our happineſs ; for this is a 


knowledge far beyond the reach of human 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN, 231 


ken.“ I only mean to ſay, that, ſhe having 
once adopted a plan, whatever it may be, every 
thing conſpires to render it perfect. Nothing 
abſurd — nothing contradictory — nothing in 
her operations, like the wavering wills and 
paſſions of men.—But on the contrary all goes 
on, in one uniform, decided, and unalterable 
courſe, 
| Havins ſettled my meaning on this point, 1 
repeat, that nature has clearly given to women, 
in a moſt important concern to ſociety, a moſt 
decided conſequence; by making the comfort 
and happineſs, and ſecurity—lI will not ſay the 
honor, becauſe I think the term miſapplied 
of the men; depend much upon the fidelity and 
chaſtity of the women. Nature having for her 
own wife purpoſes, which are however totally 
unknown to us, placed this truſt in their vir- 
tue; ſhe, ever in uniſon with herfelf and with 
reaſon, forms them—though with exceptions 
modeſt from the beginning. Or in other and 
more explicit words—modeſty is innate in a 


greater degree in women than in men. The 


1 


—— 


re 


p pa owe = $6. 0 — — = = 
= = = 2 — — — — 
2 ,,4 "i 


— 2 — — — i 
— „ Ei: we. 
py _ fi 3 10 — - iP 
- fo at EE Foam <——d _ = — ——— 
— " 4 - — 1 _ 
. 


232 APPEAL TO THE 


hiſtory of all nations,—of the human race, wild 
and tame, ſocial and favage,—all, all agree in 
this great truth; and would delicacy permit, a 
thouſand and a thouſand arguments might be 


adduced to ſupport a fact, ſo undeniably, ſo | 


ſacredly true ;—fo dear to the happineſs of in- 


dividuals and ſociety ;—ſo eſſential to domeſtic 
bliſs, And, at the ſame time a truth, the moſt 
honorable and flattering for the female ſex ; 
enſlaved and mortified as they are, in ſo many 


other caſes, 


I HavzE thus in conformity with what I be- 
lieve—ſincerely beheve—to be the truth, and 
nothing but the truth ; acknowledged, that- a 
great degree of modeſty and purity in behaviour 
and conduct, is to be expected, and is even 


required in the female character. Vet if I have 
failed in proving that theſe expectations are 


formed, theſe requiſitions made, in conformity 
with nature and reaſon; I have failed eſſentially 
indeed. And if happineſs and honor to them- 
ſelves, are not the principal motives adduced, 


as incentives to this ſuperior purity of conduct; 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN, 234 


all other arguments are vain and viſtonary, and 
never will-—never indeed can convince, to the 


end of time. 


Bur though I have upon this ſubject, ad- 
vanced only what all mankind have nearly agreed 
upon to be true ſince the beginning of the world; 
yet ſhould I be miſerable indeed, if by that means 
even one mite were added, one voice more, 
however inſignificant, given, in favor of the li- 
centiouſneſs of men. Alas! there is little oc- 
caſion to feed, if but with one particle of fuel, 
a flame, that is likely not only to deſtroy the 
happineſs and comforts of domeſtic life—as in- 
deed it too often does even at prefent—but 
perhaps in the end, to degrade the human race 
to a degree, that is little attended to by the 
thoughtleſs votaries of vice. Every one of 
whom, however, have not only their own indi- 
vidual guilt to account for, in indulging their 
paſhons beyond the bounds that reaſon, reh- 
gion, and I may add nature preſcribe ; but will 
likewiſe be accountable, for the ſhare they have 
had in contaminating the ſociety to which they 


234 APPEAL TO THE 


belong ; and for rendering miſerable by their 
miſconduct, thoſe, whom it was molt their duty 
to make happy. | 


| Bzrons 1 quit this ſubje&, I am going to 
recommend, and that perhaps ſomewhat at 
large, a ſpecies of humanity not much culti- 
vated ; but which I conſider as worthy of the 
ſerious attention of my own ſex—and it 1s this. 
That however amiable, and indiſpenſable, mo- 
deſty—the virtue of which we have been treat- 
ing—undoubtedly is; yet that thoſe who pol- 
ſeſs it in the moſt eminent degree, are not 
entitled upon that account, to deſpiſe or con- 
demn too rigorouſly, that unfortunate portion 
of the ſex who have fallen victims to vice—Or 
rather let me fay to the arts of men; who, by. 
an abſurdity of conduct | which no good ſyſtem 
of morality can poſſibly countenance, talk in- 
deed of female virtue, and ſeem even by their 
laws, to conſider it as the chief bond of ſociety; 
yet never ſcruple to break this bond, when in- 
ſtigated by a paſſion, which ſo ill deſerves the 


name of love, that hatred itſelf cannot produce 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. 235 


conſequences ſo dreadful to the unhappy ob- 
jects of it. 


Dip women of virtue then conſider ;—had 


they but opportunities of knowing the infinuat- 
ing, though baſe arts uſed by profligate men, 


to ſeduce innocent and unſuſpecting females-— 


and what ſacrifices of truth and honor it often 
coſts them to ſucceed even with women, who, 
afterwards perhaps by a train of unfortunate 
circumſtances, turn out pre-eminent in vice, 
and a diſgrace to their ſex and to human na- 
ture—TI repeat it, had a virtuous and humane 


woman but acceſs to know, and conſider all 


theſe—ſhe would look inward upon herſelf and 


ſay—If I have more purity of heart and con- 
duct, than theſe unfortunate ſiſters, have I not 


more cauſe for thankfulneſs than triumph? Can 
I lay my hand upon my heart and ſay, what-f 
would have been my conduct, preciſely in * N 


ſame circumſtances? 


Wur conſcience anſwers theſe queſtions; 
n 


236 © APPEAL TO THE 


in the way that ſhe moſt certainly will do, we 
ſhall then-find two admirable leſſons inculcated 
upon us ;—with regard to others pity to the un- 
fortunate ;—with regard to ourſelves, the moſt 
ſcrupulous caution to avoid whatever has the 
moſt remote tendency, to ſully the purity of 
the mind or manners. Not but that I am per- 
fectly convinced that there are of both ſexes, 
whoſe virtues are of a nature too exalted, and 
founded upon principles too ſacred, to be moved 
perhaps by any temptation whatever. To ſay 
that thoſe who are virtuous are only ſo, becauſe 
they have had no temptation to be otherwiſe, 
would be lowering the ſtandard of goodneſs in- 
deed ; and would too, be experimentally falſe ; 
for many have reſiſted every temptation that 
imagination can paint. I only would hint, that 

it is hard to judge, whether the unhappy claſs 
of females we allude to, may not be generally, 
more objects of pity than blame. And indeed 
cannot help conſidering it as a matter of great 
unportance to ſociety, to inculcate ;—that com- 
paſhon and an attention to the circumſtances 
which may have led to the deſtruction of ſuch, 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN, 237 


are more likely means of producing reformation 


among them, and ſtopping the progreſs of vice; 
than that hatred, contempt, and terror, which 
the modeſt and virtuous, perhaps, naturally 
enough feel for ſuch characters, when theſe are 
not taken into conſideration, 


I nave heretofore been ſpeaking of thoſe, 


who, by continuing in the practice of vice, are 


generally ſuppoſed to preclude all ſympathy. 


Yet even in theſe worſt of caſes, when we con- 


ſider among other things, how difficult the re- 


turn to virtue is made; we muſt balance well, 


before we judge rigorouſly. And if ſo, how 
much more compaſſion is juſtly due to thoſe, 
whoſe quick return to the paths of rectitude, 
proves, that in ſome minds nothing can totally 
extinguiſh the love of virtue not even an ac- 
quaintance with its moſt deadly foe,—not even 
the blandiſhments of vice itſelf. To ſuch peni- 
tents every encouragement ſhould undoubtedly 
be given, that is conſiſtent with delicacy and 


. propriety, and particularly by their own ſex; 


who, are upon every account, much fitter for 


_ — 
9 
3 
— g - 1 


: 
—p— — 2 — — — — — —7ib j — 
— 3 3 3 FI" LY. __ 7" i 


mnt 
— AM. ad 


— — - 


_ _— E . 2 
23 Do - a = — 
- - — = 


— o- 


| 
| 
| 
| 


—_— = — _ = —_— 
* J —— — — 
— — Ä — x ̃ —-. nn ge tener 2 Py 


——ñ — 


— 
— — 


— —— 


— 
l — — - = 
: 1 M's. — — 
- — — * 
- — — —— — m̃mj . ̃ p 
8 


- + pm. hs 
% — — 


— — 


238 © APPFAL Tro TE. 


ſuch a taſk, than men—feeble advocates, alas! 


and dangerous patrons, for returning virtue. 


Exoucn has now been ſaid, and it may bs 


ſuppoſed by ſome, too much, upon a topic not 


the moſt agreeable.—I have only to urge in 


my defence, that upon this, as well as upon 
every other ſubje& on which I have touched ; I 
have the intereſts of ſociety, and eſpecially of 


the unfortunate, and unfriended, ſincerely at 


I HAVE more than once ſaid, that this work 
aims at nothing higher than a flight ſketch, of 
an important plan; but even this ought to in- 
clude ſo much, that I tremble at the proſpe& 
of what yet remains to be done. I endeavour 
to compreſs rather than expand ; but this is 
perhaps the moſt difficult, of all the difficult 


things, which a poor author has to encounter. 


After all, ſubje& preſſes upon me, and it is 
| only left for me to ſelect with what judgment I 


am, miſtreſs of, that which appears moſt neceſ- 
ſary to my plan. 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. 239 


Bz1NG therefore, thus circumſcribed, I ſhall 
not expatiate much more upon the education 
of females. It is eaſily ſeen, from what has 
been ſaid in different parts of this Appeal, that 
it is taken for granted, that it ought to be eſta- 
bliſhed upon fair and liberal principles; and 
that no inſtruction, which is ſuited to their 
ſtations, their circumſtances, and their genius, 


ſhould be denied to women any otherwiſe than 


men; with thoſe reſtrictions however, which 


have been ſo laboriouſly pointed out, and which 
it is hoped the reader has not already for- 


gotten, 


I sHALL, however, as I write for all claſſes, 
here touch a little upon one branch of domeſtic 
employment, which though totally abandoned 
in the higher ranks, yet in a certain degree, 


and eſpecially in certain ſituations, is ſurely not 


below the attention of other women. But I 
cannot give it that unqualified praiſe as a neceſ- 
ſary acquirement for the whole ſex, which ſome 
ſtill perſiſt in beſtowing upon it; though upon 


TOO EEE —— ——⸗—— §— 2 — 
_ — N - — =, 2 "1 * 5 TH 


ee ee a ea i 
— £4 n n 4 


240 APPEAL TO THE 


the whole on the wane even in that reſpect, in 


the public' opinion. 


Ir is the art of cookery to which-I allude. 
The knowledge of this, if not the practice of it, 
is commonly recommended, as a very proper 
and uſeful knowledge for the ſex. I again who 
am an advocate for ſimplicity in every thing 
poſſible, and conſiſtent with the advanced ſtate 
of ſociety, muſt beg leave to advance a few ar- 
guments againſt it; though certainly not againſt 
that attention to domeſtic concerns, which is 


beyond all diſpute the duty of every woman, 


In the firſt place then, what is generally now 
called good cookery, is only poiſon in diſguiſe. 
It is, if I may ſo expreſs it, domeſtic and daily 
poiſon, ever repeated, and ever at hand; and 
for that reaſon, I would not have wives and 
mothers inſtrumental in encouraging a vitiated, 
a luxurious, — and when over indulged, —a 
beaſtly appetite, in themſelves or their families. 
Indeed the luxuries of the table, are become ſo 
eſſential a part of the order of the day, that it 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN, 241 


is beating the air to argue againft them; and 
the advice or example of women in this caſe, 
would probably have as little effect, as in moſt 
others. Still, however, there is a difference 
between ſuffering an evil, and adminiſtering to 
it, by miſemploying time or talents, to encreaſe 
it. I therefore with ſubmiſſion, think, that wo- 
men of a certain rank or fortune, are fully juſ- 
tiſied in leaving both the theory and practice of 
this delectable and elegant art, to thoſe whom 
it is their duty to employ for that purpoſe. 


In the next place, I think this ſcience, has 
no very favorable effects upon the temper or 
manners; or in plain terms, that thoſe women 
who are moſt addicted to it, and are moſt 
famous upon that account, are ſeldom remark- 
able at the ſame time for the ſuavity of the one, 
or the elegance of the other. And what is too 
provoking, men —capricious creatures as they 
are - ſit down at the tables of ſuch women, and 
do all manner of juſtice to their ſavory meats z. 
but how often do they riſe diſguſted with the 
kind hand that feeds them! And how often do 


242 APPEAL TO THE 


they ridicule, the lamentations or triumphs of 
the good creatures, as their feaſts have failed, or 
| ſucceeded, in exciting appetite and applauſe! 
So men upon this, as well as upon moſt other 
occaſions, are very ungrateful when they are 
obeyed and ſerved, and their vile appetites ad- 
miniſtered to; yet wonderfully ſurpriſed and 
angry when they are not. 


Tur next objection to women of a certain 
underſtood rank, being too violent and minute 
in their houſewifery—l mean of courle more ſo 
than is neceſſary to prevent impoſition and waſte 
in their families, which, I muſt repeat it, is un- 
doubtedly one of the firſt duties of the ſex, let 
their ſtation or fortune be what it may my 
next objection I ſay, is this; that by their miſ- 
placed activity they ſupply places, which in ſtrict 
juſtice ought to be occupied by others to whom 
fortune has been leſs kind; and who depend 

on the employment of their ſuperiors for the 
| ſupport of life. 


Ir may be remarked, that a ſei diſant re- 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN, 243 


former, ought to recommend induſtry, and 
economy in every ſtation. I do fo with all my 
heart, as far as it is conſiſtent and practicable. 
But there are degrees which ſuit every ſtation ; 
for we all know, that what is becoming and 
amiable in one, becauſe neceſſary, is the very 
reverſe of theſe in another. 


I THEREFORE contend, that people of fortune 
ought to employ as many about them, and 
make thoſe as happy, as is conſiſtent with a 
reaſonable degree of induſtry and appropriate 
employment to each. This is one of the ſureſt 
and beſt methods of being charitable and bene- 
volent, and eſpecially for perſons of rank and 
fortune, who, are generally placed at ſuch 
an awful diſtance from poverty and diſtreſs, 
that they almoſt forget that ſuch things are. 
Though it is but juſtice to add, that many of 
them when made ſenſible of the miſeries of their 
fellow creatures, are ready, and even eager to 
aſſiſt the unfortunate. 


Bur by the method here recommended, the 
[1 | 


r Ü ]³˙ ü — — — — 


244 APPEAL TO THE 


objects of their benevolence would be continual- 
ly under their eye; and it thoſe who by their 
neceſſities, are compelled to ſerve, were made 
friends as well as domeſtics - which gentle treat- 
ment ſeldom fails to do, it would contribute 
more to the comfort and ſecurity of maſters, 
than any other mode of conduct that can be de- 
viſed. It is impoſſible indeed, that good conſe- 
quences can ariſe, either from the thoughtleſs, 
extravagant, and often debauched ſtile, in which 
the ſervanrs of great families are permitted to 
live; and where after all, they are conſidered 
only as trappings to the ſtate, and the vanity of 
their employers—Or from the equally faulty 
conduct with regard to ſervants, of thoſe fami- 
lies; where they are treated with narrow mind- 
ed ſuſpicions, watched like thieves, or conſi- 
dered at beſt, but as neceſſary evils, rather 
than poſitive bleſſings. 


UNGRATEFUL ! thoughtleſs! and pampered 
race s it not enough that thy fellow creature 
mult bear thy burthen, without adding to it, 


inſult and contempt ?—Are not the virtues and 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. 245 


vices of domeſtics and dependents, in a great 
meaſure the conſequence—as in every other caſe 
—of education and circumſtances ?—Are they 
a different race, born with ſlavery and ſervitude, 
and their imputed concomitant vices, ſtamped on 
their fronts? No—what is their fate to day, it is 
not impoſſible maybe ours to morrow. And at all 
events it is much more than probable, that our 
poſterity, whom we fondly cheriſh by anticipation 
ho are dear to us in imagination as our own 
fouls— dear as the ruddy drops that warm the 
heart'—that our poſterity ſhall in the ſad * viciſ- 
ſitude of things? be to theirs, what thoſe we 
too often trample upon, are now to us. We 
talk of equality. The affairs of human life are 
never equal. Neither, however, does one ſcale 
always kick the beam. Let us beware then, 


how we carry the cup when it is full. 


ONE other objection to very buſy houſe. - 
wifery, is this. It does violence to the cgſtumi, 
it does not keep up that equal finiſh, which is 
beautiful in real life, as well as in the imitative 


arts, For example, while a man is ſquandering 


246 APPEAL TO THE 


his fortune at a gaming houſe, or on the turf, 
or in other places which it becomes not the de- 
licacy of a female ſcarcely to allude toz—can 
he have the conſcience to preach up—can he 
reaſonably expeA—that his wife ſhall dedicate 


her time, to domeſtic drudgeries at home: 


To ſuch ſubmiſſive and homely employments, 
he may indeed wiſh her to dedicate it; becauſe 


this would at leaſt enſure better conduct than his 


own. But if ſhe did ſo, it would only render 


her an object of contempt in his eyes—4q too 


great contraſt to him — whoſe elegance per- 
haps is all he has to boaſt of. And, who, too 
probably, has neither ſenſibility nor gratitude 
enough, to appreciate, to reward, or to ac- 


knowledge, mere uſeful and humble worth. 


Wr however any thing like the ſimplicity 
of the patriarchal, or heroical ages ſupported 


by the men, nothing ſo reaſonable as that the 


wives ſhould be their aſſiſtants. When Abraham 


himſelf, ſtepped forth and killed the calf, could 


Sarah do leſs than dreſs it with all the ſkill ſhe 
was miſtreſs of? And when we find the vene- 


MEN -OF GREAT BRITAIN. 247 


rable patriarchs buſied in digging wells, at every 
place they came to, tending their flocks and 
herds, and exerciſing every other laborious and 
paſtoral employment,—can we ſuppoſe the Ra- 
chels of thoſe days, degraded, by drawing water 
for their camels, waſhing their linen if they had 
any, &c. &c.? On the contrary, were not theſe, 
appropriate and neceſſary, and even pleaſant 
employments ? But here indeed, all is appro- 
priated, all conſiſtent ; for the fact is, that in 
thoſe days, in thoſe climates, and in thoſe coun- 
tries, —in dry and barren lands,—to have the 
neceſſaries of life in decent abundance, was no 
eaſy matter; and to prepare and adminiſter 
theſe, was of conſequence, not conſidered as 
below the dignity of exalted characters, of 
either ſex. In the ſame circumſtances, the ſame 
manners hold good to this preſent day; for 
I believe any one who wiſhes to ſee patri- 
archal fimplicity in the higheſt perfection, 
has only to go in queſt of it to the deſarts 
of Arabia, where, he will find it realized at 
this very moment, among the wandering tribes 
who inhabit thoſe devious and barren tracts; 


248 AppPEAL TO THE 


and where he will likewiſe ſee what correct 


| painters of manners, our ſacred writers were, 


Havinc from the ſubject of houſewifery 


wandered to the deſerts of Arabia, and to ſay 


the truth very nearly loſt our way, let us re- 


turn home the beſt road we can, but above all 
the ſhorteſt, - 


THarT in theſe kingdoms then and in theſe 
times, when men themſelves gallop at full 
ſpeed, after pleaſure and luxury in every ſhape 


they can put on ;—when men themſelves one 


| ſhould think, endeavour to anticipate the vices 


of all future times, through fear of any eſcaping 
untaſted! that they yet ſhould ſuppoſe, that 
women are to lag ages behind, and cultivate 
ſimplicity only—is really one of thoſe abſurdi- 
ties at which one knows not whether to laugh 


or cry. 


HERE again once for all I muſt entreat, that 
I may not be miſunderſtood. For though the 
art of which J have been treating, like many of 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. 249 


the other arts, has nothing intereſting or digni- 
fied in itſelf; yet they all become ſo, when per- 
formed cheerfully and from a ſenſe of duty and 
propriety. As nothing, ſurely, can be more 
amiable and praiſe-worthy, than to fulfil the 
duties of our ſtation, whatever they may be. 
I only mean to ſay, that to adminiſter. to the 
- vanities of a great table, or to gluttony, or epi- 
curiſm ; deſerves not much time, or attention 
from rational women ; who, after paying all due 
attention to houſehold concerns, might be much 
more uſefully and agreeably employed, in the 
care and education of their offspring; if them- 
ſelves were trained up ſo, as to be capable of 


- undertaking that moſt important taſk. 


I Have no doubt enlarged fully enough upon 
this ſubject ; ſince it muſt be acknowledged that 
women of this day, in general, do by no means 
give too much time or attention either to the 
theoryor practice of cookery. But thisis the very 
reaſon for ſaying ſo much. - For this deviation 


from that, which men in general recommend, and 


to which they ſeem partial, requires ſome apo- 


* 


250 APPEAL TO THE 


logy; and I hope I have defended the women, 
on rational and equitable grounds. 


Tk acquiſition of knowledge has already 
been treated of ſufficiently, to evince the im- 
portant view in which it is held; and the 
light in which, the extreme folly of laying re- 
ſtrictions upon it, is conſidered. Further argu- 
ments on that ſubject, would here be tedious 
and unneceſſary. I ſhall only therefore add, 
that every virtue, every acquirement, every 
branch of knowledge which is either uſeful or 
ornamental ; or to which the genius of indi- 
viduals point, or to which their ambition ſhall 
aſpire; may—a few faſhionable accompliſhments 
excepted—be cultivated in a conſiderable de- 
gree, in the private, in the domeſtic, in the 
rural ſcenes of life. Circumſtances highly fa- 


vourable, in the education of women. 


80 perſuaded am I, of the good effects of an 
early attachment to the country, that though 
an enemy to the affectation of ſyſtem— to ſtrict 
and uniform rules, for various and general na- 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN, 251 


ture—yet 1 ſhould wiſh every young perſon in 
whoſe future conduct and happineſs I were 
much intereſted, to acquire a taſte for a coun- 
try life, and ſuch ſimple pleaſures, and rational 
enjoyments, as it certainly affords. 


HEALTH, improvement, and pleaſure, may 
go hand in hand in the ' country—an union 
which any where elſe, can hardly be ſuppoſed 
ſo well to take place. Though, that theſe are 
often united to a wonderful degree, where one 
ſhould leaſt of all expect they ſhould, even in 
the gruateſt-and moſt populous cities, we muſt 
—in ſpite of very ſtrong prejudices in favor of 


a darling theory—impartially acknowledge. 


_ I HAvE now traced in the beſt manner I am 
able, thoſe virtues which are moſt effential to 
the ſex—thoſe virtues which muſt be the foun- 
dation of every uſeful, or amiable, or valuable 


character, however circumſtanced, or in what- 


ever ſituation. And meagre as the catalogue 
may appear, ſuch general and indiſpenſable 
K k | 


252 APPEAL TO THE 


ones, are all that can with any propriety be 
pointed out, in a work of this kind. 


Tux love of truth—a deteſtation of hypo- | 
criſy and diſguiſe—ſimplicity of manners in as 
great a degree as can be reaſonably expected, 
or as is conſiſtent with the advanced ſtate of 
fociety—unaffeted modeſty of heart and con- 
duct, with much allowance for the frailties, and 
much compaſſion for the miſeries of the unfortu- 
nate liberal opinions and humane conduct with 


regard to domeſtics and dependents and a rea- 
ſonable deſire after knowledge, not WIdIIſtandiag 


the illiberal prejudices thrown in the way 
theſe compoſe the body and the leading branches 
of the ſyſtem. The ramifications are infinite, 
and certainly no delineation of them will be 


here attempted. 


 Trovecn no mention has been made of Re- 


 ligion, the moſt important concern of all; yet 
a deep ſenſe of it—however modified by diffe- 
rent dendminations of chriſtians—is conſidered 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. 253 


as the vivifying principle which animates the 


whole ſyſtem. —The maſter ſpring by which the 


whole is moved and regulated. 


_ Wrrnovr religion, though virtue may exiſt, 
it is deprived of its beſt ſupport, its moſt faith- 
ful counſellor and guide.—Without religion, we 


are deprived of the animating hope of rendering 


ourſelves acceptable in the fight of the only 
Power, who is able to appreciate and reward, 
the often ſilent and unſeen exertions, of the 
nobleſt faculties of our nature. 


A PERFECT knowledge of the divine morality 


of the chriſtian ſyſtem, is therefore not only in- 
cluded in our plan; but is conſidered as the beſt 


and moſt ſolid foundation upon which to reſt 
the whole. 


Or ſuch a ſuperſtructure —raiſed on ſuch a 
foundation—ſtability, conſiſtency, and rationa- 


lity will of courſe be the prominent features. 


. 
* 


Burr in characters thus formed it is natural 


_ APPEAL TO THE 


likewiſe to expect from the beſt motives, ami- 
able diſpoſitions, and gentleneſs of manners; 
for the earneſt precepts and matchleſs example 
of the Author of our faith, are, with regard to 
humility of heart and conduct too poſitive to 
be evaded by any thinking believer of either 
ſex. How men profeſſing belief in the ſcrip- 
tures, reconcile their conſciences to the flagrant 
breaches of theſe, and other moral virtues equally 
forcibly inculcated on both ſexes; is therefore 
unaccountable upon any other principle, than 
that of their not thinking at all. 


I eanNorT however in conſcience recommend 
to our ſex, the wretched caſuiſtry, of excuſing 
their own neglect of duty, from the example 
of others. If we are once ſincerely perſuaded 
that the precepts of our Saviour are drawn 
from a divine ſource, and adapted to human 
nature, with a tender compaſſion for its im- 
perfections and ſufferings; and that as ſuch 
they are the beſt calculated of all to produce 
happineſs— mortal and immortal If we are 


once ſincerely perſuaded of all this, though we 


* 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. 255 


ſee others abandon this great ſtandard of duty, 
it ought not, — nor it cannot indeed then, 


greatly affect our conduct, 


A $TRONGER proof cannot be urged of the 
infinite importance of fixing religious principles 
early in the minds of women. For perhaps 
there is not another means of guarding them 
againſt, and enabling them to repel, the force of 
badexample—which comes too with double force 
from thoſe, who have erected themſelves into 


perpetual dictators, and ſuprem2 judges, over 
women—than that of enabling the ſex, to draw 


their rules of conduct from the higheſt ſources 
— before the ſtream is polluted by the follies 
and abſurdities—and before themſelves are like- 
ly, to be much influenced by the dereliction in 
principle and practice of men, 


Every virtue raiſed and ſupported on ſuch 
a noble baſis, will bear the ſtamp of reality, 
and ſtand the teſt of trial. That mere automa- 
tans may put on the ſemblance of every virtue 


to a degree as captivating—perhaps even more 


| 
4 
; 
* 
» | 


235 ARAL ro THE” 


ſo, than women of real ſenſibility, and of fixed 
principles, I am moſt willing to allow. But this is 
© the varniſh of the ſurface, not the cultivation 
of the mind. And though when viewed through 
the favorable mediums of youth and beauty, it 
may appear lovely, and paſs for ſterling; yet 
when brought into collifion—when brought to 
bear againſt the rubs of life—how it ſcales off, 
and betrays the baſe materials, it was employed 
to ſcreen! Whilſt real, unaffected, unaſſuming 


goodneſs, may be compared to marble of the 


moſt exquiſite quality, —which, without flaw or 


blemiſh, admits of an equal poliſh through all 
its parts as on its ſurface; and on which the 
ſculptor may laſtingly impreſs the ſublimeſt ef- 
forts of his art. So virtues founded on energy 


of mind and conſiſtency of character, as well 


as truth in every ſhape, appear to greateſt ad- 


vantage and intereſt moſt, when examined 


nearly, and when moſt ſeverely tried. 


My readers I hope, will now agree with me, 
that it is unneceſſary to enlarge, here, on the 
minutiæ of modern accompliſhments. Upon 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. 257 


this point, Reaſon and Faſhion muſt compound 
the matter as they beſt can; for here the latter 
will always bear a certain ſway, in ſpite of all 
that the other can urge. And perhaps, after 
making good terms for the virtues, and more 
ſolid attainments; it is as well to let the giddy 


thing have her own way, and allow her to rule 


the lighter affairs of life, while ſhe conducts 


them with innocence and grace. 


Tux drudgery of education once over, what- 


ever it may be, or however conducted, brings 


women. to the happieſt period generally ſpeak- 


ing of their whole lives; if that may be termed | 


happieſt, when moſt innocent pleaſures are 
enjoyed ; and fewelt cares, felt or feared. And 
here perhaps it may not be improper to advert 
a little, to the different ſituations of the ſex, in 


the ſingle and married ſtate. 


Tun fate of women is generally allowed to 
be extremely hard in this reſpect, that young 
and old they are ever under control; huſbands 


taking up the authority, when parents leave it 


— 


p 
— — — —— — 
*. r — - \ — x 5 . = W 5 
— 8 — — w— fires . 
Cn. = — 


— 


7 


- — — 
: a 


Y 
| 


258 + APPEAL To THE 
of. —But oh! the bleſſed reſtraints, the tender 
the gentle admonitions, dictated by the fond 
heart of the anxious parent! Such is the nature 
indeed of parental love, of this exquiſite, this 
beſt of all the affections; that it makes even 
authority itſelf, light and eaſy. And notwith- 


ſtanding the acknowledged defects of human na- 


ture, notwithſtanding even the general profli- 
gacy of the times - hich no virtuous perſon will 


deny require reformation—it cannot be alleged 


that there is much to be reformed, in this par- 


ticular. Cruel parents, and unnatural children, 
are by no means common charaQeroy aud uy- 


thing better proves this, than, that whenever 
they appear, they are held up to univerſal ab- 
horrence and contempt. Whereas characters 
which are common, meet with no ſuch marked 


diſapprobation. 


Tux truth is, that Nature herſelf is guide 
and guardian, of that moſt important and inte- 


reſting inſtinct, which ſo ſweetly draws the 


parents and their offspring together; and it 


rarely—very rarely indeed happens—that any 


4 
2" 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. 259 


attempt is here made, to violate her rights. 
Parents are ever willing enough to do their 
children juſtice to the beſt of their judgment, 
and to grant them every indulgence that their 
ſituation and circumſtances allow; and often 
from an amiable, though perhaps miſtaken ten- 
derneſs, they go beyond theſe bounds ; and be- 
yond the bounds which prudence, or the future 
good of their children warrant. Under ſuch 
guardians—in the hands of ſuch partial judges 
—what have women left to wiſh for, or to fear ? 

AT this nappy period too of a woman's ex- 
iſtence, every thing from without as well as at 
home, wears a cheerful and encouraging aſpect. 
If ſhe is handſome, all ſmile upon, admire, and 
adore her; and independent of beauty, youth 
itſelf has a charm, that prevents any one from 
being completely diſagreeable. And though we 
allow, that even at this gay ſeaſon of life, partial 
and momentary clouds and ſtorms muſt ſome- 
times intervene ; yet under the kindly influence 
and ſhelter of the parent's wing, conſolation 
and protection are always to be found. 

L. I 


1 


— — 


260 APPEAL TO THE 


MEN in the characters of fathers too, are 
generally infinitely more amiable, and do more 
juſtice to the ſex, than in any other character 
whatever. One of the reaſons for this I believe 
is, that there being very little, or rather no 
temptation, for their daughters to diſpute their 
prerogative which they hold dearer than the 

light of heaven—that vile ſtumbling-block be- 
f ing in this connection pretty much out of the 
way — nature and reaſon prevail; and it is not 
often that the daughters of a family have cauſe 


to complain, of the father's partiality to his 
ſons. Fathers do not indeed in diefe kingdoms, 


nor in many others, throw off their prejudices 
thoroughly ; and like the phlegmatic, though 
reaſoning and equitable Dutchman, divide their 
property equally among their children, when 
they find them equally deſerving. But moft 
fathers of moſt countries, by their fond endear- 
ments, their engaging indulgence, their often 
partial and diſtinguiſhed love to their daughters, 
leave impreſſions on their hearts more tender 
and more laſting—more dear a thouſand times 


* 
MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. 261 


to minds of ſenſibility—than all the wealth the 
mines of Potofi could beſtow. 


I do not draw this picture of the early part 
of female life, from fancy, nor from partial 
obſervation ; but from general nature. It may 
be flattering or overcharged, but I am not con- 
ſcious that it is ſo.— But conſidering it with all 
the drawbacks and limitations poſſible, ſtill it 
remains, a ſeaſon of gaiety and innocence, of 
domeſtic felicity, and of abſence from care; 


that I tremble to contraſt with the ſcenes which 
the ſex have ſometimes to encounter, when 


they exchange the wholeſome reſtraints, the 
tender touches of parental government, for the 
high hand of unfeeling authority. An autho- 
rity by ſo much the more dangerous, that it is 
placed in hands, who, by the very nature of 
the matrimonial connection, have a thouſand 
temptations to abuſe it. And, which, it is too 
much perhaps for human nature, not to avail 
itſelf of, when malignant or ſeducing paſſions 
predominates PLE by 


262 Appl. TO THE 


IE authority of parents is ſo congenial to 
our natural feelings, and to reaſon; that on the 
one hand, thofe under it ſeem little diſpoſed to 
reject or throw it off; while on the other—ſuch 
is the love of parents to their children—a love 
conſtant and immoveable—an inſtinctive affec- 
tion not a paſſion, and conſequently not ſubject 
to variableneſs, or change, or caprice I ſay 
ſuch in theſe relations are the feelings of both 
parties, that it is ſeldom indeed, that a parent 
is tempted to ſtretch his authority beyond the 
bounds of reafon, or even of tenderneſs. So 
very ſeldom, that it is perhaps impoſſible that 
any rules that could be made to further reſtrain 
it; might not introduce more evils into ſociety, 
than the few and unavoidable ones, which oc- 
cur on the preſent ſyſtem. 


Bur with regard to the authority of huſbands, 
the caſe is altogether different; for matrimony 
—though a bond fo ſacred, ſo abſolutely eſſen- 
tial to the comfort. and peace of ſocicty, that 
whoever lifts up his voice againſt it, cannot be 


conſidered but as the enemy of mankind—is 


| 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. 263 


yet in a great degree but a civil contract. And 
though, it is in its nature ſtrictly moral; yet in 


— — nn 
— 
1 


— 


this point we arg not guided by that unerring | 


inſtinct, which directs the attachment of a parent 
to his child, or a child to his parent. We are 


| 
here moſt commonly influenced by love, which | 
though in itſelf kind and gentle, is ſubje& to | 


err—to deceive, and be deceived. Or we are -\i8 


guided in our choice in this important concern, 
by ambition or avarice, which are yet more 
likely to blind us than love. Such as the paſſion 


of love is however, did it always continue 
—or when it abates, were it always ſucceeded 


by a pure and ſteady friendſhip and good will; Is 
it might perhaps be ſufficient for every good | 
purpoſe, and for the reaſonable happineſs of 
both parties in this connection. But this is by 
no means the caſe; for love not only ſhifts ob- 


—— ——— — m 


jects, but degenerates ſometimes in violent and 


capricious tempers, to contempt, and even ha- 


tred, with very little reaſon or provocation; 1 
ſometimes none at all. This being undemably : | | 
true, and but too frequently happening, we | N 
muſt of courſe acknowledge, that power is an ( + 


—＋— 


> WAG Wt os 
& - + 


NT — — 


— 


74 


3 


264 APPEAL TO THE 


engine of too dangerous, and of too ready exe- 
cution, in domeſtic life, to be truſted in the 
hands of man, — ſubject as all human beings 
more or leſs, are, —to error, to paſſion, and 
caprice. And to call much leſs than abſolute 
and unlimited power, that which men may, and 


often do, exerciſe over their wives; is only de- 


ceiving ourſelves, and prevents us perhaps from 


ſearching to the bottom an evil, whick can 


never be remedied, till that is faithfully done, 


To point ont the frequent and melancholy 
abuſes of this authority, would be to draw a 


picture, of what many an amiable woman ſuf- 
fers from it; and many an unamiable one too. 
For though men are apt, and perhaps naturally 
enough, to ſuppoſe, that theſe two characters 
merit very different treatment; yet they ſhould | 
conſider, that all have the feelings of right and 
wrong,—all are equally entitled to juſtice,— 
though all have not an equal claim to love and 


admiration. 


To treat however this part of my ſubject as 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. 265 


it deſerves, would require abilities and talents, | 
to which I have no claim; and would occupy | Fi 
more time and ſpace than I am willing upon | i 
many accounts to beſtow. And above all, it " 
were an invidious taſk for one, who admires | a 
, enthuſiaſtically the inſtitution of marriage; and | | 
who will ever perſiſt in thinking, that it re- | . 
quires reformation only. Such as it is, even \ j 
at preſent, it certainly is a great ſecurity to the | | 
individual and general well-being of ſociety. In | 
its main deſign, that of bringing two perſons | { i 
of different ſexes together, and engaging diem | \ 
to mutual kindnels, conſtancy, and virtue, from 1 
the moſt intereſting of all motives—that of pro- | 


moting their own happineſs and the welfare of - 4 | 
their expected offspring, —it is congenial to 
every feeling of the human heart. In its ſimple S 


though comprehenſive plan, it ſo clearly points 


— 


out, that in it, true domeſtic bliſs may moſt cer- 


——— — 


tainly be found; that we think we can trace the 
hand of a God, in the noble and perfect out- 
line. Vet, alas! in the detail and execution, 


we often ſo miſerably fail, that we are almoſt 


led to believe, it requires the malice of a Demon 


— ——— — 23 


— 


266 AppPREAL TO THE 
to deſtroy ſo fair a fabric, to cloud ſo bright 
a proſpect. We are almoſt led to fear, that 


the firſt temꝑter has neither loſt his power, nor 


forgot his enmity. 


Sour few of the moſt obvious ſources of 
miſconduct and miſery in the holy ſtate of ma- 
trimony, we ſhall endeavour, however, to point 
out; this being in ſome degree eſſential to our 
plan. | 


I Bzzizvn it will be allowed to be a juſt re- 
mark, that faults ſeldom originate preciſely at 


the time, or upon the occaſions, when they 
firſt make their appearance; and thus the miſ- 
conduct of the ſexes in married life, may pro- 
bably be generally traced, to anti- nuptial cauſes. 
The manner in which men accuſtom themſelves 
to treat women before marriage, contraſted 
with the behaviour which they commonly chuſe 
to adopt after it; cannot but produce very ter- 
rible effects. * 


Tux ſtile or manner alluded to, which takes 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. 267 


place before marriage, is an abſurd mixture of 
the meagre reliques of ancient chivalry, with a 
much greater daſh of modern french manners ; 
which, grafted upon the native, manly engliſh 


character, bordering upon bluntneſs, make al- 


together a ſtrange hodge-podge ; yet ſuch as it 
is, the women are forced to be ſatisfied. They 
ſwallow very cheerfully the unmeaning flattery 
preſented them through ſuch mediums. The 
pill, though neither very ſkilfully, nor very 
painfully gilded, glides eaſily down. | 


 Trovcn flattery is in all ſhapes dangerous, 
and prepares the mind very ill for the reception 
of truth; and though even this kind of general 
inſi pid flummery does no good, but much harm; ö 
yet ſurely the moſt blameable ſpecies of it then 
commences, when a man ſingles out a particular 


woman, as the object of his choice. 


ONE ſhould imagine, that upon entering on 
ſo ſerious, ſo ſolemn an engagement; it were 
prudent on both ſides to lay aſide all attempts 
to impoſe upon, and miſlead each other. Love 

Mm * 


268 APPEAL TO THE 


is of himfelf, a flattering enough painter, and | 
likely enough, as has been faid, to deceive and 
be deceived, without calling in art to his affiſt- 
ance. Sincere and rational conduct is, how- 
ever, ſo far from being inconſiſtent with the 
moſt ardent attachment, that it ought always 
to accompany whatever truly deſerves the name 
of love. But inſtead of this, a farce is carried 
on to the laſt moment, tending to encourage 
expectations, which it is almoſt impoſſible for 


human nature to realize. 


1 62awT, that if there were not ſome enthu- 
ſiaſm in the paſſion of love, it would be but a 
very infipid buſineſs indeed. Like all other 
ſublime paſſions it feeds on enthuſiaſm—as the 
cameleon is faid to exiſt upon air—and it de- 


generates miſerably without it“. But we muſt 
* It is alleged however by curious obſervers, that both 


lovers, and the ever-changing little grubs, here, not un- 
aptly compared to them; require ſomewhat more ſubſtantial 
food than is above aſſigned them. In ſhort it is maintained 
that when well watched, both ſpecies are found to have 
molt vulgar and devouring appetites. We doubt it not. 
We rather ſpoke poetically than philoſophically. 

— — —ñ — ————————— — — 


Eg 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. 269 


inſiſt, that this ſtats of mind and heart, is by 
no means incompatible with a manly conduct, 
and ſincerity of intention; and that nothing 
but a moſt deſpicable faſhion, of infipid—vapid 
gallantry, has ſeparated them. And certainly, 


no man, even in the ſhort ſpace of time com- 
monly allotted to gaining the affections af a 


future wife, ſhould demean himſelf too much, 
even to the object of his fondeſt attachment. 
Every woman 1s willing enough to accept the 


man ſhe loves, upon reaſonable terms; and 


without ſuch unmeaning condeſcenſions as are 


but too commonly practiſed at this period: 


Unmeaning they certainly are, if not worſe ; | 


for it is but too true that thoſe who behave 


moſt ſervilely to their miſtreſſes, commonly 


make them when wives, pay dearly for the f 


ſhort-lived ſacrifice. Servility and tyranny, but 
too often meet in the fame character; and woe 
to her who is the victim of ſuch! Indeed a 


more wretched ſituation cannot well be con- 
ceived, than that of a woman thus firſt raiſed 


above the pitch of common ſober ſenſe and 
reaſon, thus ſuppoſing herſelf the deareſt object 


——— ——— SE 


, om rene I 


270 APPEAL TO THE 


upon earth to the man ſhe moſt loves—and 
which belief in a generous and ſenſible mind is 
perhaps the moſt flattering idea that can take 
place; —and then degraded below her real 
deſert. To be thus raiſed and to fall,—1s to 
fall indeed. Out of this delirium, to awake 
to indifference and neglect, perhaps to unme- 
rited contempt or hatred, —is without doubt as 
ſevere a trial as any which occurs, in the whole 


detail of human miſery. 


Yer ſuch is the fate of many women, nay 
in ſome degree more or leſs of nat, though 
certainly not of all, who enter into the bonds 


of matrimony. 


Aras! ſcarcely are marriage viſits received 


and returned, ſcarcely are the happy pair on 


an eaſy footing together, when the huſband 
begins to ſuſpect that he is not married to an 


angel. Capricious man! was ſhe not a divinity 


of your own creation? Did you not daily and 


hourly offer up before her the incenſe of flat- 
tery, and that ſo groſsly, that it was ſufficient 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. 271 - 


to have choaked a common by-ſtander ? never 
conſidering, what a dangerous doſe you were 
adminiſtering, nor caring for the after conſe- 
quences. Yet inſtead of all this, in a ſhort, in 
a very ſhort time indeed, not only your eyes 
are opened,—for this is a neceſſary and natural 


conſequence of living in ſociety together, but 


the time faſt approaches, when the idol becomes 


the ſacrifice ; and when ſhe is perhaps doomed 
to ſuffer the more, to expiate your former ab- 
ſurdity, of which you are now aſhamed. But 
ak not the only cafe, where the one ſex is 
left to expiate' the crimes and follies of the 


other ! 


Troven this change of behaviour on the 
part of huſbands, is bitter enough, and hard 
enough of digeſtion for the poor wives; yet -H 


here we ſee ſomething of human nature, ever 


prone - to extremes, and ever given, where 
there is no check, to ſome abuſe of power; and 


therefore every reaſonable woman looks for this 


change in ſome degree. But to fill up the 
meaſure of injuſtice and abſurdity, heaped and 4 


| 


272 APPEAL TO THE 


running over; the generality of huſbands, not 
contented with claiming the privilege of treating 
their wives in that way which beſt ſuits their own 
particular tempers and caprices, and viewing 
them, their faults and virtues, through ſuch 
mediums as the paſſions of the moment ſuggeſt 


expect further, that women are to reverence, 


not only, the virtues and good qualities of their 

huſbands, but are even to reſpect and connive 
at their follies, their. ir infirmities, and t their vices; 
gu men 


however mortifying this conduct may be, to 
thoſe, whom men chuſe to ſuppoſe, ought always 
to have their feelings under ſubjection to theirs, 


THis it will readily be allowed is no eaſy taſk, 
Yet that there are women, who, by a native 
ſweetneſs of diſpoſition, or by the exerciſe of 
chriſtian humility, which like charity, hopeth 
all things, believeth all things, beareth all 
things; that ſuch ſometimes are, who, in any 
ſituation, or with any man whatever, will 
glide down the ſtream of life without attempt 
at remonſtrance or redreſs — and far leſs at 


retalation—I know to be true. But I like- 


* 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. 273 


wiſe know that ſuch characters are rare. When 
a man falls in with ſuch a woman, he ſhould 
cheriſh her as the apple of his eye when alive 
and afterwards pickle or preſerve her, or ſtuff 
her like ſome new ſpecies in the cabinet of a 
virtuoſo ; for believe one who knows ſomething 
of the ſex, that ſuch an one when found, is a 


rara avis indeed —is one of the white crows of 


creation—and as they are grown every_day 
— — — 


ſcarcer, and the times more and more ſceptical, 
if ſome proof is not adduced, the thing will 
not be believed an hundred and fifty years 


hence. 


Bur ſeriouſly ſpeaking, ſuch, are exceptions 
to the ordinary run of women; and from ex- 
ceptions no rules ought ſurely to be formed. 
The fact is, that human nature being nearly 
the ſame in both ſexes— that is a compound of 
paſſions, of virtues, and of frailties—the mode 
of conduct claimed and expected from women, 
can never take place, generally ſpeaking, but 
at the expence of their happineſs, or their ſin- 


eerity; which muſt in the end undermine the 


274 APPEAL TO THE 


beſt intereſts of ſociety, of Ro we have daily 
and hourly examples. 


J am indeed willing to allow, that much of 
the miſery in the married ſtate, proceeds from 
the vanity, the folly, the extravagance, and 
miſconduct of women; but, humanly ſpeaking, 


| they have little inducement to reformation. And 


* 


particularly w] when we conſider the example ſet 


them by the men, we mult confeſs, that the leſs 
oe & Gd abour i the better. Upon this ſubject 
we dare'not in conſcience commend, and we are 
averſe to judge and condemn. Waving for the 
preſent theretore, all alluſion to the force of ex- 
ample, however powerful, let us proceed to ſay; 
that the miſconduct of women generally ſpeak- 
ing, originates in improper education, and in 
the miſtaken and ungenerous opinions adopted 
wherever the ſex is concerned ; but moſt parti- 
cularly in the matrimonial engagement, by which 
a degree of domeſtic tyranny is eſtabliſhed by the 


men, totally incompatible : with natural . 


not always even. conſiſtent . humanity; and 


oo conſequently ill calculated to promote ote the hap- 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN, 275 


pineſs of either party. For where fo decided 
and invariable authority and ſuperiority are 
claimed, they will never be yielded to with ſa- 


tisfaction or complacency ; ; except the ſubjected 


party is convinced that the title is well founded, 
or that the right, ſuch as it is, is exerciſed with 
juſtice and moderation. Of the firſt, women 
never were, nor I fear never will be convinced. 
And the laſt, the daily and ſad experience of 


many, will not permit them to believe. 


Ir indeed it were poſſible, that men ſhould 
never, or but rarely, be tempted to abuſe their 
authority, —if they ſtudied the comforts, the 
pleaſures, the happineſs of women, as much as 


they do their own, or half as much, I believe 


— 
I may venture to fay for the ſex in general, 
millions againſt one, that they would ſubmit con- 
tentedly to the yoke; and not from a miſtaken 


and ridiculous pride, differ about a mere name. 


Nay more, I will venture to aſk,—where is 
the woman who has ever experienced the nature 
of a true and virtuous attachment, who would 


Nn 


226 APPEAL 'TO THE 


not rather a thouſand times owe her happineſs 
to the indulgence of an amiable man whom ſhe 
loves, than to any other circumſtance that imagi- 
nation can ſuggeſt? Whatever is enjoyed through 
ſuch means, acquires double value and additional 
reliſh; and exceeds all that the frigid hand of 
law or right could poſſibly beſtow.—If there is 
on earth a woman who could but for a moment 
heſitate between theſe,— | 


Who would not bluſh if ſuch an one there be?“ 


Bor alas! for the frailty of human nature, 
which we are ſo often forced, fo lamentably to 
bewail,—though there are huſbands who give 
their wives no reaſon to complain, and who in- 
deed ſcarcely allow them to feel their authority, 
or experience injuſtice in any ſhape; yet men 
themſelves are too candid to ſay, that this is 
generally the caſe. The multitude therefore, 
ought nor to be ſacrificed to a poſſibility. On the 
contrary, probability ought always to be on the 
| fide, of every experiment that is tried upon 
them; and every poſlible means ſhould be em- | 
ployed to ſcreen them from injuſtice. 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. 277 


- In all humility then, may I be permitted to 
Tay that there cannot be a reaſonable doubt, but 
that the gradual emancipation of women,— 
ſhackled and enſlaved by a thouſand abſurd pre- 


judices,—would in this enlightened age, pro- 


duce the moſt ſalutary effects. Juſt as the gra- 


dual emancipation of every one bearing the 
ſtamp of the human ſpecies, would moſt infal- 
libly do. h 


TE laws with regard to the ſex, ought, 
undoubtedly, to be reviſed and corrected. Per- 
| haps like Queen Eliſabeth's latin, they only 
required © ſcouring up, as they have lain ſo long 
ruſting.—Or perhaps ſome of them may be 
found ſo completely abſurd, and inconſiſtent 
with juſtice, that they ſhould be annulled alto- 
gether. Nothing too is more probable, than, 
that in reviewing theſe, it may be found neceſ- 
fary to add others for a check upon the female 
ſex, where they ſeem moſt to require it. And 
why not? Juſtice to deferve the name, admits 
of no partiality. And no idle ſpirit of gallantry 


ſhould here interfere, to prevent the enforcing 


278 * APPEAL 'TO THE 


of practicable and wholeſome laws, tending to 
the reformation of women, and to their juſt. 
and neceſſary ſubjectioh. Neither on the other 
hand ſhould the pride of man prevent him from 
yielding to their juſt claims of redreſs, however 
they may claſh with reigning faſhions or preju- 
dices—Moſt fallacious guides indeed, and little 
. worthy of attention, where we have the eternal 
laws of juſtice and mercy to appeal to; and 
where the happineſs of ſo great a proportion of 
the human race 1s at ſtake. 


I PRESUME not to point out particulars, but 
I may be indulged in one remark—that it were 
much to be wiſhed that women were ſomewhat 
more attended to, in the diſtribution of fortune. 
This attention to their worldly comfort, is the 
more reaſonable, that they are debarred by the 
_ tyranny of faſhion—as I have before more than 
once had occaſion to obſerve from availing 
themſelves of their talents and induſtry, to pro- 
mote their intereſt and independence. ' How- 
ever high the ſphere of life in which a man is 
born, if his fortune be not equal to his birth 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. 279 


or his ambition, there are a thouſand different 
ways by which he may advance himſelf with 
honor in the world; whereas women of a cer- 
tain rank, are totally excluded from a poſſibility, 
even of ſupporting that ſtile of life to which 
they have been accuſtomed, if they are left 
without competent fortun2s. | But what is in- 
finitely worſe—becauſe it leads to want, or in- 
famy, or both—few, very few are the employ- 
ments left open even for women of the inferior 
clafles, by which they can ſecure independence; 
and to which without a doubt may be greatly 
attributed, the ruin of moſt of the ſex, in the 
lower ranks. For, want of fortune, and want 
of appropriate employment, leave them open 
to the attempts of thoſe who can afford to bribe 
them from the paths of virtue. And the want 
of theſe, likewiſe unfits them, for being proper 


wives to men in their own ſtation, who in ge- 


neral can ſcarcely afford to marry, without | 


ſome aſſiſtance, either in induſtry or money. 


INDEED the buſineſſes appropriated by cuſtom 
tor women, are ſo very few in proportion to 


\ 


280  - APPEAL TO THE | 


the nnmber of candidates, that they are ſoon 
monopolized. And many a poor young crea- 


ture, after waſting ſome of the moſt precious 


| years of her life, upon a ſedentary and unhealthy 


buſineſs, finds it impoſſible after all to proceed; 
and falls at laſt a prey to thoſe evils, which ſhe 


has been for years laboring to ward off. 


WomeN being thus helpleſs, and being ren- 
dered ſo, chiefly, by falſe education, and falſe 


prejudices ; and fortune being in the preſent 
ſtate of things, that which procures every com- 
fort, conveniency, elegance and honor, which 
this world affords; they cannot be accuſed of 
being too palpably intereſted, in wiſhing to ſhare 
in it, in a reaſonable degree. Indeed while it 
poſſeſſes ſuch ſeducing advantages,—vaunt as 
we pleaſe, —it will ever be a ſufficient bait for 
the common herd of mankind, men and wo- 
men ; who conſider not, that gold can neither 
ſecure virtue and happineſs, nor exclude vice and 
miſery. And accordingly, ſo much do the men 
value this uſeful commodity—ſo much is it the 
object of their ambition and care—that they have 


—  —— — — — 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. 281 


by the moſt ample and excluſive privileges, ſe- 
cured it chiefly in their own hands; and guard 
it like very dragons, —like very Arguſes, —for 


if one eye is ſhut, there are always ninety-nine 


open, upon the precious charge. 


A 
_ 


— —— 


As men, however, deign ſometimes, to give 
reaſons for their ſeeming partiality to them- 
ſelves; they argue that it is of little conſequence 
whether women have fortune or not, as in the 
courſe of human events it circulates among 
them; and that the equilibrium is reſtored by 
marriage, which raiſes women to a participation 
and communion of fortune. But here, they 
forget ſome very material circumſtances. For, 
all men do not marry. All women are not 
married. And even thoſe who are, find that 
this-participation and community of fortune is 

often merely verbal; words without any mean- 
Ing whatever ;—and' that they are in this re- 
ſpect, as well as in moſt others, as completely 
dependent upon their huſbands, as it is poſſible 
for any one human being to be upon another. 
They find in ſhort and few words, that a wife 


* 
282 APPEAL TO THE 


is neither more, nor leſs, than —a great baby in 
leading- ſtrings— a character which a woman 
cannot help being a little aſhamed of; and 
which even thoſe who impoſe it, cannot, if it 
were not extremely convenient for them, very 
much admire; as every thing unnatural, muſt 


ever in ſome degree, be diſagreeable. 


Ix the married ſtate therefore, a woman has 


but one chance for juſtice, or in other words 


for happineſs ;—for no thinking being can be 


happy,—no reaſonable mind ſatisfied, —under a 


ſenſe of ſuffering injuſtice; and this one chance 


is, that of her huſband happening to be, a ſen- 
ſible, a reaſonable, a humane man, in a more 
than ordinary degree. In this cafe he will nei- 
ther deny her the comforts, nor even the ele- 
gancies and pleaſures, ſuitable to his rank and 
fortune; nor will he allow her to fall into that 
profuſion, which it is the ambition of the gene- 
rality of the ſex to exhibit ; becauſe, every other 
ambition is diſcouraged in them, by a wrong 
education, miſtaken notions, and degrading dil. 
tinctions in favor of men. 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. 283 


Bor huſbands ſuch as we have been deſcrib- 
ing, are too uncommon to be looked for every 
day. It will therefore be readily acknowledged, 
that women are much more likely to ſuffer fram 
avarice on the one hand, or from extravagance 
on the other, than to fall in with ſuch models 
of divine juſtice. And what is indeed very hard, 
and ſhews that there is no kind of injury to 
which a woman is not /iable in the married 
ſtate, ſhe is often nearly as ill off with a ſpend- 
thrift, as a miſer. For the firſt has too many 
bad ways of laying out his money, to be ſup- 
poſed always ready to allow his wife a decent 
and reaſonable ſhare ; whereas if a miſer is un- 
generous to his wife, ſhe ſees, that what he is 
mean enough to withhold from her, he has 

likewiſe loſt the power of uſing himſelf; except 
we allow voluntary privation to be enjoyment. 
And if ſhe has a family, it will be ſome conſo- 
lation to her to refle&, that he is amaſſing for 
them, what he denies to her. 


Born profligate and avaricious characters 
are however deteſtable; and hard enough it is, 
Oo 


284 APPEAL TO THE 


for people of a right and moderate way of 
thinking, to be penſioners at will of either. 


IN high life there is an abſolute neceſſity for 
guarding againſt theſe abuſes of authority on 
the part of the men; becauſe thoſe of that 

rank, finding themſelves, by the abſurd folly 
of mankind, ſet above the common rules that 
bind, at leaſt in ſome degree, inferior mortals, 
they are the leſs to be truſted. 


THE fortunes being in theſe ſituations ample 
enough to admit of it, it is extremely reaſon- 
able, and it is the caſe, that wives are inſured 
of ſomething which they can call their own; 
and which though it goes by a ridiculous and 

childiſh name, yet even that very name points 
out, that it is ridiculous and childiſh, that grown 
women ſhould not have ſuch trifles at their 
own command. 


Ir is pretty bold to defend a cuſtom, which 
is much objected to by many,—and I believe 
with much ſincerity and good intention, —as 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. 285 


tending to a ſeparation of intereſts in a connec- 
tion, where no ſuch diſtinction ought to take 
place. I am moſt ready to allow, that no ſuch 


diſtinction ght to take place, if it could be 


avoided ; but alas! where there are different 
tempers, different opinions, and where different 
paſhons predominate ; it is not perhaps poſſible, 
but that this diſtinction ſhould often in ſome 


degree, take place. And if it does ſo, where 


is the juſtice of throwing all the weight into 
one ſcale? 


Tuls is ſurely one way of ſettling diſputes, 
and that a very. deciſive one too, and I ſuppoſe 
I may add upon truſt, a very ſatisfactory one, 
to thoſe who have the happineſs of preponde- 
rating ; but feeling, or at leaſt ſpeaking as one 
of the beam kickers, I may be permitted to ſay, 
that it is a very unjuſt, and a very clumſy con- 


trivance, and bears very evident marks of a 


barbarous age, and of barbarous and bungling 


legiſlators ; who, with ſome general and con- 


fuſed ideas in their head, of the neceflity of 
ſubordination—though without ſufficient politi- 


286 | APPEAL TO THE 


cal diſcrimination, to reconcile neceſſary ſub- 
| ordination with juſtice—ſat down with all the 
gravity imaginable to make laws ; but in guard- 
ing againſt /ome ſtumbling-blocks, had not fore- 
ſight enough to avoid knocking their heads 
againſt others, as bad. And, who, in the true 
pride of ignorance, were too conſequential to 
apply for elucidation to thoſe, who, moſt un- 
doubtedly were beſt able to detail their own 
grievances, and perhaps—with reſpect to the 
ſublimer powers be it ſpoken—not lealt able, to 


point out an antidote or preſcribe a cure. 


IT muſt however be confeſſed, that there are 

few points more delicate, in the whole of the 
delicate ſubject I have undertaken, than that 
very one now touching upon. Yet ſurely it is 
by no means beyond the reach of human ſaga- 
city to adjuſt the balance,—I will not pretend 
to ſay to the complete ſatisfaction of all parties, 
for that never happens even where the faireſt 
deciſions are given, — but in perfect conformity 
to juſtice, which is that which ought to be con- 


ſulted, above all other conſiderations; as what 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. 287 


is founded upon it, muſt ultimately, end well 


for all concerned. 


THe authority of hufbands it muſt be con- 


feſſed is very great on the preſent ſyſtem ; yet 


it is not ſo well underſtood as to preclude in all 
caſes, extravagant pretenſions on the part of 


the other ſex; though it is ſufficient on moſt 


#- 


_ occaſions, to oppreſs, and overwhelm them. As 


matters now ſtand, it is very difficult to decide, 


where authority ſhould in prudence begin, or 
where it ought in juſtice to end. There is no 
rule equally acknowledged and appealed to by 


both parties. On the contrary, when quarrels 


and difference of opinion take place—the one 


complains bitterly of injuſtice and oppreſſion 
the other talks loudly of diſobedience. 


SUCH a ſtate of uncertainty, is ſurely more 


likely to give riſe to differences and diſputes, 


than if things were more clearly pointed out, 


and better underſtood. Setting aſide prejudice 
then, and reaſoning upon the principles of com- 


mon ſenſe and experience—for I know not why 


r 


— 


\ 
TC — — — — — — —— — > 


* 
—— - —— — 


| 


288 APPEAL TO THE 


common ſenſe ſhould be excluded upon, this fub- 
ject we muſt allow that in every caſe, the more 


diſtinctly limits are defined, the leſs confuſion 


and doubts enſue; that the clearer rights on 


each ſide are made out, the leſs room there 


is for diſpute; and that when due bounds are 


ſet to authority, though upon the one hand it 


prevents the abuſe of it, yet on the other 1t 1s 


the moſt likely method to enſure a ready obe- 


dience to its juſt commands, 


THESE truths are fimple and obvious enough, 
and are now very readily acknowledged, in all 


matters except where women are concerned. It 


is aſtoniſhing however, that principles of private 
and domeſtic juſtice, do not at leaſt keep pace 
in the minds of men, with thoſe of a public and 
political nature. The reaſon that they do not 
ſo with regard to women, I fear does not ſay 
much for the generoſity of the men. With re- 
ſpect to each other they enforce juſtice, becauſe 
they have power ſo to do; — where the weaker 


ſex is concerned the inference is obvious. 
what cannot be enforced, remains undone. 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN, 289 


To finiſh what I have to ſay on this head at 
once, I confeſs, that I think the power of the 
men in the married ſtate, like that of kings in 


a well regulated and limited monarchy, ought* 


to be confined ſolely to that of doing good. 
For, while the power of doing miſchief is left 
open, the will can never be wanting in either 
caſe. With reverence be it ſpoken, I believe 
there never was a king in this world from So- 
lomon downwards—George the third, king of 
Great Britain, France, and Ireland, always ex- 


cepted—who might not be tempted at a time to 
ſtretch his prerogative a /ittle too far. Nor do 


I believe there is a huſband on the face of the 


whole earth with the exception of one only,— 


another convenient /a/vo,—who may not fre- 


quently pull the reins of authority too tight, 
perhaps ſo very tight as to crack; to the utter 


confuſion of the whole domeſtic machine, which 
it is ſuppoſed men are able to guide, with ſuch 
exquiſite {kill and dexterity. 


Having now pointed out, how very much 


reformation is deſirable, i in regard to the educas 


* 
BY. 


—  — — 

al _ 
92 — 

0 


ö 

N 

— 14 
| | 
48 
{ 
i 


299 APPEAL TO THE 


tion of women, and with reſpect to the opinions 


entertained of their relative conſequence in ſo- 
ciety ; it is but juſt that I ſhould ſhew, what 


advantages adequate to the trouble and hazard 


of change, are held forth as probable. Theſe 
I have however, had occaſion to touch upon, 
in difterent parts of this ſketch, and ſhall poſſi- 
bly again in others, as they occur; but a8 they 
come with peculiar propriety under conſidera- 
tion here, I ſhall endeavour in a general way, 


and in as few words as poſſible, to recapitulate 
them. 


Tax conſequences then reaſonably to be ex- 
pected, are, ſuch asſeldom fail to enſue, when any 
individuals, or ſocieties, or claſſes of mankind are 
reſtored to their natural rights; that is to ſay 
when they find themſelves at eaſe in their proper 
places; not degraded nor fettered by unneceſſary 
confinement, but bound by ſuch wholeſome 


reſtraints, as prevent liberty, from degenerat- 


ing into licentiouſneſs. In ſuch a ſituation, all 
will perform their appropriate parts, with re- 
doubled ability, cheerfulneſs, and alacrity; 


2 2 Ms, 


MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN. 291 


when compared with others in leſs happy and 
favorable circumſtances. 


I wiLL own, however, that even if the pre- 
tenſions of the ſexes were finally adjuſted, and 
that equilibrium eſtabliſhed, which I have endea- 
voured to point out as neceſſary to the peace and 
ſatisfaction of both; that perfection, or compleat 
happineſs, is not to be expected. Of this how- 
ever we are certain, that, if univerſal juſtice were 
to prevail among mankind, —in which. of courſe 
we include womankind. that we ſhould then 
be on the high road to happineſs; of which we 
might reaſonably hope to taſte a competent 
ſhare in this world, and might ſafely truſt to a 


good providence for the perfeQion of it in an- 
other. 


A vtrvYntelligent traveller, makes a remark 
highly worthy of obſervation ; and which {truck 
me indeed very forcibly, as being much to the 
purpoſe of the preſent argument. He has juſt 
been giving an account of the inhabitants of an 
Iland, here he deſcribes the men and women 

P p 


292 | APPEAL TO THE 


as living together, on a footing of perfe& equa- 
lity; at leaſt as much ſo as their different duties 
and occupations pernfit ; like people in ſhort of 
the ſame ſpecies, who feel that they are of equal 


conſequence to each other's happineſs and com- 
fort ;—the difference of ſex there, only endear- 
ing and producing variety,—not as in other 


| | | places, degrading the one half of the human 


| race. The traveller without any view to ſyſtem 


building, and merely ſpeaking of the natural 


— —— —— _— — 


conſequences of ſuch a friendly and equitable 
= intercourſe, ſays, with the utmoſt naivere, that 
| | < the women from being happy, are always in 


4# good humor.” 


| 1 Mor firmly believe that good humor 1s 

one of the happy conſequences, to be reaſon- 
= ably expected, if women were every where put 
on a rational and equitable footing. And as 
conſequences, like misfortunes, rarely come 


alone; how many good ones might not be ex- 


pected, to follow that engaging quality! Every 


one is daily and hourly witneſs, either of the 


effects which ariſe from good humor—which 


# 


MEN OF OREAT BRITAIN. © 293 


never fails to operate like a charm in all ſociety 


public and private—or of the bad effects of its | 


oppoſite. Oh! that men would therefore attend 
to the important leſſon, included in the little 
ſentence, which I have juſt quoted ; for in few 
words, and without the pride of reaſoning, it 
perhaps contains the eſſence of all that ever 


was, or ever will be ſaid, to the purpoſe, on 


the ſubject! Let them but endeavour to make 


women happy—not by flattering their follies 
and abſurdities—but by every reaſonable means; 
and above all by conſidering them as rational 
beings upon a footing with themſelves, —influ- 
enced by the ſame paſſions, —and having the 
ſame claims to all the rights of humanity ; which, 
indeed, are fo ſimple, that juſtice well defined 
includes the whole. And then © women from 
being happy, will always be in good humor; 
and from being happy, and always in good 


humor, it is but reaſonable to hope, that they | 


will at laſt be, what all wiſe, and good men 


with them, and what in reality they may 
and OUGHT TO BE, 


* 


Fed. 4 
3 ell eee 


N 


r 


24 


